* 1415560
* Molecular Ions: an Hybrid Atom-Ion Platform to Generate Quantum States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robin Cote, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 269,999.00

The recent developments in information technology are having a large impact on
the society. One factor in the explosion of new technologies is the rapid
increase in computing power, described by Moore's law: processor power doubles
every 18 months. This is accompanied by a reduction in the size of the
processors. In the near future, the actual processors based on classical
treatment of information will reach the quantum limit; the uncertainty principle
of quantum mechanics will come into play. Quantum Information Science (QIS) is a
new approach to information science that takes advantage of laws of quantum
mechanics. New advances in quantum information indicate that devices based on
fundamental quantum principles, such as interference and entanglement, can
perform certain tasks considerably more efficiently than any classical computer.
Efforts in quantum information processing have led to protocols for quantum
cryptography, and quantum algorithms. Many platforms have been studied for QIS,
such as trapped ions, neutral atoms, Rydberg atoms, atoms in crystals, spin of
particles, photons in cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) or nonlinear optical
setups, mesoscopic ensembles, and polar molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
field of quantum information science matures, so do its goals. There is a search
for more realistic and better scalable systems, for novel areas of application
and stronger cross-fertilization with other areas in physics. A hybrid platform
for generating quantum states and for quantum information processing, based on
molecular ions will be studied, with an eye towards feasibility, scalability,
and connection with other subfields in physics. This hybrid platform shares the
advantages of other platforms; the long coherence times of neutral atoms, and
strong interactions of trapped ions. The required properties of these systems
will be studied in order to identify the best candidates among molecular ions
that will allow the Coulomb interactions between atoms to be switched off and
on. This will help guide efforts in designing new experimental apparatus for
quantum information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main effort relates to
quantum information science, namely the possible generation of quantum states,
and the implementation of phase gates. First, the use of molecular ions as
enablers to design non-trivial states, such as non-local atoms will be explored.
Specific species, alkali+alkaline earth and homonuclear alkaline earth diatomic
molecular ions will be studied and their properties (energy surfaces, transition
moments, hyperfine structure, etc.) computed. Second, arrays of neutral atoms
and trapped ions that could be used to effectively create strong long-range
interactions that can be switched on and off by using molecular ions as
mediators to enable entanglement will be studied, systems, such as combinations
of sodium (Na) and calcium (Ca), Na + Ca+, or Ca + Ca+. These new systems will
be explored using realistic parameters from careful calculations, to help in
understanding complex physical systems, and to predict new phenomena and to
generate new theoretical concepts. The exploratory research on quantum computing
with molecular ions promises to broaden the scope of QIS and atomic, molecular
and optical physics to mesoscopic systems, and condensed matter physics.