* 1415028
* SEES Fellows: Interacting Effects of Public Policy and Cash Crop Expansion on Forest Conservation
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2016
* John Zinda, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2016
* USD 443,935.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish himself in an
independent research career related to sustainability.

This Fellow's project will examine how cash crop production affects forest
conservation under Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) programs. Forests
provide many valuable services, such as soil erosion control and biodiversity,
which can be very important for nearby agriculture, and carbon sequestration,
which can help slow global climate change. PES programs use incentives to urge
landowners to plant and maintain forests on their land in order to create such
benefits. However, the success of such programs is varied and appears to depend
on social and economic factors that are not fully understood - particularly the
tradeoffs between land-use and resource-use. Scientists now debate whether the
production of cash-crops can enhance forest conservation by reducing the
pressure to extract resources from forests. This project employs an
interdisciplinary approach to study both the socioeconomic and ecological
dimensions of the relationship between cash-crops and forest regeneration. A
better understanding of the linkages between household decision-making, public
policy, and forest conditions could help refine forest conservation programs so
that they maximize both human and environment wellbeing.

This research will examine how varying patterns of cash crop adoption affect
forests under China's Grain-to-Green Program, which compensates households for
planting forests on retired farmland. Ten communities will be selected in Weixi
County, Yunnan Province, varying by whether the community organizes collectively
to plant and market cash crops, households individually adopt cash crops, or
cash crops are absent. Data will be gathered to test three core hypotheses: (1)
at the household level, cash crop production leads to less withdrawal of forest
resources; (2) across communities, forest use intensity is greatest where cash
crops are absent and least where cash crops are adopted collectively; and (3)
plant diversity and carbon sequestration correlate negatively with intensity of
forest resource use. Data collection will include a survey of household
livelihoods; a sub-survey on resource use, including respondent-led mapping of
forest use; field measurements in planted forests selected to control for
elevation, slope, aspect, and proximity to pre-existing forests; and remotely
sensed satellite imagery. Analyses will assess effects of household and
community factors on different resource uses and their relationships with forest
measures at plot and landscape levels. By comparing across communities in a
landscape, this research will capture meso-level mechanisms that regional and
household studies have neglected so far.