* 1415418
* SEES Fellows: An Integrative Model of Riparian Ecosystem Dynamics to Support Sustainable Management of Regulated Rivers
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Rebecca Diehl, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 375,161.00

Sustainable river management requires strategically balancing the various, and
often conflicting, demands placed on a river system. Human priorities must be
met within a framework that also satisfies ecological needs. The challenge to
provide for water supply demands while maintaining environmental flows is
particularly striking in the water-limited Colorado River basin. The Colorado
has historically been managed for complete reliability of water deliveries by
taking advantage of the basin's large dams and extraordinary reservoir storage
capacity. Within the past few decades, however, consumption has surpassed
supply. This project will explore the dominant processes that shape the current
condition of ecosystems along the large rivers of the Colorado River basin.
Research results will help inform the management of ecologically sustainable
water systems that integrate human and ecological needs. The project is
supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries
needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy and societal
sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address these
challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a promising
early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent research
career related to sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops,
tests and applies a hydrologically driven model of riparian ecosystem dynamics
for evaluation of ecosystem response to altered flow regimes. The dominant
processes that shape the current condition of riparian ecosystems along the
large rivers of the Colorado River basin will be captured in a modeling
framework by building interrelated vegetation and geomorphic flow response
curves. The interdisciplinary approach will push the one-way relationship
characteristic of many vegetation response models towards a more realistic model
of interactions and feedbacks between biotic and abiotic factors. Concepts and
methods will be applied to two areas of the upper Colorado River basin that
represent the variability in geomorphic organization, hydrologic alteration,
sediment mass balance conditions, and management contexts that exist within the
basin. The work takes advantage of the relatively well-established understanding
of riparian ecology and geomorphology in these settings and proposes new field
data collection and ecological, hydrologic, and hydraulic modeling. The project
will 1) address both physical and ecological processes and their associated
interactions, 2) integrate finer scale interactions that fundamentally shape
ecosystems and the larger scales of river organization at which river managers
work, 3) adopt the simple methodology of environmental gradients and non-
taxonomic guilding of species based upon traits so that the approach may be
generalized and applied over large spatial scales, and 4) provide a spatially-
explicit identification of the trade-offs in riparian ecosystem condition for a
given flow scenario. The SEES Fellow, Dr. Rebecca Manners, works with host
mentor Dr. Andrew Wilcox at the University of Montana, and with partner mentor
Dr. David Merritt at the USDA Forest Service National Stream and Aquatic Ecology
Center in Fort Collins, Colorado. The project is co-funded by the EPSCoR program
at NSF.