* 1415461
* Collaborative Research: PIF: Scalable Quantum Computers in the Presence of Physical Noise: a Study of Surface Codes with Realistic Errors at the Algorithmic Level
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Kenneth Brown, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

In principle, quantum computers can use the physics of atoms and molecules to
perform calculations ranging from code-breaking to simulation of materials
algorithmically faster than any conventional supercomputer. The main challenge
for building a quantum computer is that quantum components are prone to error.
Error correction can be used to overcome this challenge but it places stringent
requirements on future quantum computer hardware. The primary goal of this
research is to develop a path for bridging the gap between current physical
hardware and large-scale quantum algorithms. Specifically how a state-of-the-art
quantum error correction scheme, the surface code, behaves when mapped to
realistic physical architectures will be examined. If successful, this research
will help experimentalists build the first universal scalable quantum computer.
The research will train graduate students and undergraduate students in the
growing field of quantum information science and provide them with an
opportunity to work with industrial collaborators at IBM.

This proposal expands the frontiers of physics by exploring quantum computation
at the intersection of experimental devices, computer architecture, and quantum
information theory. Surface codes with a computational error threshold of 1% are
a promising solution to the problem of decoherence and imperfections in quantum
systems. Computation is performed by the creation, annihilation, and braiding of
topological defects. Examining this process from the perspective of algorithms
and architectures will help reveal common structures and provide a precise
method for implementation of these ideas on real physical systems. Surface code
implementations that account for realistic noise models and system-level
constraints will be examined. This will leverage previous work in experimental
device data, quantum circuit synthesis tools, computer architecture, and quantum
programming languages and compilers. Additionally, there will be close
collaboration with Sergey Bravyi at IBM (including summer internships at IBM for
students) on the theoretical foundations of this work.