* 1415608
* The ethics of communicating scientific uncertainty: Understanding how scientists, environmental lawyers, and reporters treat uncertainty
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Scott Schang, Environmental Law Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2015
* USD 89,749.00

This award to the Environmental Law Institute (ELI) supports a 1.5-day multi-
disciplinary workshop in Washington, D.C. at which scientists, lawyers, and
media professionals will discuss how they address and communicate scientific
uncertainty on environmental issues, subject to the ethical standards of their
respective fields. In particular, the treatment of subjects such as climatology,
weather forecasting, hydraulic fracturing, and synthetic biology inevitably
requires that uncertainty be explained and addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this workshop is twofold: (1) to facilitate more effective cross-
discipline communications by having participants better understand the
approaches their peers take to scientific uncertainty and the ethical reasons
underlying these approaches; and (2) to promote more transparent and
constructive discussion of major environmental issues by ensuring that people
understand the professional constraints on the scientific, legal, and media
professionals charged with communicating the nature and importance of scientific
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important questions of public policy often
involve varying degrees of uncertainty in the science - for example, over what
particular data or trends mean, or over the significance of a lack of data.
Public decisions are heavily informed by the data, information, and analysis
developed and communicated by scientists, lawyers, and members of the media.
Each of these professions,however,thinks about scientific uncertainty
differently with differences shaped, in large part, by internal ethical
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop, and the resulting proceedings
which ELI will publish, could contribute to a fuller, fairer, and more
transparent discourse on controversial public policy issues where decisions must
be made in the face of scientific uncertainty. Additionally, the transfer of
information at the workshop among a diverse range of scientific, legal, and
media participants will allow them to draw on a new understanding when they are
working with their peers in other professions. Ultimately, the long-term goal is
better decision-making on matters of public policy significance that are
affected by scientific uncertainty.