* 1415496
* EAGER: Physical Flow and other Industrial Challenges
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Henrik Christensen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Motivation. At the core of many societal challenges, particularly in view of
sustainability and efficiency, there are hard optimization problems. While these
underlying problems can be solved for smaller setups using optimization methods,
realistic problem sizes are still prohibitive. Apart from the immediate
challenges arising from sheer size, in today's fast-paced and intertwined
economies we additionally face the challenge of addressing real-time aspects;
otherwise, the obtained solutions might not apply anymore: the problem changed
faster than it was solved. This EAGER addresses specific optimization problems
arising from societal challenges and will motivate the study of the underlying
optimization problems. For this, new methods at the intersection of continuous
and discrete optimization as well as machine learning and randomization will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. PIs set out to investigate
general solution strategies to address problem size, real-time requirements, as
well as uncertainty aspects using recent developments from theoretical computer
science and modern optimization theory. At the core of this proposal is the
study of real-world challenges related to cargo-vessel routing, palletizing,
vehicle and mobile bot routing and related problems. A main difference to
classical approaches is that the real-time requirements will not be added on top
but will be integral to the whole design process, which is likely to result in
better algorithms. Apart from the challenges from the aforementioned problems,
PIs intend to develop an online expert system - Ask Minmax. This platform will
leverage machine learning techniques to make the theory of optimization methods
and tools accessible to industry and other personnel that face challenging
optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. A key objective of
this proposal is outreach. This EAGER will develop a consulting tool that will
allow industry and the broader society to learn about most useful methods in
algorithms and optimization. In particular, this tool is geared towards helping
the user to make a decision regarding which methods are most likely to be
applicable to their problem: in an interactive way the tool will collect
information from the user about their optimization problem. The system will then
determine the most likely model and provide information. Large-scale challenges
in palletizing and routing require the combination of various heuristics and
algorithms. A second component that will significantly impact industry is the
developing of key performance indicators for such algorithms. These metrics will
help to gauge efficiency of a particular heuristic and/or algorithms, which will
be important when algorithms are combined within a larger solution. Mentoring
and collaborating with a graduate student, a shared postdoctoral student across
multiple EAGERs, as well as hosting a workshop in relevant frontier topics at
the Institute for Mathematics and Applications (IMA) are all parts of the
broader impact of this EAGER.