* 1415669
* U.S. Scientific Community Engagement in the Intergovernmental Platform for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Stephen Jackson, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2019
* USD 213,395.00

The Intergovernmental Platform for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES),
an international body established in 2012, is intended to strengthen the role of
science in decision-making as it relates to the conservation and sustainable
management of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Over the next several years,
IPBES will conduct assessments addressing biodiversity and ecosystem services at
global to subregional scales. The U.S. government and members of the scientific
community have been involved from the start in the conception and establishment
of IPBES, which can enhance the value of U.S. science initiatives such as the
Long Term Ecological Research Network, National Ecological Observatory Network,
and others to global and national science-based decision making. Furthermore,
IPBES assessments can provide data and knowledge to proposed policy initiatives,
for example, the Quadrennial Ecosystems Services Trends Assessment, which would
periodically assess conditions, trends, and challenges to sustainability of U.S.
ecosystems; and the Ecoinformatics-based Open Resources and Machine
Accessibility initiative, which would facilitate integration and use of
biodiversity and ecosystems data across the federal
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to strengthen U.S. engagement in
IPBES, it is critically important to effectively inform the scientific community
about the wide range of opportunities for contributing to and benefiting from
IPBES activities. The Ecological Society of America (ESA) is awarded a grant to
support that engagement. ESA will develop and implement a process for
identifying possible U.S. nominees for IPBES expert panels, working groups, and
reviews; network with other professional societies, nongovernmental
organizations, and trade groups; publicize opportunities to participate in
IPBES; recommend nominees for participation in IPBES activities; and assist in
developing webinars and conference sessions on IPBES assessments and other
activities.