* 1415113
* EAPSI: Uncovering underlying causes of high fat meat marbling in Korean Hanwoo Cattle
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kelsey Caetano-Anolles, Caetano-Anolles         Kelsey
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Korean Hanwoo cattle display an extremely high percentage of fat marbling- a
phenomenon not observed in other species and a much-desired trait in regards to
meat quality. While previous studies have aimed to determine the cause, results
have been inconclusive. This project will investigate the cause of this
marbling, potentially assisting in the improvement of cattle farming and meat
quality around the world through selective breeding. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Heebal Kim at Seoul National University in
Seoul, South Korea. This collaboration affords a unique opportunity to have
access to data gathered from a native Korean species that will enable new
insights into the Hanwoo genome.

This project will use RNA-sequencing to understand the underlying transcriptome
make up and regulation behind high fat marbling in the meat of Korean native
cattle. More than 80 RNA-seq samples obtained from various tissues and organs of
both male and female Hanwoo, including subcutaneous, intramuscular, and omental
fat; muscle; liver; brain; and pituitary gland will be analyzed. By aligning the
RNA-profile of the fat and muscle of Hanwoo to that of other cattle species, it
is possible to identify differentially expressed genes associated with this
trait. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Korea.