* 1415368
* SEES Fellows: Pathways &amp; Partnerships in Adaptive Drought Communication in the Great Plains
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Nicole Colston, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 06/30/2018
* USD 416,292.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project builds upon
Resiliency Theory and theories of applied community participation to explore two
specific contexts of participatory communication (i.e., processes of collective
learning and shared meaning) at the science-society interface: (1) adaptive co-
management meetings in New Mexico and Oklahoma, and (2) existing education
efforts by drought scientists at two Great Plains universities (Oklahoma State
University and University of Nebraska-Lincoln). A mixed methods approach
(including, household surveys, oral histories, key informant interviews, and
pilot tests) will model community-partnership capacity for drought adaptation in
Cimarron (OK) and Union (NM) Counties, and assess the impact of community-
academic partnerships on drought literacy and adaptive capacity across the Great
Plains. Research in adaptive co-management meetings and interactive media (as
contexts for participatory communication between scientists and citizens)
provides the context for innovative case study research on the role of public
communication about science in community drought
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration in case study research with Host
Mentor Vadjunec and outreach efforts with Partner Institution Mentor Thomas
(UNL) offers a unique opportunity to research the intersections of participatory
communication and scientific literacy about the human and climatic drivers of
extreme drought. The core research questions addressed by this proposal are, (1)
What formal and informal pathways, players, and partnerships exist for
participatory communication between scientists and citizens about drought
vulnerability and adaptation, (2) How does communication about drought risk and
recovery inform the effective diffusion and translation of drought literacy
efforts in the Great Plains, and (3) How can we design forums and spaces for
sustained interaction (i.e., engagement and collective learning) between
stakeholders involved in adaptive drought communication? The project objectives
uniquely related to advancing research at the intersections of sustainability
science and education are, (1) to identify dimensions of community and
partnership capacity for drought education and pathways of adaptive drought
communication across scales, (2) to advance dynamic participatory models which
assist in the adaptive co-management of water resources in local communities
(i.e., increasing citizen-science dialogue, mobilizing community leaders, and
fostering the drought education partnerships), and (3) to design and measure the
success of drought literacy efforts based on inputs from sustainability
scientists at various stages of community decision-making. The adaptive drought
co-management workshops in NM and OK provide spaces for stakeholder interaction,
which may lead to new approaches, innovations, and learning outcomes for
communities in those regions. Outreach partnerships with UNL maximize
dissemination of user-friendly and culturally-relevant drought outreach
products, including a project website to consolidate scientific knowledge about
drought in the Great Plains and interactive media templates. Interdisciplinary
collaborations and research findings will inform efforts in academic community
partnerships for sustainable practices across many NSF-supported disciplines.