* 1415095
* EAPSI: Damage detection and performance assessment of wind turbine blades
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Yingjun Zhao, Zhao                    Yingjun
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Current global competition for fossil fuels has motivated the prosperity of
sustainable energy infrastructures such as wind turbine mills. Wind turbine
blades, usually assembled by composite materials, are one of the most vulnerable
structures due to their growing self-weight and harsh operational environment.
Skyscraping maintenance cost spent on condition assessment through a turbine's
service life has caused wind energy to be less cost-effective comparing to
conventional resources. Reliable approaches are currently sought to assess
turbine blade's structural performance without high expenditure. Considering
that most structural failures are initiated from early material deteriorations
such as cracks or corrosion, an in situ structural health monitoring system may
be employed to alert early signs of material worn-outs, preventing catastrophic
structural failures possibly taking place in the future. In collaboration with
Dr. Yuan-Sen Yang at the National Taipei University of Technology in Taiwan,
this projects aims to employ emerging damage sensing technologies to perform
damage assessment of lab-scaled wind turbine blades. Dr. Yang's lab will provide
unique dynamic testing facility for lab-scaled turbine blades, and expertise on
dynamic characterization of turbine blade performance.

A self-assembled, carbon nanotube-based nanocomposite material is employed as
the strain sensor, whose damage sensing capability has been verified on
composite material coupons. It will be customized to perform spatial damage
detection for lab-scaled wind turbine blades. Structural dynamic responses of
the same blades under rotational motion will be taken via the digital image
correlation technique - a non-contact motion tracking method - through
utilization of a high-speed video camera. A computational model based on both
measurements will be established to simulate multidimensional damage aspects of
a turbine blade under different operational conditions, thereby providing all-
around performance assessment and predictions of the wind turbine's structural
conditions. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Science Council of Taiwan.