* 1415063
* EAPSI: Analyzing recent earthquakes in Japan using high resolution topographic data
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Emily Kleber, Kleber                  Emily          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Societies affected by earthquakes instill policies informed by studies of
earthquake geology in order to preserve life and resources. The Western United
States and Japan are two areas that have seen recent and severe earthquake
activity. These two areas have unique tectonic settings and are actively
researching ways to "characterize" earthquakes along fault zones in order to
refine seismic hazard. This project will investigate recent seismic events in
Japan, focusing on the Itoigawana Shizuoka Tectonic Line, Honshu Island, Japan.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Koji Okumura a noted
expert on earthquake geology, at Hiroshima University in Japan.

The surface expression of an earthquake can be critical to understanding the
characteristics of a rupture event and a fault zone. The cracking, raising, and
subsidence of land associated with earthquakes are indicative of processes in
the upper, brittle portion of a fault zone. In the last decade, the periodicity
and resolution of remotely sensed images from satellite and aerial platforms
that can be used to "quantify" the surface have been advanced and applied to
studying surface deformation by earthquakes. The complex interplay between
earthquakes, surface deformation and surface erosion is broadly known as
tectonic geomorphology. The goal of the scientific investigation is to assess
seismic risk of the Itoigawana Shizuoka Tectonic Line through the process of
objectively mapping faults, quantitatively depicting surface deformation, and
understanding fault mechanics and kinematics. The study will assess the fault
zone landscape as a function of varying climate, slip rate, geodetic (changing
location of GPS stations) rates, and temporal constrains. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.