* 1415047
* EAPSI: Investigating ocean territory and resource sovereignty through seabed mining in South Pacific Island Nations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Katherine Sammler, Sammler                 Katherine      G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

EAPSI: Investigating ocean territory and resource sovereignty through seabed
mining in South Pacific Island Nations



As land-based resources are diminishing, the world is looking offshore to
satisfy growing appetites for food, fuel and minerals. The deep seabed is being
targeted for large-scale mining, which has only recently become possible with
changes in global markets and advancing technologies. However, mining rare
metals and minerals from the deep seabed present a number of significant
challenges to resource managers, and push the limits of scientific knowledge,
technical ability and institutional capacity. This project will investigate the
emerging management strategies in New Zealand and other South Pacific Island
Nations as they lay the groundwork for deep seabed resource development. New
Zealand is a prominent economic force in the South Pacific and has considerable
influence in the region. It is also one of the first nations exploring seabed
mining, which makes it a critically important site for this research. In
collaboration with Dr. Nick Lewis at the University of Auckland, this project
will employ a mixed methods approach utilizing archives, interviews and spatial
planning data. It will examine emerging resource management strategies in New
Zealand, as well as its role within the regional governance context.

Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) give coastal nations a form of resource-based
sovereignty up to 200 nautical miles from shore. Managing these vast ocean
territories has proved challenging to institutions historically developed to
govern land. Pacific Island Nations are presumed to have the most to gain from
developing seabed resources because their EEZs are much larger than the
resource-limited island nations. Results of this investigation will be important
to developing island nations, as they struggle to advance concrete seabed
management strategies with fewer economic and governmental resources.
Additionally, this work will address a significant gap in critical geography
scholarship on processes of territory, environmental governance and the
commodification of nature in the context of marine-based resource management.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New
Zealand.