* 1415537
* Collaborative Research: PIF: Scalable Quantum Computers in the Presence of Physical Noise: a Study of Surface Codes with Realistic Errors at the Algorithmic Level
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Frederic Chong, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 10/31/2016
* USD 255,000.00

In principle, quantum computers can use the physics of atoms and molecules to
perform calculations ranging from code-breaking to simulation of materials
algorithmically faster than any conventional supercomputer. The main challenge
for building a quantum computer is that quantum components are prone to error.
Error correction can be used to overcome this challenge but it places stringent
requirements on future quantum computer hardware. The primary goal of this
research is to develop a path for bridging the gap between current physical
hardware and large-scale quantum algorithms. Specifically we will examine how a
state-of-the-art quantum error correction scheme, the surface code, behaves when
mapped to realistic physical architectures. If successful, this research will
help experimentalists build the first universal scalable quantum computer. The
research will train graduate students and undergraduate students in the growing
field of quantum information science and provide them with an opportunity to
work with our industrial collaborators at IBM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal expands the frontiers of physics by exploring quantum computation at
the intersection of experimental devices, computer architecture, and quantum
information theory. Surface codes with a computational error threshold of 1% are
a promising solution to the problem of decoherence and imperfections in quantum
systems. Computation is performed by the creation, annihilation, and braiding of
topological defects. Examining this process from the perspective of algorithms
and architectures will help reveal common structures and provide a precise
method for implementation of these ideas on real physical systems. We will
explore surface code implementations that account for realistic noise models and
system-level constraints. Our work will leverage our previous work in
experimental device data, quantum circuit synthesis tools, computer
architecture, and quantum programming languages and compilers. Additionally, we
will collaborate closely with Sergey Bravyi at IBM (including summer internships
at IBM for our students) on the theoretical foundations of this work.