* 1415250
* EAPSI: Characterization of dissolved free amino acids in hatchery system water - a salmon hatchery case study
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Joseph Lemanski, Lemanski                Joseph         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

For many decades, salmon in the Pacific Northwest have been sought after for a
multitude of reasons. Due to regional declines in adults returning to their
natal rivers to spawn every year, the rearing and release of hatchery salmonids
has been utilized for many decades. Unfortunately, hatchery raised salmon have
shown a significant decrease in home stream fidelity and impose an assortment of
ecological issues due to increased interaction with wild populations. One
proposed explanation for the lack of home stream fidelity in hatchery salmonids
is inadequate learning of chemical cues in natal river water. The purpose of
this study is to determine if the chemical nature of natal river water is
altered by simple, daily hatchery operations. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Hiroshi Ueda, an expert in dissolved free amino acids
(DFAA's) in salmonid imprinting and homing, at the Hokkaido University in Japan.

It is well understood that salmon use olfaction to identify distinct chemical
cues of natal river water when navigating to their natal rivers to spawn.
However, the distinct set, or "bouquet" of chemicals that salmon use for this
phenomenon has yet to be identified. Recently, considerable attention has been
directed towards DFAA's as a set of molecules that salmon use to navigate and
identify their natal rivers. Research has shown that salmonids possess the
ability to distinguish between certain water sources based on their DFAA
compositions. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) will be used to
analyze the content of DFAA's in river water. By analyzing water collected from
certain locations within a hatchery setting, it will be determine if current
hatchery operations may significantly alter the chemical nature of their source
river water. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.