* 1415300
* Collaborative Research:   Ocean Acidification and Coral Reefs: Scale Dependence and Adaptive Capacity
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Kevin Gross, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2019
* USD 99,909.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Ocean Acidification and Coral Reefs - Scale
Dependence and Adaptive Capacity

This project focuses on the most serious threat to marine ecosystems, Ocean
Acidification (OA), and addresses the problem in the most diverse and beautiful
ecosystem on the planet, coral reefs. The research utilizes Moorea, French
Polynesia as a model system, and builds from the NSF investment in the Moorea
Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research Site (LTER) to exploit physical and
biological monitoring of coral reefs as a context for a program of studies
focused on the ways in which OA will affect corals, calcified algae, and coral
reef ecosystems. The project builds on a four-year NSF award with research in
five new directions: (1) experiments of year-long duration, (2) studies of coral
reefs to 20-m depth, (3) experiments in which carbon dioxide will be
administered to plots of coral reef underwater, (4) measurements of the capacity
of coral reef organisms to change through evolutionary and induced responses to
improve their resistance to OA, and (5) application of emerging theories to
couple studies of individual organisms to studies of whole coral reefs. Broader
impacts will accrue through a better understanding of the ways in which OA will
affect coral reefs that are the poster child for demonstrating climate change
effects in the marine environment, and which provide income, food, and coastal
protection to millions of people living in coastal areas, including in the
United States. Additionally, the research will have broad-reaching and cascading
effects at multiple levels associated with public awareness of climate change
effects, and the preparation of an American workforce focused on Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) careers. These effects will be
realized by basing the research in a 4-year, Hispanic-serving campus California
State University Northridge (CSUN) where undergraduates will have strong
involvement in the project through classroom instruction and Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) opportunities, and postdoctoral, graduate, and
technical staff opportunities will be supported. An ongoing program of high
school involvement will be extended to include K-12 educators in Moorea, and
integration of lesson plans between local schools and CSUN.

This project focuses on the effects of Ocean Acidification on tropical coral
reefs and builds on a program of research results from an existing 4-year award,
and closely interfaces with the technical, hardware, and information
infrastructure provided through the Moorea Coral Reef (MCR) LTER. The MCR-LTER,
provides an unparalleled opportunity to partner with a study of OA effects on a
coral reef with a location that arguably is better instrumented and studied in
more ecological detail than any other coral reef in the world. Therefore, the
results can be both contextualized by a high degree of ecological and physical
relevance, and readily integrated into emerging theory seeking to predict the
structure and function of coral reefs in warmer and more acidic future oceans.
The existing award has involved a program of study in Moorea that has focused
mostly on short-term organismic and ecological responses of corals and calcified
algae, experiments conducted in mesocosms and flumes, and measurements of reef-
scale calcification. This new award involves three new technical advances: for
the first time, experiments will be conducted of year-long duration in replicate
outdoor flumes; CO2 treatments will be administered to fully intact reef
ecosystems in situ using replicated underwater flumes; and replicated common
garden cultivation techniques will be used to explore within-species genetic
variation in the response to OA conditions. Together, these tools will be used
to support research on corals and calcified algae in three thematic areas: (1)
tests for long-term (1 year) effects of OA on growth, performance, and fitness,
(2) tests for depth-dependent effects of OA on reef communities at 20-m depth
where light regimes are attenuated compared to shallow water, and (3) tests for
beneficial responses to OA through intrinsic, within-species genetic variability
and phenotypic plasticity. Some of the key experiments in these thematic areas
will be designed to exploit integral projection models (IPMs) to couple organism
with community responses, and to support the use of the metabolic theory of
ecology (MTE) to address scale-dependence of OA effects on coral reef organisms
and the function of the communities they build.