* 1415056
* EAPSI: Deployment of geographically distributed meteor radar for improved observations of upper-atmospheric wind
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Cody Vaudrin, Vaudrin                 Cody
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Knowledge of how upper-atmospheric wind distributes energy throughout Earth's
atmospheric system is of key importance for understanding climate change and for
developing predictive methods for dangerous space-weather events. One instrument
used to measure atmospheric dynamics in the upper-atmosphere is the Traditional
Specular Meteor Radar (TSMR), which observes trails left by ablating meteors.
Every day, millions of micro-meteors enter Earth's atmosphere, most no larger
than a grain of sand. When meteors ablate in Earth's upper-atmosphere, they
temporarily deposit a trail of free electrons which strongly scatter VHF radio
waves and share the motion of the neutral wind. When probed with a TSMR, the
position and radial velocity of the trail (and therefore the wind in the trail's
vicinity) can be measured. By combining many trail observations, large-scale
mesospheric wind structures are observed. In collaboration with Brian Fuller
from the Adelaide, Australia based Genesis Software, a company involved in
advanced scientific radar development; major improvements to the TSMR
measurement technique will be demonstrated.

Recently, an advancement of the well-established TSMR technique has been
proposed with remarkable potential for both new and improved geophysical science
data. The Multistatic Specular Meteor Radar (MSMR) deploys a network of phase-
coherent receivers over a geographic area on the order of 100's of km and
specular meteor trail scatter originating from a single transmitter is observed
at the different receiver locations. An increase in trail detection rates, the
horizontal extent and spatial and temporal resolution of the wind measurement
and an increase in the angular diversity of the radial velocity and position
vectors are the primary observational advantages of MSMR. These new
observational capabilities enable the study of new meteor physics phenomenon and
the observation of the mesoscale structures in the upper-atmospheric wind field
important for understanding Earth's atmospheric system. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.