* 1415936
* SBIR Phase I:  Secure Computation for Private Health Information Exchange and Consolidation under a Patient-Centered Model
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Bon Sy, SIPPA Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to study the feasibility of a health
technology platform to enable an individual to be the main facilitator for
secure and private health information synchronization. The proposed technology
is aimed at increasing the opportunities for an individual to interact with care
providers, and consequently improves the individual?s awareness of his/her own
health condition and the benefit of behavioral change towards a healthy
lifestyle. By facilitating electronic health record exchange, the platfrom also
creates a positive environmental impact by avoiding wasteful duplication of
records, tests, and procedures; thus a reduction in the use of paper, x-ray
film, toxic chemicals for x-ray film processing and gasoline from avoided
medical visits. By targeting at the poly-chronic patients who account for 5% of
the population, an estimated $12 billion can be saved on the healthcare cost for
the society if the proposed technology can affect even just 1% of the poly-
chronic patients to have a behavioral change towards a healthy
lifestyle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the
needs for secure exchange, sharing, and consolidation of health information for
meaningful use. The research objective is to conduct feasibility study of the
proposed platform technology to enable a patient centered model. The technology
is a practical privacy preserving secure computation suitable for private data
exchange. One important objective is to regenerate cryptographic keys based on
an individual?s personal data such biometrics or imprecise passphrase; thus a
mechanism to assure the security and privacy of electronic health data exchange.
The proposed feasibility study will first realize a tool for empowering an
individual in a patient-centered model to engage in secure synchronization and
consolidation of health information. It will then test interoperability support
for secure health information exchange and consolidation under the common
standards for Stage 2 Meaningful Use using sample EHRs commonly available in the
public domain. Based on the result, the effectiveness of the proposed technology
can be evaluated in terms of its effectiveness to improve patient engagement in
health information exchange, and its potential to assist care providers in
increasing care efficiency while addressing the security and privacy requirement
of HIPAA.