* 1415087
* EAPSI: Understanding how customary fishing reserves affect commercial fishing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Hekia Bodwitch, Bodwitch                Hekia          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Ocean sustainability initiatives include both market-based and spatial
management strategies, but we have yet to understand what happens when these
approaches overlap. This project will investigate the relationship between New
Zealand's commercial fishing industry, governed by a tradable quota system, and
an indigenous Maori community's governance of a spatially defined marine area,
in which commercial fishing is prohibited. In 2004, the Ngai Tahu tribe
established the nation's largest customary fishing reserve off Stewart Island to
promote fish species' development. Commercial industry representatives, however,
argue the reserve's ban on commercial fishing conflicts with the market-based
incentives for sustainable fishing practices embedded in the nation's quota
system. This project will map changes in commercial fishing data against
customary management practices to examine how quota markets are affected by
spatial restrictions on commercial fishing. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Brad Coombes at the University of Auckland, in New
Zealand, who is a noted expert on indigenous resource management. The tensions
between commercial and customary fishing policies in New Zealand speak to
broader concerns regarding the recognition of indigenous rights through market-
based solutions to social and environmental problems, exemplified in fisheries
quota management systems and carbon cap-and-trade programs. The dynamics of
Maori fishery governance are particularly important to examine because Maori
tribes are also major players in the commercial fishing industry, owning
substantial amounts of fishing quota. This investigation of Maori fisheries
management strategies will, therefore, trouble the durability of dichotomies
between customary versus commercial interests, and traditional versus modern
natural resource management practices. In doing so, this research will broaden
our understanding of the ways access to and benefits from marine resources may
be more equitably distributed to indigenous and non-indigenous fisheries
stakeholders. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Royal
Society of New Zealand.