* 1415948
* SBIR Phase I:  Examination of Diamond Cathodes to Advance Thermionic Energy Conversion-Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Technology for Use in Onsite, DC, Power Generation Needs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Nicholas Hooten, IOP Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is far-reaching, as
successful demonstration of a TEC-SOFC generator will significantly benefit
numerous civilian and military sectors, and also encourage further scientific
research into this innovative power generation method. The aging U.S. electrical
grid, which lacks sufficient redundancy and can leave the country susceptible to
cascading blackouts, provides clear motivation for pursuing efficient, safe, and
reliable power generation schemes. A TEC-SOFC generator could serve as an onsite
generator for residential or industrial applications, eliminating consumer
dependency on the current U.S. electrical grid. When fueled by natural gas,
preliminary estimates indicate power production at 1/20th the cost of purchasing
from the grid, while producing significantly less greenhouse gas emission than
current fossil-fuel based approaches. Additionally, this portable technology
would immediately benefit the military as a tactical electric generator due to
its greatly improved fuel efficiency over existing generator designs.
Calculations suggest that widespread adoption of TEC-SOFC generators by the
military could reduce fuel-associated costs by 60%. Beneficial scientific
impacts from this research are expected to include a more detailed understanding
of the thermionic emission performance from advanced cathode materials, so that
a range of practical TEC devices can be scientifically realized and
commercialized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a novel, highly efficient power
generation technology particularly suited for small-scale, mobile, and off-grid
type applications. This proprietary technology involves the combination of
thermionic energy conversion (TEC) and solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs)?two highly
efficient technologies?to create a generator with prospects of: 1) Greatly
improved fuel efficiency, 2) Reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and 3) Cheaper
operating costs. Because the resulting TEC-SOFC generator is based on well-
established physical and engineering principles, we anticipate rapid product
development (&lt;five years). Research to be conducted during this Phase I SBIR
project is meant to prove the feasibility of low temperature (&lt;1000oC) TEC
devices that utilize advanced electrode materials while also advancing already
promising preliminary results. Specific tasks will aim to characterize various
electrode compositions and configurations, which will then be implemented into a
?pre-prototype.? Upon completion of Phase I, TEC power output levels in excess
of 0.1mW/cm2 at temperatures below 1000oC are anticipated. Power output levels
are expected to continually increase up to 5 W/cm2 by the end of Phase II, at
which time the development, testing, and commercialization of the full TEC-SOFC
generator will commence.