* 1416398
* SBIR Phase I:  Design And Implementation Of A Self-Contained Sensor For 3 -Dimensional State Estimation And Ground-Based Sense-And-Avoid System For Small Unmanned Aerial Systems.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Ryan Morton, SkySpecs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2015
* USD 172,500.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
commercial UAS positioning and sense-and-avoid technology that will enable
future UAS to operate safely in the NAS while delivering revolutionary new
capabilities in emergency response, search and rescue, law enforcement,
infrastructure inspection (e.g. wind turbines, bridges, road), agriculture,
forestry, and a multitude of other commercial applications. After over 5 years
of debate, in November 2013 the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) released a
10 year roadmap for integration of commercial UAS into the NAS, specifically
stating the need for development of a multi-sensor airborne sense-and-avoid
system across all certified UAS. The manufacturability and wide commercial
deployment of the proposed sensor suite will therefore also enable domestic UAS
manufacturers to mitigate the regulatory uncertainty surrounding their products
and catch up to their overseas counterparts who are already serving the multi-
billion dollar global market for UAS. In addition to supporting U.S. technology
leadership, the resurgence of domestic manufacturing, and the growth of an
entirely new industry, this project will also enable parallel advances in
related areas such as collision avoidance systems for autonomous automobiles,
location awareness for handheld electronics, and plug-and-play electronics
integration and miniaturization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of
deploying a novel, integrated sensor suite to enable accurate position estimates
and sense-and-avoid capabilities for small Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS)
operating in the highly-regulated National Air Space (NAS). Currently, UAS are
not integrated into the NAS due to regulatory and technological limitations. The
uncertain regulatory climate is fast evolving toward a regime in which major
technological advances in robotic situational awareness and sense-and-avoid
capabilities will be required for UAS integration into the NAS. Today?s state-
of-the-art UAS are remote controlled and gather rudimentary position estimates
from Global Positioning System (GPS) and pilot feedback. This project will
demonstrate a UAS sensor package that enables direct interface with current and
proposed NAS infrastructure, remains fully functional when GPS is unavailable,
and exceeds positioning capabilities of piloted vehicles. The sensor package
will integrate a 360° camera, inertial measurement unit, GPS receiver, pressure
sensor, and visual odometry software into a single, on-board device enabling
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) for precise vehicle positioning and
communication with nearby aircraft. Completion of this Phase I SBIR project will
enable the introduction of a disruptive navigation technology into what will
become a multi-billion dollar domestic UAS market.