* 1416633
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Gel Microarrays for Low-cost Protein Binding Assays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Akwasi Apori, Correlia Biosystems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to develop new tools for rapid and
customized protein testing. The proposed technology would allow the end user to
rapidly pattern their own high-throughput arrays, reducing assay time from days
or weeks to minutes. In addition, the proposed 3D hydrogel reaction environment
is expected to improve binding interactions and sensitivity compared with the
current surface immobilized substrates, such as protein microarrays, ELISA, and
bead-based systems. Today, the protein microarray market is dominated by
companies selling pre-patterned arrays, and labs providing costly customized
array services. The proposed technology will have the potential to transform and
advance the widespread adoption of protein microarray measurements into broader
life science research applications ranging from high-throughput pharmaceutical
research and antibody development to customized personalized medicine. In
addition, this transformational technology promises to improve customization and
speed while driving down costs, making high accuracy protein testing routine and
accessible within the $782M research and diagnostics market.

This SBIR project aims to develop a rapid and multiplexed protein testing
platform to be easily customized and run by third-party users. Current protein
microarrays can analyze targets from a single sample against hundreds of
surface-immobilized capture molecules. However, problems preventing widespread
adoption of traditional protein microarrays include high costs, long assay
times, or a lack of customization, sample multiplexing, and specificity. The
proposed Electrokinetic Gel Microarray (EGM) technology will surpass these
barriers through core advances in functionalized hydrogels integrated within
microfluidic architectures that could allow a user to pattern and test tens to
hundreds of user-customized analytes on a postage stamp-sized chip. The Phase I
goal is to design and test key EGM technology that proves feasibility of
developing a customizable 15 minute protein-ligand array on a microdevice with a
3D hydrogel architecture. These functionalized gels will allow for efficient
homogeneous protein interactions while significantly enhancing the binding
environment over traditional heterogeneous surface-immobilized arrays. Phase I
tasks will include developing a gel-based protein capture system, optimizing
assay and optical readout protocols, validating quantitative measurement of a
model protein system, and designing the assay microfluidic chips.