* 1416816
* Education, Engagement, and Well-Being Among Adolescents
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Christina Gibson-Davis, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,999.00

Education policy tends to focus almost exclusively on test scores as a measure
of student achievement, but an ever-increasing body of research suggests that
non-cognitive skills may be the key to succes in school and beyond. This
project, drawing on Gallup survey data and administrative records, explores how
students' well-being, school involvement, and optimism about the future are
related to academic achievement and civic engagement. In doing so, the study is
the first to link together school administrative records and polling data in
order to understand how the school context, "non-cognitive" traits, and civic
behavior interact. A primary goal of this work is to identify and encourage the
policies and practices that promote students' future quality of life and
participation in democracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although previous research
suggests that the school setting plays a large role in development of non-
cognitive skills, few studies have been able to test models of the link between
school, engagement, and well-being comprehensively, because the data demands
have been simply too great. This project solves past methodological challenges
by linking extensive information about the school environment, the home
environment, individual attitudes and opinions from a sufficiently large number
of students across diverse settings. The researchers will use a combination of
survey data and administrative records, coupled with a field experiment, to
examine how adolescent well-being measures are related to studnet achievement
and civic engagement, over and above demographic correlates and how school
characteristics and policies are related to hope, engagement, and well-being.
The project is an initial studep towards a better understanding of how schools
can nurture and facilitate adolescent well-being and
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus attention on an
important research problems that can only be addressed by an interdisciplinary
team and will have meaningful impact across research disciplines and
intellectual boundaries. Also, in a climate that focues on test-based
achievement measures, the proposed research will inform education policy-making
that balances academic pedagogy with support for noncognitive factors that are
important for life success. Ultimately, this research may encourage schools to
address well-being, engagement, and hope as part of their standard curriculum.
The project will also contribute to the interdisciplinary education of doctoral
and undergraduate students, who will be involved in the development,
implementation, analysis, and presentation of the research.