* 1416920
* Collaborative Research:   Changes in Arctic Sea Ice and their Impact on Timing of Life History and Production of Zooplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Jinlun Zhang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 90,879.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate the impact of
climate-induced changes in the arctic physical system on the timing of primary
production and a single important copepod species. This species serves as a
model for understanding the interplay between the physical and biological
processes in arctic systems and how the changing timing and sequence of events
due to climate change may influence the success or failure of that species. The
results can be extrapolated to other organisms and groups that are similarly
dependent on seasonal cycles and on the timing of events in the physical and
biological environment to better predict the changes in this ecosystem under
changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will introduce K-12 students
to ways in which climate change may influence ecosystems in the Arctic. The
educational activities and curricula developed through this project will be made
available broadly and the team plans to sponsor one undergraduate each year in a
student fellowship program to pursue a research project associated with this
work. A post-doctoral investigator will participate in the modeling and the team
will disseminate its results to the scientific community through conferences and
meetings and to the broader public through social media and online
presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic organisms
are adapted to the strong seasonality of environmental forcing. A small timing
mismatch between species' life histories and their physical and biological
environment can have significant consequences for them and for the entire arctic
ecosystem. Climate warming is likely to cause earlier snowmelt on sea ice and
speed its retreat in the Arctic, thus causing variability in the timing
(phenology) of marine primary production. Such changes will significantly impact
the pelagic consumers that rely on that primary production. The focus of this
study is to understand the coupling between the physical environment, the timing
and magnitude of primary production, and the secondary production of pelagic
consumers by focusing on a single dominant species as a model. The copepod
Calanus glacialis is a key member of arctic ecosystems, critical in the linkages
among sea ice and ocean conditions, primary production, secondary production,
upper trophic level consumers, and ultimately human communities. It also follows
a life history that is closely timed to pulses of ice algal and phytoplankton
primary production in the Arctic Ocean, making it an attractive focus of study
because of the potential vulnerability of that life history to climatically
induced disruptions to the biological and physical environment. The objectives
are: to describe past conditions and predict future changes to selected
characteristics of the marine physical environment that influence the production
response (e.g., sea ice, water temperature); to explore the physical and
biological factors controlling C. glacialis population dynamics; to investigate
the interannual variability of its spatial distributions and possible shifts in
life history strategy under ongoing climate change; and to identify the
implications of those spatial and temporal shifts to secondary production and
beyond. The research will combine a copepod individual-based model and a
concentration-based biology-ice-ocean model into a spatially-explicit
biological-physical coupled model, integrating remotely sensed and in-situ
observational data and laboratory-derived copepod vital rates to project
plankton production under future climate change scenarios.