* 1416752
* Better Fast Algorithms for Large and High-Dimensional Datasets:  Sparse Fourier Transforms and Fast Density Estimators
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mark Iwen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 263,600.00

The size, scope, and importance of large, high-dimensional data sets have been
accelerating at tremendous rates over the last several decades fueled by the
rapid proliferation of computers and communication technology. As a result,
analyzing massive amounts of high-dimensional data is becoming increasingly
necessary in a wide array of disciplines including molecular biology, genomics,
finance, marketing, economics, sociology, and epidemiology, among others. The
need for fast computational techniques that can both rapidly and accurately
process, compress, and reduce huge datasets without losing important information
has never been greater.

This research will develop fast computational methods, supported by rigorous
theoretical guarantees, for two important types of problems encountered during
the analysis of such large and high dimensional data sets: (i) approximating
discrete Fourier transforms of big data sets, and (ii) estimating the
statistical properties of large and high-dimensional data. The difficulty in
solving both sets of problems stems from the sheer size and complexity of the
input data sets, which limits the applicability of existing computational
methods. In both cases, new and computationally tractable algorithms will be
developed that take advantage of hidden simplifying structure (Fourier sparsity
in the first case, and intrinsic low-dimensional geometric structure in the
second) that often exists in large and high-dimensional data sets in practice.