* 1416333
* SBIR Phase I:  Barrier-free Power Wheelchair
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Stephen Sundarrao, Rehab Ideas Wheelchair Products & Accessories Two, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 146,354.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this project is the increased
access and independence for power wheelchair users in employment, educational,
home and community environments. This will create a paradigm shift in how
society views individuals using wheelchairs from confining to liberating
products. There will be a significant cost saving to wheelchair users and third
party funding agencies by avoiding the purchase of secondary products such as
lifts and ramps. The power wheelchair market at $1.1 billion in 2011 is
anticipated to reach $3.9 billion in 2018. Added to this, the additional cost
for ramps, lifts and architectural modifications to provide wheelchair access in
private and public settings exceeds $20 Billion. The results of this research
will set a higher standard for wheelchair manufacturers to push innovation and
to test products using the ANSI/RESNA Standards even during product development.
Collaboration with academic institutions, Veterans hospitals and clinicians
provides an interdisciplinary experience for engineering students. Opportunities
to design and commercialize exciting innovative products such as this barrier-
free wheelchair has the potential to encourage K-12 students to enter STEM
careers that positively impact the quality of life for individuals with
disabilities. Results of the research conducted will be disseminated through
scientific and technical publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to test the feasibility and
commercialize a power wheelchair capable of overcoming level changes in the
environment that are 3? or higher without a ramp or lift. Although there are
requirements for accessibility in public environments, it is not always done. In
personal homes and private environments the cost to provide these adaptations is
often limited. As a result power wheelchair users lose their independence and
are greatly disadvantaged when they are confronted with changes in elevation.
The focus of this project is to provide a solution for this immense barrier by
designing a power wheelchair base capable of independently traversing changes in
elevations, while maintaining all the seating, stability and maneuverability
features. This unique design incorporates a three-axle base that transfers the
entire power chair from one level to the other. In addition to the ability to
ascend and descend elevations, it will offer users the ability to raise the seat
to reach for items at standing height and lower the seat to enable the user to
reach the floor. The results from this research will provide a transformational
wheelchair that can adapt to the environment.