* 1416269
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced insulated glass sealing techniques for low-cost, large area, flat panel radiation detectors.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Andrew Inglis, Silverside Detectors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,755.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support the
development of a new radiation detection technology with the potential to
increase global nuclear detection coverage by at least an order of magnitude,
while meeting important non-proliferation and homeland security budget
constraints. Current radiation detection technology is too expensive to be
deployed in large, discreet networks that cover global transportation pathways,
cities, and nuclear storage sites. This project will develop a new product which
combines a proven detector geometry (flat-panel multi-wire proportional chamber)
with a powerful neutron conversion material (enriched lithium metal). By
adopting expertise from the window industry, this project will substantially
reduce the cost of these detectors via the development and demonstration of
innovative panel sealing protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective
of this effort is to design and test a flat-panel gas chamber body that adapts
the hermetic sealing technologies used in electronics and vacuum insulated glass
(VIG) windows. This sealing technology allows sensors to function in harsh
environments: under water, in zero gravity, and in deep space applications. The
Phase I work covers three approaches for lower-cost, high manufacturability
chamber sealing mechanisms that will be optimal for smaller, robust chambers
used in secondary markets (academic research, steel reprocessing, oil/gas
industry). These sealing methods include ultrasonic soldering using flux-free
solders, electrical resistance welding, and laser welding. Adaptation of this
technology to neutron detectors will increase the robustness and reduce the
manufacturing costs of the chambers. The expected outcomes will include proving
out a cost-effective process to hermetically seal next generation gas chambers
while maintaining high detector performance and durability.