* 1416232
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermally Durable Plasmonic Near Field Transducer for Heat Assisted Magnetic Recording
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Urcan Guler, Nano-Meta Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,402.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project are to enable ultra-high capacity disk drives.
The explosion of global digital data and the need to store it is continuing to
drive demand for disk storage. Approximately 550 million drives are sold each
year with a value of about $35B. The greater storage densities created by heat
assisted magnetic recording will drive down the cost of storage per Terabyte and
greatly reduce the physical and thermal footprints in data centers. A 10X
greater drive capacity translates to an approximate 90% reduction in the number
of drives required for any given storage requirement. This will greatly reduce
facility utility costs and emissions associated with housing, powering and
cooling data centers.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to solve
critical issues in heat assisted magnetic recording (HAMR) technology for next-
generation of ultra-high capacity disk drives. High data storage densities
achievable with HAMR technology are expected to radically improve drive storage
capacities through much greater densities. However, durable near field
transducers (NFTs) are critical components that must be realized before
commercialization of the devices is possible. Plasmonic materials with
refractory properties are natural candidates for durable NFTs. In-depth
comprehensive understanding of the connection between thermal cyclic load,
oxidation, stoichiometry, crystalline structure and plasmonic properties for the
plasmonic ceramics at nanoscale requires sufficient scientific and experimental
support. Numerical simulations, optical characterization and advanced electron
microscopy techniques will be employed to investigate the performance of
plasmonic ceramics with refractory properties as reliable NFTs for HAMR
technology.