* 1416789
* Re-imagining Video-Based Online Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Joanne Lobato, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2018
* USD 444,060.00

The goal of this exploratory project is to create, investigate, and provide
evidence of promise for a model of online videos that embodies a more expansive
vision of both the nature of the content and the pedagogical approach than is
currently represented in YouTube-style lessons. This goal is pursued through the
development and research of videos for two mathematics units--one focused on
proportional reasoning at the middle grades level and the other focused on
quadratic functions at the high school level, using an approach that could be
applied to any STEM content area. The media attention on the Khan Academy and
the wide array of massive open online courses has highlighted the internet
phenomenon of widespread accessibility to mathematics lessons, which offer many
benefits, such as student control of the pace of learning and earlier access to
advanced topics than is often possible in public schools. Yet, despite the huge
range of topics presented in online videos, there is surprising uniformity in
the procedural emphasis of the content and in the expository mode of
presentation. Moving beyond the types of videos now used, primarily recorded
lectures that replicate traditional classroom experience, this project advances
our understanding about how students learn from video and from watching others
learn - vicarious learning - as opposed to watching an expert. This project
addresses the need for an alternative approach. Rather than relying on an
expository style, the videos produced for this project focus on pairs of
students, highlighting their dialogue, explanations and alternative conceptions.
This alternative has the potential to contribute to learning sciences and to
develop a usable tool.

Despite the tremendous growth in the availability of mathematics videos online,
little research has investigated student learning from them. This project
develops dialogue-intensive videos in which children justify and explain their
reasoning, elucidate their own comprehension of mathematical situations, and
argue for and against various ideas and strategies. According to Wegerif (2007),
such vicarious participation in a dialogic community may help learners take the
perspective of another in a discussion, thus "expanding the spaces of learning"
through digital technology. Consequently, a major contribution of this proposed
work will be a set of four vicarious learning studies. Two qualitative studies
investigate the particular meanings and ways of reasoning that learners
appropriate from observing the dialogue of the students in the videos, as well
as the learning trajectories of vicarious learners for each unit. Two
quantitative studies isolate and test the effectiveness of the dialogic and the
conceptual components of the model by comparing learning outcome gains for (a)
conceptual dialogic versus conceptual expository conditions, and (b) dialogic
conceptual versus dialogic procedural conditions. Another mark of the
originality of the proposed work is the set of vicarious learning studies that
contributes to the emerging literature across several dimensions, by (a) using
secondary students rather than undergraduates; (b) exploring longer periods of
learning, which is more conducive to deeper understanding; and (c) examining the
nature of reasoning that is possible, not just the effectiveness of the
approach.