* 1416539
* SBIR Phase I: Improving Children's Motivation, Self-Efficacy, Science Learning and Reading Proficiency
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ronald Cole, Boulder Language Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project's broader/commercial impact is the potential of the
intelligent tutoring system to increase young learners' science motivation and
achievement and to improve their fluent reading and comprehension skills. The
innovation thus addresses a critical national need to improve students' science
learning and reading proficiency in our nation's schools, since national
assessments of educational progress indicate that the majority of fourth, eighth
and twelfth grade students are not proficient in either science or reading on
standardized tests. The innovation is thus designed to provide teachers with an
accessible, affordable and highly effective learning tool that will improve
their students' engagement, motivation and learning in both science and reading.
The projects' commercialization plan is designed to support widespread
distribution of the innovation to schools in the U.S. and globally through
existing channels, thus increasing the potential for broad societal impact.

The project aims to develop and demonstrate the feasibility of an intelligent
tutoring system that will help children learn to reason about science and
comprehend science texts through conversational interactions with a virtual
tutor. Successful outcomes of the project will lead to new insights and
contribute to scientific knowledge about how advanced human language
technologies, character animation technologies and computer vision technologies
can be combined and integrated into intelligent tutoring systems to optimize
young learners' engagement, motivation, self-efficacy and learning. The project
is based on theory and scientific research on how children learn through social
interaction in multimedia environments, and prior research by the project team
that improved children's motivation to learn science and their science
achievement through conversations with a virtual science tutor. Successful
outcomes of the SBIR Phase I project will extend this prior research and advance
scientific knowledge by demonstrating the feasibility and promise of an
intelligent tutoring system that tracks and interprets students? eye movements
to improve science learning, oral reading fluency and reading comprehension.