* 1416161
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Mechanism for Cation Exchange and Doping in Semiconducting Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Phillip Geissler, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Phillip Geissler from the University of California Berkeley is supported in an
International Collaboration in Chemistry award by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program and the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program; his collaborator, Eran Rabani at Tel Aviv
University, is simultaneously supported by the U.S.-Israel Binational Science
Foundation. The project is motivated by the fact that the past 20 years have
seen a revolution in chemists' ability to make materials on extremely small
scales, notably in the form of "nanocrystals" (nanometer-sized excerpts of
crystalline materials). Realizing the immense technological promise of
nanocrystals, however, requires much more control over their composition, shape,
structure, and relative arrangements than is currently possible. This project
concerns a recently discovered route towards gaining control of this kind:
exchanging one set of ions in a nanocrystal with a chemically distinct set of
ions, remarkably without altering the nanocrystal's structure. The mechanism,
energetics, dynamics, and physical consequences of such "cation exchange" are
very poorly understood, greatly limiting its precise application. The project
uses tools of theory and computation to develop and explore models that shed
light on the chemical underpinnings of ion exchange. It further evaluates the
consequences of exchange on electronic properties relevant to desirable
technological advances. Specific activities of this project include (i)
construction of models for exploring reaction mechanisms of doping and ion
exchange, (ii) development and application of state-of-the-art computational
techniques needed to explore the long-time behaviors of these models, and (iii)
the assessment of resulting electronic properties. Interaction models are built
through judicious comparison with electronic structure calculations and
experimental measurements. Molecular dynamics simulations combined with
techniques such as transition path sampling are employed to examine how
impurities/cations enter the nanocrystal from solution, how they diffuse through
the host lattice, and how they exchange places with host atoms. In order to
calculate emergent electronic properties, semiempirical pseudopotential models
adequate for doped materials and heterostructures are developed. Finally, a
theory for heavily doped nanocrystals in the spirit of a "hydrogenic-like" model
for multiple impurities is being constructed to elucidate at a fundamental level
the alignment of bands, localization of excitons, electron-hole interactions,
and how these properties depend on the size, shape, and choice of materials.