* 1416133
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanomanufactured optical elements for fiber optic connectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Longfei Ye, MagAssemble, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 174,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the field of
advanced manufacturing. This project develops a low cost, high resolution
nanomanufacturing technology platform for building optical fiber devices with
approaches that are currently out of reach because of manufacturing cost. While
both size and cost reductions are needed for this technology to address the
optical component market, if successful, demand could reach 8 figures for a
single customer. This technology could thus transform optics manufacturing
across the entire spectrum of markets that use photonics: including biomedical,
energy, military, and consumer markets. If it meets the needs of the photonics
sector, this platform, which uses a template to assemble building blocks into
composite materials, could penetrate a much broader commercial marketplace. One
example includes extending additive manufacturing (3D printing) to
nanoelectronics, information technology, and personalized low-cost manufacturing
of consumer devices. The scientific and technological understanding created by
developing this platform could enable businesses to leverage low-cost U.S.-based
nanomanufacturing to address markets for advanced materials and components
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will miniaturize optical fiber
components that are used in fiber optical line cards, by leveraging an advanced
nanomanufacturing platform with potential to reduce component cost as well.
These optical line cards contain many cylindrical components that are 5 mm in
diameter, each of which performs different operations on the optical signals
coming into the card, and then routes certain signals to output optical signals.
Being able to reduce component size means optical fiber component manufacturers
can pack more components into a given physical space, or reduce the overall
footprint of a line card without negatively impacting performance or increasing
cost. Phase I research activities will include assembling prototype components
with diameters approaching 1 mm, verifying that component performance can
approach that of current devices, and evaluating specific manufacturing and
assembly strategies to assess size reduction and manufacturing cost. Expected
results include performance data and an accurate forecast of the required
technical innovations and trade-offs needed to reduce component size without
increasing manufacturing cost.