* 1416025
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of High Speed Process Technology for the Manufacturing of Cost Effective Polymer Rebar
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Matthew Kero, Neuvokas Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 177,590.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the
development of a superior infrastructure material with wide-reaching
applications. Fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) rebar materials offer significant
performance advantages as compared to uncoated steel rebar. These advantages
include a sevenfold weight reduction, the elimination of corrosion, a 30%
reduction in concrete usage (which translates to a 15 billion ton reduction in
CO2 emissions), and equivalent tensile strength at smaller diameters versus
traditional steel rebar. FRP rebar is being produced in small quantities, but
has limited market acceptance due to its high cost. The material and process to
be developed will allow price parity and enable dramatic improvements in
production speeds as compared to the current FRP state-of-the-art. When
combined, these improvements will open the FRP market of $1.8 billion and create
opportunities in the broader $60 billion global market for rebar. Additionally,
global basalt mine waste dumps will be explored and, if possible, utilized as a
raw material for fiber production. If successful, this would eliminate a
significant waste stream and lead to better environmental stewardship.

This effort will focus on developing the process required to produce this new
rebar. A thermoset resin and basalt fiber will be used as the primary
reinforcements within this composite. Over the past 20 years, FRP rebar has been
developed into a viable product, representing $1.2 billion in cumulative
revenue. However, no FRP rebar product is currently offered at price parity with
uncoated steel rebar. In order to reach price parity, this effort will focus on
development of a novel high-speed manufacturing process for this material.
Basalt fiber is an emerging material that has potential to replace carbon fiber
in a variety of applications. Additionally, thermoset resins not commonly used
in pultrusion can offer improved performance characteristics that cannot be
achieved with typical FRP rebar resins. Completion of this project will create
further understanding of material interactions in this system, which will create
the potential for additional composite technologies.