* 1416051
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Fundamental Limits of Surface Resistance of Superconductors for Next Generation Particle Accelerators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jean Delayen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 664,192.00

Superconducting Radio Frequency (SRF) cavities have been used in a variety of
particle accelerators for quite some time. The ulra-low electrical resistivity
of a superconductor material allows a radio frequency resonator (needed for an
accelerator) to obtain a high quality factor (Q) which allows energy storage
with very low loss. Future accelerators, important in many areas of science and
medicine, will benefit from advances such as the techniques in this award. This
award is for advanced studies of superconductors used in SRF accelerators.
Superconductors used in SRF are limited by the fundamental surface resistance.
The next significant breakthrough in the SRF cavity technology is only possible
if the physics of surface resistance is fully understood. The main goal of this
research is to provide an understanding of the origin of the various
contributions to the power dissipation in superconducting niobium and in
particular the origin of the non-linear behavior as a function of the radio
frequency field. This award includes integrated experimental and theoretical
parts to address the unresolved issues of the surface resistance of
superconductors at high radio frequency field, and in particular how the surface
composition and structure can be modified and tuned in order to reduce surface
resistance. The theoretical work will guide the experimental work which, in
turn, will provide feedback to further develop the theory. This research will be
performed by two graduate students and thus contribute to the education of
accelerator scientists, who are in extremely short supply. The successful
completion of this work will be very beneficial for the ongoing R&amp;D of high
performance SRF cavities. Addressing the outstanding problems of the residual
surface resistance and the increase of the quality factor Q with the radio
frequency field magnitude can help guide the ongoing R&amp;D of SRF cavities and
evaluate possibilities of promising new materials as possible SRF materials.
This work will have a significant impact on the application of the SRF
technology in general, and to accelerators operating in continuous wave mode in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this award some of the unresolved issues in
our understanding of the surface resistance of superconductors will be
addressed, in particular: (1) the physics of the residual resistance, which can
exceed 20% of the theoretical contribution; (2) mechanisms of the observed
increase of Q with the field and the possibilities of using this effect to
extend the increase of Q to higher fields to boost the cavity performance; (3)
possibilities of increasing the Q factor by managing impurities; and (4) making
SRF materials other than Niobium useful for low field accelerator applications
at low temperature.