* 1416591
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Robotic Orthotics for Industrial Lift Safety
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Timothy Swift, Other Lab Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. The
industrial lift assist device being developed directly in this effort can be a
tool that mitigates the 137 thousand annual lifting injuries seen in the US and
the annual price tag of over $50 billion in direct and indirect costs. This
device can be sold directly to corporations and result in an improved quality of
life for those patients that avoid a long term lifting injury. Another area of
impact of the technology presented in this proposal is that it is much larger
than just the industrial application being evaluated at first. Orthotic devices
are a brand new field that has demonstrated potential in many different markets
including military applications, medical, education, and even consumer. In each
of these cases, the costs of the current generation of devices are one of the
leading limitations for their widespread integration. The fabric design concepts
developed in this effort will create a foundation for revolutionizing these
other markets as well as leading to the birth of an entire new industry that
spans many aspects of the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a novel architecture used to
construct this low cost lift assist device. The low cost orthotic device
proposed in this effort is constructed entirely out of fabric. This effort
pioneers the use of selectively compliant fabric structures to replace the rigid
components, typically made from steel or aluminum, of traditional exoskeleton
design methodologies. This effort is founded in the realization that some high
strength fabrics have strength to weight ratios up to 10x that of steel, while
they can be manufactured for a fraction of the cost. This design approach also
allows the part count to be significantly reduced further reducing the cost of
these devices. We anticipate that these cost reductions can result in a viable
lift assist device that can be sold for 10x less than that of conventional lift
assist exoskeletons. There are currently no design tools for the design of
fabric structures as the typical design infrastructure is limited to rigid
components. As a result, this effort will seek to build on our existing internal
design infrastructure and experience to tailor these fabric structures to the
application of industrial lift safety.