* 1416873
* IBSS-Ex: Integrating Social Science and Systems Methodologies for Sustainability: Promoting Appropriate Waste-Disposal Practices in Low-Income Neighborhoods
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Benjamin Hobbs, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 249,998.00

This interdisciplinary research project will explore the potential for a new
approach to reduce trash accumulation and promote recycling in low-income urban
neighborhoods. The project will demonstrate how different social science methods
can be integrated to provide insights and answers useful in urban sustainability
management. The investigators will bring together perspectives and approaches
from behavioral science, decision and management sciences; econometrics and
behavioral economics; and the social determinants of health. The project will
provide new insights regarding the factors that influence waste-creation and
-disposal practices, and it will assess the potential for different kinds of
approaches to reduce litter, increase recycling, and improve urban environmental
characteristics. The project will be conducted in low-income neighborhoods in
the city of Baltimore, but it will provide new theoretical insights in a diverse
range of other locales, and it will inform the development of programs and
policies designed to promote urban neighborhood quality and sustainability. The
investigators will work in collaboration with neighborhood residents, community
associations, environmental organizations and city agencies to investigate the
causes and to pilot test and evaluate solutions to the problem of urban trash
accumulation. The project will provide valuable education and training
opportunities for graduate students, and it will involve students from a number
of high schools that have science programs with a health focus and with large
numbers of students underrepresented in science and engineering in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on a pilot study conducted in
early 2014 that identified four key factors contributing to the accumulation of
solid waste in neighborhoods: (1) high turnover of tenants in rental properties;
(2) landlords who do not provide trash containers, information about trash
collection procedures, or access to the back alley to tenants; (3) difficulties
faced by sanitation code enforcement officials given current laws; and (4) drug
dealers and users who encourage trash accumulation because it helps conceal
their activities from law enforcement officials. The investigators will
integrate empirical and theoretical modeling methods from different social
science fields to assess social and physical factors influencing waste creation
and disposal practices and create measurement tools for evaluation of factors
affecting waste creation and disposal. They will develop and test intervention
packages designed to improve household and community waste management, and they
will employ a systems-analysis approach for the evaluation of strategies. Four
types of empirical analyses will inform the parameterization of the socio-
physical decision sciences model. The first will be analyses of historical data
for broad relationships between waste policies and the amounts of waste and
litter. These data will provide a useful baseline and insights on correlations
with policies but will not provide the fine-grained resolution needed for models
of relationships between influences and choices. The second and third types will
be laboratory experiments and field studies to generate individual and
household-level data under more controlled conditions to identify relationships
that are more causal in nature. The fourth will be questionnaire studies
addressing attitudes towards proper and improper disposal methods, which will
help identify which interventions will be received most positively by the public
under given circumstances, with an emphasis placed on design features that can
make a large difference in intervention effectiveness. This project is supported
through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS)
competition.