* 1416888
* WORKSHOP: IEEE VR 2014 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Daniel Keefe, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2014
* USD 15,609.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 12 graduate students
(9 domestic and 3 international), along with 5 senior members of the community
(faculty and industry researchers), in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be
held in conjunction with IEEE Virtual Reality 2014 conference that will take
place March 29-April 2 in Minneapolis, and which is collocated with the IEEE
Symposium on 3D User Interface. Virtual reality (VR) is a multidisciplinary
field involving human-centered computer simulations that seek to imitate or
augment real world senses (usually sight, sound, and touch) and experiences. VR
research includes developing and assessing methods and systems, and facilitating
and understanding user perceptions, beliefs, and behaviors. First organized by
the IEEE Computer Society in 1993 and held annually since 1995, IEEE Virtual
Reality is the premier international conference and exhibition in this field and
includes technical paper presentations, workshops, tutorials, research
demonstrations, and exhibits from industry. The IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces has been held annually and colocated with IEEE VR since 2006. Based
on prior year numbers, the combined 2014 conferences are expected to attract
350-400 registrants, 15-20 exhibitors, and 30 student volunteers. More
information may be found online at
http://www.ieeevr.org/2014.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's IEEE VR Doctoral
Consortium is inspired by and similar in format to last year's successful
inaugural event, which was also supported by NSF. The main activities of the DC
will take place on Sunday, March 30, immediately prior to the start of the IEEE
VR conference proper and in parallel with the second day of the IEEE Symposium
on 3D User Interfaces; additional smaller activities will take place at
scattered times over the rest of the week. The workshop will include morning and
afternoon sessions in which each student presents his/her work to the other
student participants and a panel of senior VR researchers, with sufficient time
set aside after each talk for discussion and constructive feedback that
addresses the strengths of the work, challenges and issues that may arise, and
implications of the results. A group working lunch attended by all the students
and mentors will be particularly valuable for unifying the individual goals and
projects presented within the group as part of a "big picture" envisioning of
the future of the field over the next 10-20 years. Each student will also be
asked to prepare a poster on his/her research that will be on display during the
conference as part of the poster sessions, and to submit a short (2-page)
abstract to be archived in the IEEE Digital
Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The goal of the Doctoral
Consortium is to provide an interactive and supportive mentoring opportunity for
mid-level graduate students in virtual reality, to afford these students a
valuable opportunity to get independent perspectives on their research from
senior individuals with a wide collective breadth and depth of knowledge, and to
build a cohort of young researchers within the VR community. The organizers will
make a special effort to recruit participants from groups traditionally
underrepresented in computer science, including women, persons of color, and
persons with disabilities. They will take steps to achieve diversity among the
students with respect to research topics, disciplinary backgrounds,
methodological approaches, and home institutions (for example, no more than one
graduate student will be accepted from any given institution).