* 1416093
* SBIR Phase I:  Fiber Optic Polarization-based Intrusion Detection System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Wenjing Tang, Optronic Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project results from a new capability to detect
eavesdropping on a fiber optic data communications link. Much of human society -
commerce, social interaction, entertainment, etc. - is increasingly information-
based. Technology related to the production and dissemination of information is
developing at an exponential rate, with optical communications systems in
particular forming the backbone of the internet and other high-capacity
communications networks. It is little wonder, therefore, that the wealth of
modern society is increasingly represented in the form of information.
Protecting such information from access by unauthorized persons or entities is
obviously of increasing importance across all sectors of society. This project
is aimed at developing a technology to detect the leakage of information at the
physical layer in an optical communications system, thus detecting intrusion by
an unauthorized party.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project brings innovation in securing fiber optic
physical transmission media by developing a novel polarization-based intrusion
detection system and demonstrating its commercial value. Secure transmission of
data is critical to governments, military organizations, financial institutions,
health care providers and other enterprises. The proposed fiber optic
polarization-based intrusion detection system utilizes the properties of light,
as they are manifested in single mode fiber, as a means of ensuring the
integrity and security of the physical layer of a fiber-optic based
communication link. This technology breakthrough is expected to provide a low-
cost means for operators of fiber optic systems to detect intrusion and take
corrective measures. Since single mode optical fibers are the primary
transmission media of high-capacity long distance telecommunications networks,
the proposed technology will enable the detection and prevention of potentially
one of the most damaging forms of information theft.