* 1416205
* SBIR Phase I:  4th Generation Advanced High Strength Steel (AHSS) Produced via Novel High-Temperature Deformation Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Nicholas Moroz, Wayne Steel Tech
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development a new family of nanoengineered low-alloy steels that surpass the
state-of-the-art in coupling high strength (>2,000 MPa tensile strength) with
high elongation (>20%). The outcome of this project will be the creation of a
domestically-designed and produced, and lower cost advanced high strength steel
(AHSS), based on a low alloy chemistry and lower energy intensity manufacturing
process. The commercialization of a non-commodity fourth-generation AHSS family
of structural materials with ultrahigh strength, and toughness without
sacrificing elongation will provide significant value for the U.S. steel makers.
These cost-effective low-alloy steels could displace current AHSSs and other
exotic materials, such as aluminum, metal or ceramic matrix composites, and
fiber reinforced composites to be used in a variety of applications in the
Defense, Off-Highway, and Automotive industries. Furthermore, the proposed
manufacturing technique can be easily retrofitted to current steel plate and
sheet production lines with minimal new equipment. The U.S. market for AHSS is
in excess of $5 billion and is expected to double within the next five years.

Current advanced high strength steels (AHSSs) employ high alloy content,
increasing their cost, and feature trade-offs between strength and ductility. A
new steel manufacturing process will be developed, combining a patented ultra-
high strength steel austempering process with grain deformation, nanostructuring
the steel to deliver high elongation. The nanoengineering deformation and heat
treatment processes for the proposed fourth-generation steel have been proven in
the laboratory and have greatly improved structural performance. Other
industrial steel grain nanostructuring means have shown improvements in tensile
strength, but have exhibited low elongation, and their manufacturing methods
have not been easily translated to sheet production. It is anticipated that the
proposed manufacturing process can be used to make plate, sheet, and net-shape
steel products. Completion of this effort will result in a technical model to
optimize steel properties, a series of prototype steels, and the design of a
prototype manufacturing line which can be scaled in Phase II to penetrate the
multi-billion dollar AHSS market.