* 1416571
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: CDS&amp;E: Multiscale Simulations of Bifunctional Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Andreas Goetz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,205.00

Andreas W Goetz of the University of California, San Diego and Dionisios G
Vlachos of the University of Delaware are supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program and the
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) program in
the Chemistry Division. The Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (ACI) is
co-funding this award. Goetz and Vlachos develop and apply computational tools
for bifunctional catalysis. The project is an international collaboration with
Philippe Sautet, Paul Fleurat-Lessard and Carine Michel of the Ecole Normale
Superieure de Lyon in France who provide complimentary expertise and who are
supported by a corresponding award of the French ANR. This project develops
computational models and software capable of handling the multiscale nature and
the complexity inherent to the catalytic processes entailing bifunctional
catalysts in solution phase. Bifunctional catalysts are important for the
conversion of biomass into liquid fuels and chemicals and therefore for a
sustainable future that does not rely on dwindling petroleum sources and
minimizes global warming with significant societal impact. Computer simulations
can play a key role in understanding how these catalysts function and in guiding
development of improved catalysts and industrially viable processes. The
computational methods developed are integrated into freely available open source
software libraries and distributed with a widely used molecular simulation
package. Both graduate and undergraduate students are involved in the project,
as well as high school students and teachers via internships and research
experience programs to train the next generation of scientists. The work has
relevance for multiple domains ranging from chemistry to chemical engineering to
biosciences and aids the development of biorefineries with a clear impetus on
economic growth and reduced CO2 emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developments in this project encompass a new force field and linear energy
relations for fast screening of catalytic reaction networks, microkinetic
simulations to extract the kinetically important steps, molecular dynamics
simulations with quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) algorithms that
allow an adaptive exchange of particles across the QM/MM boundary to determine
the activation energies of the important reactions, and parameterizations of
density functional tight binding theory to maximize the accessible time scales.
The combination of these methods enables for the first time to explore the
combinatorial explosion in pathways in the transformation of biomass using
bifunctional (a metal and an acid/base) catalysts in solution. Initially the
project focuses on the hydrodeoxygenation of glycerol into propanediol, for
which significant experimental data is available. These simulations aid in the
development of improved bifunctional catalysts that can ultimately lead to
improved processes in biorefineries. The integration of efficient multi-scale
simulation approaches in widely utilized and freely available open source
software as part of this project can impact multiple application domains.