* 1416098
* SBIR Phase I:  Active Radar Multi-Path Mapping for High-Precision Ranging Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Thomas Schmid, Greina Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project derives from the fact that modern Real Time
Location Service (RTLS) systems offer the potential to improve the efficiency of
warehouses, offices, and hospitals, and to increase the safety of first
responders during an emergency. The high-precision radio frequency (RF) ranging
technology to be developed in this project is expected to enable new application
areas that are out-of-reach with current RTLS systems. The proposed technology
is expected to provide an accuracy improvement of three orders of magnitude over
current state-of-the-art systems using low-cost of-the-shelf components, while
also mitigating common technical problems with RF systems (such as poor
performance due to multi-path RF reflections). If successfully developed, the
proposed technology could enable the use of high-precision RF ranging for motion
tracking, accurate indoor localization, robotics, high-value asset tracking,
perimeter security, and accurate first-responder person tracking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project investigates algorithms to mitigate multi-path issues in a novel RF-
based RTLS system. RTLS systems rely on robust range estimates between
participating nodes. Multi-path reflections are the most significant source of
error for these ranging estimates, and reducing their effect has in the past
proven difficult. Recent developments in narrow-band 2.4 GHz radios allow
millimeter-accurate ranging techniques based on carrier-phase measurements,
similar to differential GPS systems. External interference can be minimized by
using the phase information of pure carrier tones, and "packetizing" the range
measurements by hopping over multiple discrete frequencies. Adding an antenna
array and fast switching between the antennas adds further capabilities, as the
different antenna phase measurements can be combined into a steerable virtual
antenna. This is similar to active radar systems, except that it is done using
low-cost of-the-shelf components. By using distance information and virtual
antenna angle combined with the different multi-path components, the proposed
system is able to map RF reflecting objects, allowing higher-level algorithms to
accurately pinpoint the location of a device in a room. The proposed technology
offers a potential accuracy improvement of three orders of magnitude over
existing methods.