* 1416907
* IBSS: New Methods for Investigating the Formation of Individual and Shared Concepts and Their Dynamic Dispersion Across Related Societies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Natalia Komarova, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2019
* USD 980,923.00

This interdisciplinary research project will develop and test new mathematical
models that explore the ways through which conceptual meaning is represented in
languages as those languages change in complexity over time. The project
investigators also will examine the ways such meaning is shared among groups of
individuals in societies. The project's models will describe the dynamic
development of concepts as a geometric system and will provide methods for
understanding the linguistic representation of concepts and the ways semantic
meaning from one community can be influenced by that of neighboring communities.
Although this project will focus on the ways that color terms have evolved
within languages and societies, the insights and information from this project
will apply beyond the domain of color representation to any set of concepts in
which objects have a similarity structure that can be assessed and described
mathematically. Examples of the kinds of situations where the approach and
methods to be developed during this project will have utility are the following:
(1) the development of unambiguous and formally scalable artificial intelligence
and robotic analogs of human classification and categorization systems; (2) the
development of a global communication methodology that could be used to enhance
rapid global information messaging capabilities; and (3) the construction of
standardized systems for information representation in critical systems, such as
medical diagnostic systems and transportation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
formation and communication of concepts permeate a diverse range of human
activities. They play roles in education systems; in the organization and design
of transportation systems; in the physical and virtual design of retail markets
and consumer goods; in classifications of quality and risk in medical diagnoses;
in business performance; and in social values. Psychologists, linguists,
anthropologists, computer scientists, and other scholars have studied concepts
by focusing on specific examples of concept formation while trying to understand
how such conceptual systems are formed. One specific concept that has received
attention is how color terms "evolve" and how their conceptual meaning is
understood and shared by members of a society. Conceptualization of color is an
important special case because color stimuli can be precisely measured and
easily duplicated, and the human perceptual space of a million colors can be
described with mathematical precision. This project will focus on the
development and testing of mathematical models that capture the ways color term
concepts are categorized and shared. The models to be designed and tested will
use geometric formalisms for characterizing meaning in general and will
specifically demonstrate their use by investigating color terms and concepts.
Testing will use data from a wide variety of societies, including the
Mesoamerican Color Survey (MCS), a database of systematically collected
categorization behaviors of 900 individuals who have communicated with one or
more of 116 endangered or developing languages that are at various stages of
color lexicon development. The MCS is largely in hand-written form, and one
product of this project will be its full digitalization using modern computer
science crowd-sourcing methods. Full digitalization of the MCS database will
make it available for use by the global scientific community for the first time.
This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and
Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.