* 1416953
* Collaborative Research: Distributome--An Interactive Web-based Resource for Probability Distributions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Ivo Dinov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2014
* USD 60,795.00

This project develops a new computational and educational resource, the
Distributome, for exploring, discovering and interacting with varieties of
probability distributions. The Distributome project leverages the results of
successful NSF projects that have been sustained over decades of work in
developing interactive learning materials, forging technological advances, and
building and sustaining digital libraries; all integrated with an effective
dissemination and professional development infrastructure to ensure on-going
use. There are several novel features of this project. This resource builds the
infrastructure for community based development, expands and validates the
distributions' meta-data that is stored, processed, searched, traversed and
updated by experts, learners, and educators. The Distributome provides a
graphical user interface for interactive exploration of diverse distribution
resources, as well as a web-service for query, discovery and computational
utilization of these distribution resources by other software programs and
tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project provides an open
(development and utilization), platform-agnostic, extensible and broad framework
for navigation, discovery and usage of probability distributions in diverse
applications. The entire framework is built using
XML/JAVA/HTML/Wiki/MathML/LaTeX and is freely made available to the entire
community via www.Distributome.org. The user-base of the Distributome
infrastructure includes both educators (integrating these graphical tools and
instructional materials in their course curricula and participating in a unique
virtual community led by a cadre of activists) and most importantly learners
(exploring, validating and understanding the use of probability distributions
and models for practical problem solving). Probability modeling is at the root
of solving driving biological, engineering, health, physical science, and social
problems fundamental to the modern STEM curriculum. The Distributome
infrastructure enables representation, demonstration, computation and
visualization of a large number of probability distributions, their
interrelations and their applications integrated with associated class and out-
of-class activities to advance learning.