* 1416584
* SBIR Phase I:  Additives for Stable, Low-Cost, and High-Performance Organic Electrochromic Windows
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Isaac Sachs-Quintana, nexTint
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2015
* USD 164,145.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce initial building capital costs and
monthly energy bills by providing dynamic glass at a price that is less than
half that of the competition. Customers will experience a projected payback
period of three years or less. Once the windows are installed, they will improve
worker productivity because the windows can switch on the order of a few seconds
in response to glare. The commercial impact of this work is significant because
the amount of energy wasted by using standard, double pane windows costs $58
billion per year in the US. The company expects its windows will help reduce the
energy waste at a low price such that the company can capture a significant
portion of the $2 billion US construction glass market.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves improving the
stability of electrochromic windows that can tint instantly. The fast switching
speeds and low cost are due to a dramatically different set of materials that
are similar to plastics. Although these materials can be deposited onto windows
at a cost that is lower than competing technologies, these materials have
suffered from stability issues. The company is developing anti-oxidant additives
that can be used to improve the stability. Our research objectives are to
produce devices with an accelerated lifetime of 20 years and to produce a 10
inch by 10 inch prototype that can used to create design pull amongst building
design firms and building owners. This will allow the company to obtain third
party validation, enlist channel partners, and begin scale-up.