* 1416046
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel High Efficiency Nanocrystal-based Phosphors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* John Lebens, Lumisyn LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will enable white LEDs to produce
significantly better quality light at up to 30% higher efficiencies.
Accordingly, the proposed nano-phosphors will enable faster market adoption of
LED lighting at a lower overall cost to the end consumer due to their higher
efficiencies. Since general lighting is a large component of total energy
consumption, e.g., ~20% in the U.S., the nano-phosphors will enable
significantly added energy savings at an earlier date compared to the status quo
of employing conventional phosphors. With regard to light quality, the nano-
phosphors will enable custom, desirable light sources to be formed, for example,
that of natural sunlight. Since the nano-phosphors maintain high efficiency
under the conditions of high temperature and very high optical flux, they should
also help enable next generation optoelectronic devices, such as, optically-
pumped, visibly-tunable lasers. Successfully encapsulating the nanocrystals in
glass will also make the nano-phosphors more technologically viable in these
other high impact areas. Accordingly, R&amp;D will be accelerated due to the
availability of nano-phosphors with these enhanced performance characteristics,
leading to faster market introduction of additional next generation
optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project aims to take novel InP-based quantum dots, which have
outstanding optical performance, and put them in a form suitable for usage by
the LED and lighting fixture industries. To enhance the adoption of LED
lighting, manufacturers currently seek high-performance, spectrally-narrow, red-
emitting phosphors to replace conventional red phosphors that result in large
LED efficiency losses. The InP-based nano-phosphors have the advantages of
quantum dots, namely, negligible optical scattering, emission range throughout
the visible spectrum, and narrow spectral width, but also maintain high
efficiency under the extreme operating conditions of the LEDs. To be practical
for LED manufacturers, the nano-phosphors need to be placed in a silicone
matrix. To achieve this, the nanocrystals will be encapsulated by a thin shell
of glass. In order to maintain efficiency following glass shelling, the
semiconductor shell surrounding the nanocrystals will be altered and the
conventional glass shelling procedures will be modified.