* 1416365
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Performance Analog-to-Digital Conversion for Broadband Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jayanth Kuppambatti, Seamless Semiconductors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,997.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to enable high-performance analog-to-
digital converters (ADCs) that are most ideally suited for consumer products
like multi-standard digital TVs ($0.7 billion market by 2015) or professional
instrumentation like the mid-range oscilloscopes ($1.8 billion market by 2019).
The developed technology and design expertise can further be used in a wide
variety of other ADC markets including base stations, hard-disk drives and
mobile & WiFi chipsets. The proposed broadband analog-to-digital-conversion
technology provides technological advances in electronics that impact the
society at large including consumer electronics and high-end instrumentation
needed for scientific progress.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop high
performance analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) for wideband digitization.
Fundamental advantages of digital computation techniques in integrated circuits
have made possible complex systems-on-chip (SoCs). These SoCs drastically reduce
the size and power consumed in modern electronics. The need to interface
powerful digital cores to the real, analog world places critical performance
requirements on the analog-pre-processing required in the interfaces,
specifically on ADCs. As digital-oriented CMOS scaling continues towards lower
supply voltages and denser and faster switching devices, traditional analog
design techniques lack the desired performance by several technology
generations. This has made implementing high-performance and power-efficient
ADCs very challenging. This project proposes ADC architectures that leverage a
unique design paradigm for analog/mixed-signal circuits and ADCs in nanoscale
digital CMOS technologies. The proposed ADCs uniquely exploit the operation of
transistors to overcome challenges associated with the design of traditional
voltage-mode analog circuits. The proposed technological innovations are
expected to bring together high performance and low power and with the cost-
advantage offered by CMOS technologies.