* 1416565
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Biocatalytic Selenium Removal from Water and Wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Joseph Salanitro, Microvi Biotech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the availability
of a new low-cost, high performance technology to remove selenium from water,
thereby contributing to national goals for protecting public health and
maintaining natural ecosystems. While selenium is an essential trace element,
excess selenium can lead to hair and skin changes, gastrointestinal symptoms,
and damage to nervous, kidney and liver tissue. Selenium levels as low as 1.5
parts-per-billion result in toxic bioaccumulation in aquatic life, endangering
the food chain and ecosystem balance. While existing regulations limit selenium
concentrations in water to 50 parts-per-billion, industrial effluents (e.g. flue
gas desulfurization, mining wastewater, coal power plants) are often required to
achieve levels below 10 parts-per-billion. Meeting these very low limits is
often unachievable or prohibitively expensive using existing technologies. In
preliminary results, the proposed technology shows promise as an intensified,
targeted, robust, and high performance biological treatment technology with
substantially lower projected costs compared to the state-of-the-art. This is
the first time that a technology for selenium removal combines novel methods in
microorganism culture development with materials science, which helps further
our understanding of how technical innovation along interdisciplinary lines can
be applied for alleviating such widespread problems as selenium
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project is a multidisciplinary approach to respond to a widespread and
increasing market demand for more effective, reliable and cost-efficient
technologies for removing selenium from water and wastewater. While a variety of
chemical, biological, and physical methods exist to remove selenium from water,
high costs and increasingly stringent regulation drive an effort for new
technologies. This first component of this work investigates selenium
biotransformation and applies state-of-the-art techniques in microorganism
culture development. Following culture development, novel synthetic biocatalyst
composites with specific functionalities are developed as a method for deploying
and enhancing the robustness of the technology application. Finally, a prototype
of the biocatalytic technology is constructed and thoroughly tested to evaluate
industrially- and economically-relevant operating parameters. The proposed Phase
I work assesses the feasibility and suitability of the new selenium treatment
technology, including determination of microbial characteristics, kinetic
parameters, and process design. Overall, this project stands to advance our
understanding of microbial selenium reduction, provide an improved process for
industrial wastewater treatment, and demonstrate the effectiveness of
multidisciplinary collaboration for applied technologies in the water and
wastewater treatment sector.