* 1416946
* STTR Phase I:  24x7 mobile wireless monitoring of patient's vitals to proactively manage disease recovery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Gary Strangman, Argosy Omnimedia, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is found in the proposed technology development
that facilitates direct, ubiquitous acquisition of key biomedical data, with
little or no human intervention or introduction of errors, has the potential to
reduce the costs of healthcare and to revolutionize healthcare delivery
throughout our society. With readily available mobile computing platforms such
as smartphones and tablets, and eventually relying on readily available or
built-in sensors, the 21st century could herald an era where ?wellness
maintenance? predominates over ?medical care?. Ongoing 24x7 monitoring could
also facilitate the concept of more personalized time-derivative medicine, where
significant changes from one?s own baseline state provide early warnings of a
medical condition?rather than identifying departures from population averages,
or waiting for symptoms to become severe. With widespread use, this technology,
and the inherent level of automation of patient monitoring, could enable early
detection of chronic disease, thereby significantly reducing mortality,
morbidity and overall healthcare costs. Critically, this STTR team?s approach
has the potential to expand healthcare to various rural and other underserved
communities by making low-cost versions of this technology platform available
and compatible with an already large installed base of personal, mobile
computing platforms such as the patient?s own smartphone and digital cellular
network infrastructure.

The proposed project will significantly advance knowledge on several fronts.
First, this STTR team?s research involving healthcare organizations will inform
us of an appropriate business model for introducing Digital Health Information
Infrastructure (DHII) type technologies to the otherwise very complex healthcare
marketplace. It will also provide information about which DHII features are
critical, unimportant, and motivating for adoption of such systems. This is key
and often-overlooked information when developing new medical technologies. This
STTR team?s Phase I research will also expand the understanding about the limits
of generalized monitoring across hardware and software platforms to identify
areas where algorithmic optimization is needed to achieve higher levels of
performance. Expectations are that the wireless data streaming from multiple
sensors will require the implementation of data optimization and algorithmic
triage protocols to ensure that critical information content is acquired and
available for local analysis by on-board computer-aided diagnostics. This data
will also be accessible through archival storage, with search and retrieval, at
the internet-connected data repository implemented through traditional or cloud
computing architectures.