* 1416881
* Discovering Preferential Flow Patterns Using Real-time Soil Moisture Monitoring Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Hangsheng Lin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 237,306.00

Preferential flow (PF) is a fundamentally important hydrologic process that
influences a variety of earth surficial processes (such as runoff, erosion,
nutrient cycling, biogeochemical dynamics, ecological functions, biological
activities, gas emission, and contaminant fate). However, PF quantification and
prediction remain notoriously elusive. This project seeks to break through this
bottleneck by advancing two important fronts: 1) A practical means of detecting
and quantifying PF across diverse soil-landscapes, and 2) A new
conceptualization of dynamic PF networks embedded in the soil-landscape mosaic.
The investigators hypothesize that, while the potential for PF to occur in real-
world soils is ubiquitous, it takes the right combination of soils and
environments for PF to actually happen. The controls of PF occurrence can be
grouped into site factors (e.g., landform unit and soil type) and temporal
factors (e.g., initial soil moisture, precipitation characteristics, and plant
growth stage). They further hypothesize that a dynamic PF flow network embedded
in the subsurface resembles (to some extent) an ephemeral stream-like network,
which is governed by a dual-flow regime. The investigators will use large real-
time soil moisture monitoring databases to investigate the condition, timing,
frequency, and mechanism of PF occurrence in diverse soil-landscapes. High-
density and multiple depth soil moisture datasets will be systematically
analyzed to identify soil moisture response signatures to precipitation events
and to identify various flow scenarios and related mechanisms. A set of tools
has been developed to efficiently and consistently analyze soil moisture time
series profiles, including the determination and visualization of PF and related
controls.

This project addresses a grand challenge in hydrologic sciences, i.e., to
develop basic hydrologic principles and tools to further understand flow and
transport processes through an irregular and interconnected world. Since
hydrology often triggers 'hot spots' and 'hot moments' of biogeochemical
reactions and ecological functions, improved detection and quantification of PF
also have considerable implications for enhanced determination of chemical
fluxes and ecosystem functions. This project will make the completed databases
and the toolbox developed freely available to the scientific community. An
educational computer program will also be developed to spark interest and
appreciation of complex subsurface processes among students and the general
public. Graduate and undergraduate education will be an integral part of this
project. A panel discussion on Preferential Flow and Fundamental Hydrology will
be organized at the AGU and the AAAS annual meetings, and a public webinar on
this project's outcomes will also be given.