* 1416246
* Physics Theorynet Outreach Program
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Brent Nelson, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 36,000.00

Physics Theorynet is an outreach program supported by the National Science
Foundation and coordinated by the Principal Investigators since 2003. The main
component of Theorynet activities is direct interaction between Boston area
theorists and high school students, through lecture presentations,
demonstrations, and question and answer sessions conducted during regular class
hours and after classes. Presentation topics may include science in the news
(such as dark energy, the Large Hadron Collider, or exoplanets), traditional
subjects of interest to young science students (such as black holes, timetravel,
or extra dimensions), or concepts related to the high school physics curriculum.
The program aims to increase students' understanding of science and to raise
their awareness of the importance of fundamental research. In particular the
Theorynet program seeks to stress the importance of teaching what is referred to
as the "nature of science" (NOS). Very briefly, NOS can be described as the
notion that the acquisition of scientific knowledge is a collective, human
enterprise which proceeds through an evolving framework of models for the
physical world. Recent research indicates that students will not adequately
understand NOS unless it is deliberately introduced into the curriculum.
Specifically, students will not come to appreciate the true nature of science
simply by learning the body of knowledge commonly taught in high school
curricula. Therefore, the Physics Theorynet outreach program seeks to deliver
instruction about NOS to high school students in the Boston metropolitan
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty participants in the Theorynet program come
from universities such as MIT, Harvard, Tufts, Boston University, Brandeis,
Rhode Island College and the University of New Hampshire, in addition to
Northeastern University. High school instructors in the Theorynet program
represent a diversified cross-section of public and private schools in urban,
suburban and rural areas, with fifteen high schools currently represented across
three states. Operational costs of the Theorynet program include a nominal
stipend for high school instructors who participate, compensation for the travel
that instructors undertake to attend program meetings, acquisition and
maintenance of lecture demonstrations and presentation equipment, and
advertising at regional events aimed at physics
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated that 2,000 students are
reached by Theorynet physicists each year, in a diversified cross-section of
public and private schools in urban, suburban and rural areas. The program is
highly appreciated by teachers, students and their parents. Students have had
negative pre-conceived notions of science professionals corrected by direct
interaction with university faculty. Students are often encouraged to learn that
even some fanciful speculations can find a home in theoretical physics, where
there truly are "no dumb questions." Concepts such as string theory or the Higgs
mechanism are de-mystified, and the importance of fundamental science as a
vocation is re-affirmed. There is even a broader impact on Boston area
communities due to the coverage in high school and local newspapers, as well as
to students reporting visits to their parents. A major component of the
Theorynet program is promoting physics as a field of study when high school
students go on to college, and suggesting theoretical physics as a plausible
long-term career goal for students.