* 1416179
* SBIR Phase I:  Using microbes as a cost effective sensor network to improve oil and gas production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* AJAY KSHATRIYA, UC2
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 175,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to increase the efficiency of oil production and to
decrease the percentage of oil that is currently inaccessible using
bioinformatics software to predict oil well features based on subsurface
microbes. Over 50% of domestic oil reservoirs cannot be economically produced
today, and a lack of information about the subsurface is a key roadblock to
increasing this efficiency. The goal is to help unlock $1 trillion of economic
value in domestic energy potential currently inaccessible with current
technology. This project seeks to utilize the subsurface microbes as a network
of sensors that provide novel information for oil and gas companies. This
information will be used to inform key decisions that increase production with
more targeted approaches that result in greater U.S. energy independence while
reducing the environmental impact of oil drilling and production. In so doing,
the project will provide disruptive value in the $12B reservoir data and well
logging industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
use microbial communities that are native to the subsurface as an advanced and
cost effective sensor network that describe key properties of the oil
reservoirs. Deep within the subsurface, there are trillions of unique
interactions of the native microbes to their ecosystem. By combining advances in
cloud computing, DNA sequencing, and novel software analytics, this project will
demonstrate that these microbial communities correlate to meaningful production
parameters for the oil and gas industry. In so doing, the project will
demonstrate at pilot scale that this new information source can be utilized as a
novel, non-invasive, low-cost reservoir characterization tool that allows the
industry to maximize hydrocarbon production while minimizing environmental
impact.