* 1416970
* STTR Phase I:  Overcoming the Flat View - Teaching Climate with an Interactive Spherical Display
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Glenn Flierl, iGlobe, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 224,978.00

This STTR project's broader/commercial impact is that it will allow researchers
to learn more about the complex relationships between environmental conditions
and the impact of changes over time. The ability to convey that knowledge in an
intuitive and compelling manner to students and the public globally could
motivate them to influence business and political leaders to craft policies that
would reduce damage to the planet. In addition to schools and universities,
there are 600 museums dedicated to science, as well as aquariums and other
public venues concerned with environmental issues; in essence, these all are
involved in educating people, and they all look for effective means of
portraying information about the Earth. While the sphere/flat-screen displays
provide the most compelling views, adapting the methods developed in this
project to laptops and tablets (owned by several hundred million people) can
contribute to learning about climate for students and adults
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR project leverages a
commercial/university partnership to develop a vehicle for education and public
outreach on climate and climate change. With the increasing awareness and
confusion about climate change and the severity of predicted impacts, it has
become critical that we educate students at all levels to give them a real
understanding of climate data and climate models. Likewise, outreach efforts are
vitally needed, both to interest students in learning more about climate science
and to engage the general public. This project will provide compelling methods
for educators and their students to explore deeply what the data and state of
the art models tell us about climate changes, both natural and anthropogenic, as
well as to illustrate climate processes with simple models that can be used for
"what if" scenarios. The goal is not a series of canned lessons, but rather an
open-ended means for teaching the material with the ability to dig deeper into
the information in response to student questions.