* 1416986
* Collaborative Research: Ten years later: Resolving the postseismic deformation processes of the 2002 Denali Fault earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 105,649.00

The Earth's response to large earthquakes does not end when the seismic shaking
dies away. Large earthquakes substantially change forces (stresses) within the
Earth, and by measuring and modeling the response to these changes, we can learn
about the mechanical properties of deep fault zones and the material that
surrounds them. This time-dependent and transient response of the Earth produces
postseismic deformation, which we will measure using high-precision GPS. A key
challenge of postseismic deformation studies is to separate the effects of the
two main mechanisms, afterslip or continued slip on the deep fault plane, and
viscoelastic relaxation within the mantle and/or lower crust. In the first few
years after the earthquake, these two mechanisms can produce similar deformation
at the surface of the Earth, but they decay with time at different rates. In
this project, we will use a long record of data (up to 15 years) following the
2002 Denali fault earthquake to develop a complete model for the postseismic
deformation following this earthquake. This improved mechanical model will allow
us to better understand the forces that drive tectonic deformation in Alaska,
and the interaction between earthquakes.

We will carry out GPS surveys of a dense network of sites surrounding the 2002
fault rupture. These data will provide important spatial resolution to
complement the sparse continuous GPS network from the Plate Boundary
Observatory, which provides critical information about the time evolution of the
postseismic deformation. We will carefully examine the observed deformation to
identify observations that can be explained entirely or mostly by a single
postseismic mechanism, if possible, which makes it easier to constrain model
parameters. We will recalculate a new coseismic slip distribution using a finite
element code that can utilize the full 3-D inferred elastic Earth structure,
including the subducting slab, so that we can most accurately compute the
postseismic response to the slip. We will develop 3D finite element models and
other models to explain the observed deformation, and evaluate how these models
would respond to other stress changes like the 1964 earthquake, or glacial
unloading. We will share information about the Denali fault, earthquakes in
Alaska, and the results of this project with the public through interaction with
Denali National Park. The Park hosts about 400,000 visitors each year and
coordinated outreach efforts with the Park offer a chance to reach a broad
audience.