* 1416874
* STTR Phase I:  Hydrogen Bromine Electrolysis for Highly Efficient Hydrogen-Based Energy Storage and High Value Chemical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Trung Nguyen, Proton Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes applications
ranging from peak load shifting, grid buffering for renewable energy input,
frequency regulation, and chemical conversions. As the percentage of energy from
renewables on the grid increases, energy storage will be essential to stabilize
the supply and demand. Currently, 20-40% of wind energy is often stranded due to
the inability to capture the energy in the peak generation periods. Germany,
Europe, Japan, Korea, and other countries are funding significant efforts in
energy storage projects. Energy storage is also a critical need for all of the
United States armed services, including microgrids for forward operating bases
and other off grid installations. While batteries can demonstrate very good
round trip efficiencies, they suffer from self-discharge, capacity fade, and
high cost. Flow batteries separate the reactant and product storage from the
electrode active area, enabling higher capacities through merely adding more
storage. Many systems have not been practical in the past due to low energy
density values, but fuel cell and electrolysis developments have provided
pathways to higher energy density. Advances in these areas would find immediate
commercial interest, and address key strategic areas related to energy security
and grid stabilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project addresses the present technology gaps in flow battery
cell stack design to enable a reliable, efficient, high rate hydrogen-bromine
flow battery for energy storage applications. The goal of this project is a
proof of concept hydrogen bromide stack that operates at a practical hydrogen
storage pressure in electrolysis mode, while providing acceptable energy density
in fuel cell mode. The majority of hydrogen bromine flow battery research to
date has focused on the discharge reaction, leading to material choices that may
not be practical for the charging mode. This project will demonstrate
feasibility of sealing and supporting thin membranes to practical storage
pressures. Objectives include demonstration of differential pressure
electrolysis with materials that can support high power fuel cell mode,
determining the bromine/bromide crossover rates as a function of hydrogen back
pressure, and exploring compatible materials for the full flow battery system.
Going beyond the Phase I funded effort, research being planned will include cell
stack design optimization, down-selection of appropriate materials, and
prototype system development for charge battery cycling. The anticipated result
will be a highly efficient flow battery system with durability in charge mode
and high power density in discharge mode for a cost effective energy storage
system.