* 1416318
* Cornell Program for Student-Centered Accelerator Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ivan Bazarov, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,597,786.00

This award addresses the fundamental physics and technology of modern
accelerators through a program aimed at investigating and understanding the
phenomena driving the behavior of compact, high power beams. This includes
studies of bright sources and RF superconductivity. In addition, the extensive
instrumentation and flexibility of the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) will
provide a framework to carry a program of accelerator science studies. A better
understanding of the physics and behavior of particle beams and related
technology paves the way for new accelerators that are ever more powerful probes
of materials, biological systems, molecules, atoms, nuclei and the most
fundamental particles in nature. Research accelerators may be used to develop
new drugs, to design lighter and stronger jet engine components, or better
battery technology. Accelerators are tools of discovery that may inspire young
scientists to explore our universe. Future accelerators may also enable the
manufacture of smaller computer chips, more effective border security, and a
safer food supply. This program will also train future accelerator scientists.
The participating graduate and postdoctoral students will have the opportunity
to operate state of the art particle accelerators, and to advance the
understanding of accelerated beams and beam technology. The operational
experience will prepare them for leadership roles in accelerator science and
future accelerators. The public will also gain deeper understanding of
accelerator-based research through guided tours of the Cornell
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconducting RF (SRF) is by far the most
energy efficient means of accelerating a beam of charged particles. The Cornell
SRF research will focus on the physics of microwave superconductivity. The
physics that limits the performance and efficiency of SRF cavities will be
studied in order to improve the technology and advance the capabilities of
future accelerators. The combination of state of the art SRF expertise and
technology with Cornell's world's brightest electron source provides an
experimental program focused on very high power beams. The high energy storage
ring CESR is the vehicle for systematic study of the phenomena that emerge and
ultimately limit particle density in very compact beams, thereby contributing to
studies of fourth generation synchrotron light x-ray sources and electron
positron colliders, building on past work that has led to the design of damping
rings for linear and circular colliders. The particle source ultimately
determines the quality of the accelerated beam and the power it can deliver. As
part of this award, new electron source materials will be developed with a
thorough understanding of material properties that is supported by theoretical
considerations as well as direct measurements.