* 1416212
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Economic Implications Of Lithic Technological Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Marcello Canuto, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 12,544.00

A central goal of archaeology is to understand the process which led to the
development of large scale socially stratified societies which characterize the
world today. What are the mechanisms, economic and otherwise which led to the
successful functioning and integration of large groups of individuals? The goal
of this project is to gain insight into their
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Dr. Marcello Canuto
(PI), Rachel A. Horowitz (co-PI) will analyze lithic and ceramic materials from
the site of Callar Creek Quarry, Belize. The materials which will be analyzed
were collected in investigations from 2011-2013 directed by Ms. Horowitz. Callar
Creek Quarry, located near the Belize/Guatemala border in western Belize, is a
source of raw materials for the production of stone tools. The quarry was used
by ancient Maya living nearby from roughly 2000 BC - AD 1000.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of quarry materials will examine the ancient
Maya economy; how commodities were exchanged among the Maya is poorly
understood. Recent research has suggested that different types of objects
circulated through a variety of exchange mechanisms under the control of various
individuals. For example, elite individuals are thought to have controlled
access to jade, while food is thought to have been widely available. The project
will examine how chert resources functioned in the ancient Maya economy to see
the role of chert commodities in the ancient Maya economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of Maya economic organization is important for
several reasons. This study in particular will increase our understanding of the
role of elite and non-elite individuals in the Maya economy and examine how
hinterland areas, or those areas distant from major cities, were integrated into
a regional economy. The role of hinterland residents is important because in an
increasingly globalized economy, the integration of hinterland individuals
becomes necessary. This project examines the ancient Maya economy from a unique
angle, that of lithic materials. The extraction of lithic raw materials is
generally an understudied segment of lithic technology in Mesoamerica.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will seek to have a broader impact, both
within the community in which the research is performed, and within the United
States. The information produced in this research will be disseminated through
public presentations in Belize, which are attended by scholars from a variety of
countries, local residents interested in archaeology, and tour guides who
disseminate the information to tourists. Presentations in the United States will
occur at local, regional, and professional conferences. Publication of the
research and its conclusions will occur in peer reviewed journals. The raw data
from the investigations will be posted on the internet using tDAR (the Digital
Archaeological Record) so that the information is accessible to the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will prepare Ms. Horowitz for her
career as an archaeologist. In addition to furthering the education of the co-
PI, undergraduate students attending a field school in Belize will be instructed
about lithics and the analysis of lithic technology. Lithic analysis is a
tangible archaeological skill which can be utilized both in the students?
further studies and in commercial archaeology.