* 1416338
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid detection of phages in microbial fermentation using a novel photonic platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Sudheendra Lakshmana, Sonanutech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,988.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to reduce cost and loss of productivity due to
bacteriophage (phage) contamination in fermentation of dairy and other products.
Bacteriophage contamination is the leading cause of failure in fermentation
processes used in the food and pharmaceutical industries. The risk of phage
contamination in food fermentation processes, particularly in the dairy
industry, is significantly enhanced due to a large diversity of suppliers of
both the raw ingredient (milk) and the necessary microbial cultures. The current
and emerging analytical technologies cannot rapidly detect phages in food
materials such as milk. Thus, the combination of the risk of contamination, and
the lack of rapid detection methods, results in a significant economic loss for
the dairy industry. Early detection of phage contamination will permit early
intervention in the fermentation process, which will lead to significant cost
savings. In addition, the test could be extended to other food areas,
pharmaceutical production, and biochemical production.

The SBIR project addresses the need for rapid detection of phage contamination
in a fermentation process through a novel photonic platform technology.
Specifically, a platform will be developed for detecting phage in cheese making
processes. The platform combines nanophotonics, microfluidics, and
electrophoresis, and is based on discoveries made at University of California -
Davis. The system is focused on the manipulation of charged phages with
electrophoresis, and their accelerated amplification in bacteria. In addition,
the system uses electrophoretic capture of phages into a nanophotonic crystal to
achieve highly sensitive detection of the target phages. The salient features of
the platform are: a) High-throughput, fast trapping of phages; b) High
sensitivity and large dynamic range for quantification of phage concentration;
and c) Scalable design that can be produced at low cost.