* 1416552
* SBIR Phase I:  Atomic Force Microscope Active Optical Probe for Single Molecular Imaging and Optical Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Alexander Ukhanov, ACTOPROBE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on proving
the feasibility of atomic force microscopy (AFM) probes that enable nanoscale
optical spectroscopy simultaneously with AFM imaging. The resulting product - an
AFM Active Optical Probe (AAOP) - represents a cost-effective blend of two
technologies: AFM probes and diode lasers. Current near-field scanning optical
microscopes (NSOMs) and hybrid AFMs with specialized far-field optical
microscopes have limited usefulness because of high cost and difficulty of use.
Though AFM for surface characterization is highly developed, optical imaging at
the nanoscale lags far behind. The envisioned AAOPs will be manufacturable at
sale and will facilitate a cost reduction of 10 to 100 times as compared with
competing instruments, while outperforming them in image quality and ease of
use. The initial market focus of this effort will be on the AFM market
(currently $110 million), with a later expansion into the combined spectroscopy
and nanotools market of $9.7 billion. As one example of the expected impact of
this product, the AAOP technology will be used by researchers and industrial
scientists for single molecule studies, biomedical sample analysis, and for
microlenses and nanophotonic devices?all at a substantially lower cost than
competing technologies.

The AAOP product will combine a micrometer-sized diode laser, an optical photo
detector, and an AFM probe on a single semiconductor chip. These unique optical
probes will perform the functions of conventional AFM probes and will
simultaneously provide specimen information about optical properties at the
nanoscale. This represents a cost-effective alternative to expensive NSOM tools,
and to hybrids of AFMs with specialized far-field optical methods such as
confocal, Raman, fluorescence, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The
AAOP will address the technical challenges of current NSOMs; namely, background
noise and low sensitivity. This effort will demonstrate the technical and
economic feasibility of the AAOP, fitting it onto a conventional AFM, an
instrument that is widely used in both academia and industry. The anticipated
technical results will provide AFM users the ability to carry out nanoscale
optical studies and characterization with better resolution and higher
sensitivity, at much lower cost, and more quickly than is possible with
conventional NSOM and Raman AFMs.