* 1416887
* Workshop Proposal: The Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves and Special Values of L-Functions, May 2-4, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Ramin Takloo-Bighash, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

A workshop "Arithmetic of elliptic curves and special values of L-functions"
will take place May 2-4, 2014 at the University of Illinois at Chicago. This is
part of the annual Oliver Atkin Memorial Lecture and Workshop at UIC. The
website of the workshop is http://www.math.uic.edu/~rtakloo/atkin2014.html. The
theme of the workshop is the recent progress regarding special values of
L-functions and its applications to the arithmetic of elliptic curves. Of
particular interest will be the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture, Gross-
Zagier-Zhang formulae, Main Conjecture of Iwasawa Theory, etc. The workshop will
bring together experts working in the area and will create an environment in
which participants may exchange ideas and start new
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from the National Science Foundation
makes it possible for junior researchers, graduate students, and other
mathematicians without travel funds to attend this exciting workshop. This is an
excellent opportunity for them to interact with experts in the field and to be
inspired for further work. The lectures by invited speakers will take place on
May 3 and 4, and time is also reserved for talks by participating recent Ph.D.
recipients and graduate students. Select lectures will be videotaped and made
available to the mathematical community on a website. The slides of talks will
be made available on the same website.