* 1416983
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Multifunctional, Bio-Based Coupling Agents for Wood Plastic Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Dilpreet Bajwa, Renuvix
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2015
* USD 224,981.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project involves a significant
enhancement in the properties of wood polymer composites (WPCs) by the
commercialization of a highly effective bio-based coupling agent made from
renewable sources such as plant oils instead of petroleum. By significantly
enhancing the properties of WPCs, substantial benefit to society will result by
providing new application opportunities for these relatively low cost, light
weight biocomposites. Globally millions of metric tons of WPCs are produced each
year. Currently, WPCs are used for applications that do not require high load
bearing characteristics due to limitations in modulus, strength, and creep. The
technical concepts proposed for the Phase I effort are expected to enable higher
modulus and strength, by facilitating the use of higher wood flour (WF)
loadings, as well as lower deformation by introducing crosslinks into the matrix
phase. Although this proposal is focused on the utility of these novel bio-based
copolymers as high performance coupling agents, these copolymers have also been
demonstrated to be excellent binders for coatings. Thus, commercialization of
these copolymers is expected to have a broader impact on society beyond use as
coupling agents.

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will determine the
feasibility of novel bio-based polymers to serve as highly effective coupling
agents for WPCs. The most common WPCs are based on WF as the dispersed-phase and
high density polyethylene (HDPE) as the matrix. WF is a very desirable
reinforcement for composites because it is inexpensive, abundant, biodegradable,
high modulus, high strength, light weight, and non-abrasive toward processing
equipment. The major technical challenge for HDPE/WF composites is obtaining
adequate compatibility between the WF fibers and the HDPE matrix. Although the
modulus and tensile strength of WF fibers is approximately 40 and 20 times
higher than that of the HDPE matrix, respectively, the mechanical property
enhancements provided by the WF cannot be fully realized without effective
compatibilization. It is the team?s belief that the bio-based polymers proposed
for the project possess the ideal chemical composition for effectively coupling
the HDPE matrix to the WF fibers to maximize mechanical properties. In addition,
the polymers are capable of introducing crosslinks into the matrix phase, which
are expected to reduce polymer creep. For the Phase I project, the effect of the
chemical composition of the bio-based coupling agent will be a primary factor
investigated.