* 1416670
* Collaborative Research Ocean Acidification: Establishing the links between offshore biogeochemistry, coral reef metabolism and acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Rodney Johnson, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2020
* USD 378,280.00

Time-series observations from the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans have revealed
indisputable evidence of long-term acidification of open-ocean surface seawater
due to uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Concurrent
evidence of negative effects of acidification on the production and preservation
of calcium carbonate have fueled concern about the potential consequences to
coral reefs. Although long-term acidification in coral reef environments in
general has not been observed, seawater acidification rates on the Bermuda coral
reef platform between 2007-2012 have been found to be three times faster than
the long-term (1983-2012) acidification rate observed at a nearby offshore open-
ocean time-series station. The investigators on this project believe that they
now understand how this happens and have designed a study to confirm or refute
their ideas. Specifically they believe that the observed changes in 2007-2012
are attributable to a recent shift in reef metabolic processes associated with
an increase in net reef calcification and heterotrophy. The evidence they have
in-hand suggests that these changes have been fueled by an increase in food
supply to the reef as a result of increased offshore primary production
seemingly linked to the state of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), a
periodic back-and-forth shifting of atmospheric pressure differences between the
subpolar and the subtropical North Atlantic. In this project, by collecting an
extensive set of physical, chemical, and biological data extending from the reef
platform at Bermuda to the offshore open-water time-series station, they will
explore this idea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific and societal
broader impacts of this project will be its relevance to advancing current
understanding of the effects of ocean acidification on coral reefs. Robust
prediction of future effects on this ecosystem requires knowledge of the main
drivers of reef biogeochemical processes and of local seawater acidification.
Secondly, the project will support the education and research activities of both
graduate and undergraduate students working as members of the research team, and
foster community educational outreach through the Ocean Discovery Institute in
San Diego and the Ocean Academy in Bermuda to engage students from
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of
this research is that during years of negative winter NAO, intensified mixing
and increased nutrient supply enhance offshore production leading to coral reef
calcification and reef heterotrophy, thus intensifying the local seawater
acidification on the reef. To address this hypothesis, the team will measure and
characterize inshore seawater biogeochemical properties (temperature, salinity,
dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity, calcium, partial pressure of
carbon dioxide, inorganic nutrients, particulate organic carbon and nitrogen,
total organic carbon and nitrogen, phytoplankton pigments, and bacterial
abundance) on a monthly interval across the Bermuda coral reef. These data will
be evaluated in concert with data collected as part of the Bermuda-Atlantic
Time-Series and Hydrostation S programs and along inshore-offshore transects. It
is expected that this approach will further the understanding of how seawater
biogeochemical properties, including seawater carbonate chemistry, vary over
time and space on the Bermuda coral reef, and identify the main drivers of these
variations. It will specifically address the coupling between offshore and
inshore biogeochemical processes and how they are linked to larger-scale
oceanographic and climatic forcings, such as the NAO. It also addresses how reef
biogeochemical processes may alleviate or exacerbate ocean acidification, and
whether these changes are important to reef metabolism in the context of other
forcings such as light, nutrients, and food availability.