* 1416753
* Investigating the mantle expression of continental strike-slip fault systems with scattered wave imaging of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* E Parmentier, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 231,291.00

At continental strike-slip plate boundaries, such as the San Andreas fault
system in California, one portion of continental lithosphere translates past
another with primarily horizontal motion. This plate motion can be measured at
the surface with GPS data and by offsets on shallow faults, including the slip
produced by crustal earthquakes. However, the form of this motion in the mantle
portion of the lithosphere is much less certain. Models of mantle deformation
beneath strike-slip plate boundaries range from narrow shear zones that lie
directly beneath the position of the plate boundary at the surface to broad
zones of diffuse deformation that are more than ~100 kilometers wide. In this
research project, seismic waves from distant earthquakes will be used to measure
the properties of the continental lithosphere beneath two major strike-slip
fault systems, the Northern Anatolian fault in Turkey and the Southern Alpine
fault in New Zealand, and these results will be compared to prior work beneath
the San Andreas. In particular, waves that convert from shear motion to
compressional motion (or viceversa) at the base of the lithosphere will be used
to constrain the thickness of the lithosphere and the gradient in seismic wave
velocity between the colder, relatively rigid lithosphere and the warmer
asthenosphere. If lithospheric thickness and/or the lithosphere-asthenosphere
velocity gradient change over small horizontal length-scales beneath strike-slip
plate boundaries, these findings would support the narrow shear zone model. For
example, prior work indicates that shear at the base of the lithosphere beneath
the central San Andreas is distributed across a zone that is less than 50
kilometers wide. More gradual horizontal changes in the properties of the mantle
lithosphere would support the presence of broader plate boundary mantle shear
zones. Numerical modeling of mantle deformation beneath strike-slip fault
systems will aid in interpreting the seismologically-measured lithospheric
properties. The results of this research will provide new insight on the
physical properties of plate boundaries and how plate motion is accommodated
within the continental lithosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to measure
lithospheric thickness and the lithosphere-asthenosphere velocity gradient
beneath the Northern Anatolian and Southern Alpine faults with seismic imaging
primarily based on Sp phases that convert at the lithosphere-asthenosphere
boundary (LAB), and we will employ numerical modeling of strike-slip plate
boundary deformation to provide a physical framework for our results. This
imaging approach directly constrains structure at the base of the mantle
lithosphere, including possible variations in LAB structure due to through-going
shear zones associated with shallow fault systems. In prior work on the LAB
beneath the San Andreas fault system, we found that Sp phase amplitudes and the
corresponding drop in shear-wave velocity at the LAB are systematically smaller
on the western side of the plate boundary than to its east. In central
California, the change in LAB velocity gradient occurs over a horizontal length
scale of less than 50 km directly beneath the San Andreas fault. These results
are consistent with the juxtaposition of mantle lithospheres with different
properties across the central San Andreas fault across a narrow shear zone (&lt;
50 km in width) that extends to the base of the lithosphere. Beneath the
Northern Anatolian and Southern Alpine fault systems, Sp receiver functions will
be stacked into 3D images to determine LAB discontinuity depths and amplitudes
and whether LAB properties vary systematically across each of the faults.
Constraints from Ps phases will also be assessed. Modeling based on synthetic
seismograms will provide quantitative estimates of the vertical shear velocity
gradients associated with the LAB and a robust assessment of how well Sp and Ps
phases resolve lateral changes in LAB properties. Numerical modeling of
lithospheric and asthenospheric deformation beneath the San Andreas, Northern
Anatolian, and Alpine fault systems will allow us to integrate the results of
the Sp and Ps imaging with constraints on mantle anisotropy from shear-wave
splitting. It will also help us to interpret the seismological results in terms
of lithosphere-asthenosphere viscosity contrasts and the role of deformation-
induced anisotropy in creating apparent LAB properties. Comparison of results
from the three fault systems will address several key questions. How wide are
strike-slip shear zones in the deep continental lithosphere? What are the
implications of LAB structure across strike-slip fault systems for the
rheologies of the lithosphere and asthenosphere? What processes are responsible
for the lateral contrast in LAB properties across the San Andreas fault system
and potentially the Alpine and Northern Anatolian fault systems?