* 1416376
* Ocean Acidification, Temperature and Light Effects on Carbon-use Mechanisms, Calcification, and Growth of Tropical Macroalgae: Drivers of Winners and Losers
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2019
* George Bowes, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2019
* USD 422,788.00

Ocean sequestration of atmospheric CO2 enhances the availability of CO2 in
seawater and lowers ocean pH, commonly referred to as 'ocean acidification'.
Marine macroalgae are likely to respond to these two changes in ocean chemistry
(elevated CO2 and acidification) in ways that have the potential to reduce the
sustainability of coral reefs and other coastal ecosystems with potential
economic consequences. There are two major forms of marine macroalgae on reefs:
fleshy species that are characterized by a rapid growth potential which allows
them to become 'nuisance species' and out-compete corals, and calcified species
that are slower growing, but help cement the reef and promote coral larval
settlement. Currently, there is very little information on fleshy macroalgal
photosynthesis and growth responses to increased ocean CO2. Further, there is an
inadequate understanding of ocean acidification effects on macroalgal
calcification. The proposed research will examine the fundamental pathways of
inorganic carbon uptake for photosynthesis across a range of pH and CO2 levels
simulating ocean acidification into the future (2100). How photosynthesis,
growth and calcification are modulated by light and temperature under ocean
acidification will also be examined. These data will be used to identify ocean
acidification effects on ecologically important macroalgae and consequential
impacts to coral reef ecosystems. This research on marine macroalgae increases
our understanding of ocean acidification effects on marine calcifiers, a
research priority identified by the National Ocean Council. The research
facility is sited at The Gumbo Limbo (GL) Nature Center that receives >100,000
visitors/yr and has educational programs supporting 15,000/yr K-12 students.
This juxtaposition of research with an established outreach facility provides a
unique opportunity to communicate OA science and its societal implications to a
large public audience.

Macroalgae responses to ocean acidification (OA) are likely to be distinctive
compared to phytoplankton and microalgae due to their low surface area to volume
ratios, high external boundary layer resistance to CO2 and higher irradiance
requirements. Understanding specific mechanistic responses of tropical
macroalgal photosynthesis and calcification to elevated pCO2, temperature and
irradiance is critical to develop predictions of OA effects on macroalgal
dominated communities of the tropics, including those that grow near their
thermal limits. The research objectives are to (1) provide new insights into the
biochemistry and physiology of photosynthesis and calcification that drive
growth responses to OA and warming in ecologically important tropical macroalgal
species, (2) elucidate photosynthetic C-use mechanisms in tropical species to
understand OA influences on HCO3- use, (3) determine if photosynthesis-
calcification processes become uncoupled by OA, (4) clarify the role of
irradiance in photosynthetic and calcification responses to OA, and (5) examine
the synergistic effects of OA, temperature and light on the thermal optima of
photosynthesis and growth in species living close to their thermal limits. To
meet these objectives, a series of short-term physiological experiments will be
conducted to ascertain HCO3-use mechanisms, Ci uptake kinetics, potential to
employ carbon concentrating mechanisms (CCMs), and species-specific linkages
between photosynthetic C-use mechanisms and calcification in ten dominant fleshy
and calcareous tropical macroalgae species. These biochemical and physiological
data will subsequently be used to interpret longer-term (20 d) growth (organic
and inorganic calcification and crystal formation) responses in aquaria studies
conducted over three different seasons, and photosynthesis response surface
experiments to gradients of pH, irradiance and temperature.