* 1416238
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Dynamic Nuclear Polarization by Nanoparticles and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Bowman, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Michael Bowman of the Department of Chemistry at The
University of Alabama will develop new classes of reagents to increase the
sensitivity of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and make it possible to image
specific chemicals and proteins. The goal of this research is to exploit the
properties of free radicals and clusters of free radicals to develop ways of
enhancing the MRI signals from specific molecules using non-toxic, earth-
abundant materials so that the transport and fate of those molecules can be
studied. This project is part of an international collaboration with chemists in
Novosibirsk, Russia and provides an excellent opportunity for introducing under-
represented students in the University of Alabama's Chemistry and Research
Experience for Undergraduate program to the global science, technology,
engineering and math career opportunities of today's economy through planned
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Free radicals and biradicals are used
in a process known as dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) to greatly enhance
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and MRI signals for molecular imaging and the
study of rare molecules and intermediates. The use of DNP is hindered by its
high cost and limited performance. Improvements to DNP will be made by the
synthesis of much better polarizing agents based on a detailed understanding of
the DNP process and the role of the electron spin dynamics of the free radicals
that drive DNP. This project involves an international collaboration coupling:
1) experimental studies of free radical spin dynamics and DNP; with 2)
theoretical modeling of the role of free radicals in DNP; to 3) guide the
synthesis of new free radicals and poly-radicals aimed at improving the
practical performance of DNP.