* 1416123
* RUI: Supersymmetric Gauge Theory and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephen Naculich, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 105,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Naculich at Bowdoin
College, an undergraduate institution located in Brunswick, Maine. This research
is part of an on-going effort by the worldwide community of theoretical
elementary particle physicists to develop mathematical models to explain the
nature and behavior of the smallest constituents of matter (elementary
particles). More specifically, this research aims at developing more efficient
mathematical tools for calculating the predictions of existing models of quarks
and gluons called "gauge theories". A second goal of this research is to explore
links between gauge theories on the one hand, and theories (such as supergravity
and string theory) that describe the behavior of gravitons, the particles
responsible for the force of gravity, on the other. The insights gained through
this research will be disseminated through journal publications, seminars, and
conference proceedings. This research also integrally involves participation by
undergraduates, and will therefore contribute to their education by providing
hands-on training in research methods in theoretical physics, as well as
exposure to quantum mechanics, group theory, and quantum field theory. Such
involvement will encourage and prepare highly-talented students for graduate
study and careers in scientific fields.

In more technical terms, this project focuses on both perturbative and non-
perturbative aspects of supersymmetric gauge theory and supergravity theory, as
illuminated by their connection to string theory. In particular, this research
will explore constraints among tree-level and loop-level gauge theory scattering
amplitudes that are generic to gauge theory, independent of the matter content
of the theory. These include both constraints that depend only on the gauge
group, as well as Bern-Carrasco-Johansson type relations. The research will
further investigate the structure of loop-level SU(N) gauge theory amplitudes
that are subleading in the 1/N expansion, their infrared divergences, and
potential iterative structures among these amplitudes. Finally, the project will
study the structure of the amplitudes of supergravity, their infrared
divergences, and potential relations between supergravity and supersymmetric
Yang-Mills amplitudes at the loop level.