* 1416984
* Collaborative Research: Changing Culture in Robotics Classroom
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mary Kay Stein, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 459,892.00

Computational and algorithmic thinking are new basic skills for the 21st
century. Unfortunately few K-12 schools in the United States offer significant
courses that address learning these skills. However many schools do offer
robotics courses. These courses can incorporate computational thinking
instruction but frequently do not. This research project aims to address this
problem by developing a comprehensive set of resources designed to address
teacher preparation, course content, and access to resources. This project
builds upon a ten year collaboration between Carnegie Mellon's Robotics Academy
and the University of Pittsburgh's Learning Research and Development Center that
studied how teachers implement robotics education in their classrooms and
developed curricula that led to significant learning gains. This project will
address the following three questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.What kinds of
resources are useful for motivating and preparing teachers to teach
computational thinking and for students to learn computational
thinking?&lt;br/&gt;2.Where do teachers struggle most in teaching computational
thinking principles and what kinds of supports are needed to address these
weaknesses?&lt;br/&gt;3.Can virtual environments be used to significantly
increase access to computational thinking principles?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will augment traditional robotics classrooms and competitions with Robot
Virtual World (RVW) that will scaffold student access to higher-order problems.
These virtual robots look just like real-world robots and will be programmed
using identical tools but have zero mechanical error. Because dealing with
sensor, mechanical, and actuator error adds significant noise to the feedback
students' receive when programming traditional robots (thus decreasing the
learning of computational principles), the use of virtual robots will increase
the learning of robot planning tasks which increases learning of computational
thinking principles. The use of RVW will allow the development of new Model-
Eliciting Activities using new virtual robotics challenges that reward
creativity, abstraction, algorithms, and higher level programming concepts to
solve them. New curriculum will be developed for the advanced concepts to be
incorporated into existing curriculum materials. The curriculum and learning
strategies will be implemented in the classroom following teacher professional
development focusing on computational thinking principles. The opportunities for
incorporating computationally thinking principles in the RVW challenges will be
assessed using detailed task analyses. Additionally regression analyses of log-
files will be done to determine where students have difficulties. Observations
of classrooms, surveys of students and teachers, and think-alouds will be used
to assess the effectiveness of the curricula in addition to pre-and post- tests
to determine student learning outcomes.