* 1416493
* SBIR Phase I:  High Performance Structural Composites with Cellulosic Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Elisa Teipel, Essentium Materials LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,995.00

The goal of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to create
cost-effective, sustainable, high performance nanocomposites for automotive and
other industries. The automotive industry is currently using 2.7 billion pounds
per year of sustainable polymeric composites with an estimated US market of $23
billion by 2017. The initial target is to replace heavy glass reinforcement in
polymeric composites with cellulosic nanocrystals (CNCs) for car parts,
providing lighter weight vehicles with increased fuel efficiency. CNCs are an
abundant and renewable natural resource, with the feedstock provided by wood or
waste from wood processing to make pulp, paper, and lumber. On-going research on
the production of CNCs from various wood sources have resulted in significant
reductions in cost (with more coming), making CNCs an increasingly attractive
functional natural filler. Developing CNCs that can be scaled up to make larger
parts at a commercially attractive price is a key objective in this research.
Successful implementation of CNCs into composites could not only lighten
vehicles and reduce environmental impact, but also transform a waste stream into
high-value materials.

This effort will address three previously encountered challenges with
incorporating CNCs into polymeric thermoplastic composites, namely: (1) particle
dispersion, (2) interfacial bonding, and (3) commercially viable processing
methods for large-scale manufacturing for automotive and other industries. CNCs
have more than twice the tensile strength of aramid fibers and a greater tensile
strength and lower density than carbon fibers. Novel interfacial chemistries and
processing paths will have to be developed in order to achieve proper
interfacial bonding between CNCs and the polymer matrices, as well as dispersion
of the CNC particles to allow the polymeric composite to realize the superior
mechanical properties that CNCs can provide. The scalability and cost of the
chemistries and processing will also be a primary consideration in this
investigation.