* 1416578
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Mechanics of Non-local Disordered Models Associated with Quantum LDPC Codes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Leonid Pryadko, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 11/30/2018
* USD 285,000.00

The main challenge for building a quantum computer is that quantum components
are prone to error. Error correction can be used to overcome this challenge but
it places stringent requirements on future quantum computer hardware. One
promising method of quantum error correction is the so-called Quantum Low-
Density-Parity-Check (LDPC) codes. If successful, using these codes a large
quantum computer could in principle be built. Compared to other existing
schemes, it would be much more efficient, requiring fewer redundant quantum
bits, called qubits. Studying these codes will improve our understanding of the
quantum theoretical problems related to quantum computation. This project will
provide excellent opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
award supports theoretical research on physics of non-local discrete and
continuous statistical-mechanical models associated with quantum error
correcting codes. An important feature of such codes is the existence of the
decoding threshold, where a sufficiently large code can deal effectively with
any noise level below the threshold, but not above it. Disordered spin models
associated with decoding transition (these models have exact Wegner's self-
duality), related models with large gauge groups associated with fault-tolerant
decoding, as well as models with extensive ground state entropy, including U(1)
gauge theories which generalize Wen's mutual Chern-Simons theory describing the
ground state of Kitaev's toric code will be constructed and studied. Models
associated with quantum LDPC codes are expected to be particularly interesting
since their interaction terms involve a limited number of participating
particles. The low-energy sectors of these models are expected to be dominated
by non-trivial extended defects that generalize the notion of topological
defects like domain walls, vortices, etc. New physics includes a phase
transition driven by an extensive entropy of defect classes, coming from the
exponentially large number of dimensions describing the original quantum code.
Results will be relevant to several established fields of physics traditionally
dealing with similar models: statistical mechanics of spin glasses, phase
transition theory, etc., with potential applications extending to many other
fields.