* 1416712
* Science-Driven Cyberinfrastructure:  Integrating Permafrost Data, Services, and Research Applications
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Kevin Schaefer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 599,870.00

Science-Driven Cyberinfrastructure: Integrating permafrost data, services, and
research applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes the use of
cyberinfrastructure tools for providing services to the scientific community for
accessing and discovering selected permafrost datasets. Permafrost is deemed as
an Environmental Indicator and an Essential Climate Variable by agencies
monitoring the Earth?s climate. Improved access to permafrost datasets
(currently scattered over many places on the web) is necessary for better
understanding its current and past state. Global scientific and policy
communities need comprehensive, up-to-date maps of permafrost distribution and
status. By making permafrost data easier to use, this project supports data
integration work currently duplicated by every lab using permafrost data and
will advance knowledge by freeing critical time for unique research. Project
outcomes are directly useful to policy-makers, broader science researchers,
indigenous communities, community-based monitoring programs, and others living
on or in close proximity to and studying permafrost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through science-driven cyberinfrastructure, the research
team will produce a set of scalable, multi-faceted services to address the
complexity of permafrost data access and usability. Recognizing the importance
of coordinated efforts in this area, the project will start where previous
efforts left off. This research leverages progress in International Permafrost
Association and Global Terrestrial Network - Permafrost (GTN-P)
cyberinfrastructure, advances permafrost community interests, and contributes
valuable functionality and data to this necessary system. Specific project
objectives are: 1) Aggregate, extract, pre-process, standardize, and reorganize
data from beyond the GTN-P network in a cost-effective manner, increasing the
breadth and depth of the GTN-P system by integrating valuable data holdings from
the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) Frozen Ground Data Center (FGDC)
and Advanced Cooperative Arctic Data and Information Service (ACADIS) Gateway.
2) Extend semantic infrastructure by expanding the GTN-P ontology to include
broader permafrost and climate modeling concepts and terms for data discovery,
integration, and reuse. 3) Integrate GTN-P metadata and systems into the Arctic
Data Explorer distributed search portal, and Arctic Observing Viewer data
collection map to support federated data access. 4) Improve data usability by
developing visualization services that quickly produce customized maps at
multiple spatial scales to deliver information to researchers, citizen
scientists, and policy makers.