* 1416359
* SBIR Phase I:  Bandages for Wound Healing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* NONE NONE, Bionic Concepts
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in enabling the
development of inexpensive miniature pumps that can be integrated with bandages
in order to apply negative pressure therapy to wounds. Negative pressure wound
therapy (NPWT) is the most commonly prescribed therapy for wounds that do not
heal by themselves (i.e. chronic wounds), or to make wounds heal faster.
However, a limitation is that the application of NPWT is constrained by the
price of the pump, as a result of which, wounds fester in individuals, before
therapy can be prescribed. It is noted that inexpensive and miniature pumps
capable of applying therapeutic levels of negative pressure are not currently
available. This project enables the development of these inexpensive pumps. The
commercial potential of the project is in the possibility of widespread use of
bandages that incorporate pumps capable of applying negative pressure to all
wounds. These pumps, which can apply high as well as low pressure, in a small
form factor, can be used in a multitude of other applications as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the manufacture of miniature, low-
weight, energy-efficient, and inexpensive pumps that are integrated onto
bandages. We will test the efficacy of bandages that incorporate the current
generation of pumps in generating therapeutic magnitudes of negative pressure.
It is noted that electronics is the primary driver of component costs in the
current generation of pumps. Therefore, we propose to micro-manufacture
components of the electronics that will be used to operate the pumps. Micro-
manufacturing the electronics can generate tremendous cost-savings that will
enable an order of magnitude reduction in the cost of pumps, enabling them to be
integrated onto all bandages. Micro-manufacturing will also enable
miniaturization, and lowering of weight of the pumps. Finally, the developed
pumps will enable new applications as they are able to generate significantly
high pressures as well as low pressures while occupying a very small volume.