* 1416889
* Ocean Acidification: Coral reef adaptation and acclimatization to global change: resilience to hotter, more acidic oceans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Mahdi Belcaid, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 721,970.00

Coral reefs house one-quarter of all marine species and provide over a billion
people around the world with food, jobs, and protection from storms. In spite of
their high biodiversity and value, coral reefs appear to be particularly
vulnerable to ocean acidification, a consequence of increased atmospheric carbon
dioxide. Many calcifying reef organisms have reduced growth rates and their
reproduction is disrupted under these conditions. Likewise the accompanying
higher average sea temperatures can lead to coral bleaching, directly killing
corals or increasing disease outbreaks. Combined, these impacts may be too much
for many coral species to cope with, leading to predictions of degradation and
collapse of these incredible ecosystems over the next few decades. This study
examines the eight dominant Hawaiian coral species that constitute &gt;95% of
the coral cover across the archipelago, yielding broad relevance for the data.
Further, the corals include two species-complexes currently being considered for
listing under the U.S. Endangered Species Act. The results will be used to
develop adaptive management plans for preserving biodiversity in a World
Heritage Site, the Papahanaumokukea Marine National Monument, which is renowned
as one of the most pristine and highly protected coral reefs remaining on the
planet. This project provides a critical link between short-term, single-species
studies and coral reef community responses to global change relevant to other
marine ecosystems across the globe. Training opportunities for a post doctoral
scholar, graduate students, and undergraduate students are provided, along with
opportunities for local K-12 students. Outreach includes broad communication of
the findings through interactive K-12 education, interactions with the Waikiki
Aquarium, a rush-hour talk radio show, direct engagement with local resource
managers, and an international blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different coral
species, and even different individuals of the same species, are known to vary
in their tolerances to lower pH and higher temperature. Thus, it is important to
know if the environment is changing too quickly for corals and coral reefs to
respond effectively, or could acclimatization or adaptation of corals play a
significant role in the future of reefs? The role of chronically reduced
seawater pH and elevated seawater temperature on corals and on the diverse coral
reef communities that rely upon, and live within, them are examined. First, the
capacity for corals to regulate pH at their site of calcification after
acclimation to a range of seawater pH and temperature using confocal microscopy
and pH-sensitive vital dyes will be assessed to understand the influence of
previous history (acclimatization) and fixed, heritable differences (adaptation)
on the capacity of an individual coral to tolerate changes in the environment.
Second, the potential for corals to acclimatize to lower pH and higher
temperature will be empirically estimated in a two year mesocosm experiment
including all eight of the dominant Hawaiian coral species. The range of
physical environments will be characterized and the patterns of population
connectivity will be investigated for the focal coral species across sampling
locations to assess the potential for local adaptation. Finally, because
relatively little is known about the impacts of low pH and higher ocean
temperature on reef organisms other than corals, yet these thousands of other
species comprise the bulk of reef biodiversity and perform important ecological
functions on coral reefs, a two-year mesocosm study will examine the effects of
chronically reduced pH and elevated temperature on the biodiversity, community
structure, and ecosystem function of biologically diverse coral reef
communities.