* 1416473
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost and Sample-Efficient Micromachined Ultrasonic Sensor for Blood Coagulation Time Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jonathan Gonzales, IntegSense Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in enabling a novel
and powerful diagnostic technique that could open the door to emergence of a new
class of micro-scale ultrasonic characterization devices. The immediate impact
of the project is in the field of biomedical sensors and aims at increasing the
accessibility and affordability of health care for our aging population. Access
to simple and accurate Point of Care devices such as those developed in this
project can greatly drive down the cost of health care while ensuring a
healthier society. This is especially important for the current time where the
cost of healthcare is a becoming an increasing burden for families, government
and healthcare industry. In addition, the technology developed in this project
has potential to be modified for use in other industries, such as measuring
viscosity of precious materials. If successful, the technology can be licensed
for use in several other products to greatly increase its economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims at studying the feasibility of utilizing a micro-scale
ultrasonic liquid sensor for measuring the coagulation time of very small
volumes of blood (less than 1ÂµL). If successful, this innovative sensor
technology will be the basis for an accurate and affordable Point of Care (POC)
blood coagulation monitoring system. A need exists in the field of medical
diagnostics for an electronic device able to measure blood coagulation, which is
sufficiently inexpensive, reliable and convenient to use, and that permits
points-of-care use by untrained individuals or health professionals in locations
such as the home, medical emergency sites, and battlefields. These devices also
need to operate with a sample sizes as small as practically possible. Micro-
resonant sensors are a viable solution and offer many advantages such as quasi-
digital outputs, simple electronics interface, small size, and high
sensitivities. However, the application of such resonant sensors for measuring
biofluids has been limited due to the inherent dampening of the resonant
structure when operated in liquid environments such as blood. The proposed
sensor in this proposal will achieve the ease of electronic interfacing while
maintaining high performance when measuring viscose liquid properties.