* 1416135
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Microscope to Detect Cellular Motion in Three-dimensional Tissue
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ran An, Animated Dynamics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 174,956.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a new microscope that integrates
biodynamic imaging with conventional phase contrast microscopy for use in drug
development and other research applications. Accurately capturing the signatures
of three-dimensional (3D) biological systems provides more realistic measures of
drug efficacy and response heterogeneity - two critical aspects of the drug-
development process that help find the right drug doses and combinations to kill
cancer cells with minimal toxic side effects. This tool will extract functional
information at greater tissue depths than conventional microscopies by using
cellular motions inside living tissue. The motion is detected by reflected light
that carries with it important information about the action of drugs inside 3D
tissue, allowing drug evaluations in heterogeneous three-dimensional tissues
systems, and providing new insights for pharmaceutical development.

This SBIR project aims to develop and test a bio-dynamic microscope that
provides a new research tool capable of extracting high information content from
three-dimensional tissue cultures and tumor biopsies. The project goals are to
construct a new type of microscope based on the detection of cellular motions,
and to integrate the microscope with a software platform that is easy to use by
customers. The software modules to be developed drive the user interface and
provide data visualization. The bio-dynamic microscope extracts functional
information at greater tissue depths than conventional microscopes by using
Doppler tags on light reflected from intracellular motions inside living tissue.
These Doppler tags carry phenotypic profiling information about the action of
drugs inside 3D tissue, a critical step towards functional characterization of
tumors as targets in personalized cancer therapy.