* 1416695
* An analysis of upper mantle discontinuity structure using 3D synthetics and global network data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jeroen Ritsema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 258,059.00

Radioactive decay of naturally occurring isotopes (e.g., uranium, thorium and
potassium) has been a major source of Earth's internal heat throughout geologic
time. This heat escapes primarily by slow (inches per year) convection in
Earth's mantle. These currents are responsible for geologic activity including
mountain building, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes. While plate tectonics is
the surface expression of solid-state rock flow in the mantle, it is still
uncertain whether separate convection cycles exist in the upper and lower mantle
(i.e., layered convection) or whether convection encompasses the entire mantle
(i.e. whole-mantle convection). An understanding of mantle convection is
important for modeling the thermal evolution of our
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is focused on boundaries near 410
km and 660 km. At the 410-km and 660-km boundaries, the most abundant rock-
forming minerals undergo phase transitions to denser structures. Since the
410-km and 660-km mineral phase transitions depend on the ambient mantle
temperature, precise maps of the depths of the 410-km and 660-km transitions act
as 'thermometers' of the mantle and can be used to infer the scales of mantle
flow. To date, the most precise global maps of the depths of the 410-km and
660-km transitions have been derived from the processing of seismic wave
reflections produced by thousands of earthquakes and recorded by global arrays
of seismometers. However, the latest maps produced by various research groups
remain inconsistent. They exhibit different predominance of long-wavelength
versus short-wavelength variations and major anomalies (i.e., thick and thin
transition zone regions) are located incoherently. We will address these
inconsistencies by investigating artifacts due to systematic data processing
errors and ignored effects from 3D wave propagation in the heterogeneous mantle.
Using state-of-the-art software for 3D seismic wave propagation, we will
estimate the uncertainties in the applied analytical procedures, and we will
determine the expected 410-km and 660-km topography for a range of convection
scenarios for the mantle.