* 1416454
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Suppressing Decoherence in Crystals Through Controlled Chemical Disorder
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rufus Cone, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 346,362.00

The rapidly developing field of quantum information science (QIS) exploits the
unique properties of quantum systems to process, store, and transmit data in
ways that are not tenable with classical information systems. For many
applications of QIS, a "quantum memory" that can store and recall quantum states
on demand is an urgently needed enabling component. This project pursues a new
approach by introducing controlled chemical disorder into high-quality crystals
to inhibit the "decoherence" processes that corrupt stored quantum information
and limit the performance of existing memories. This international collaboration
funded by the Division of Chemistry through the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms B program and the French ANR, combines teams with expertise in
diverse areas ranging from solid-state chemistry and quantum physics to non-
linear optics and information theory to solve this outstanding problem.
Advancing the capabilities of quantum memory technology is of strategic
importance given the broad need in our society to transmit information in a way
that is and remains absolutely secure. In addition, the materials developed in
this project have applications in many other photonic technologies including
classical optical signal processing, ultra-stable optical clocks, and solid-
state lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration addresses a critical need
for new photonic materials with low quantum decoherence by introducing specific
types of chemical disorder in crystals. Of all the optically addressed quantum
memories being investigated, rare-earth ions in crystals at cryogenic
temperatures stand out as one of the most promising light-matter interfaces that
can store and recall the quantum states of light with high fidelity, efficiency,
and bandwidth. This project investigates how incorporation of substitutional
chemical dopants, introduction of defects such as oxygen vacancies, and weak
local perturbations of chemical bonds due to compositionally induced lattice
strain can disrupt the ion-ion, spin-ion, and photon-ion interaction mechanisms
responsible for decoherence dynamics that limit the performance of quantum
memories. This new material chemistry solution for developing low-decoherence
materials coordinates fundamental studies of material properties and chemistry,
design and synthesis of materials, and practical tests of performance in quantum
memory demonstrations to develop a telecommunications-compatible system for
efficient teleportation of quantum states between light and matter in quantum
communication and computing systems.