* 1416651
* IBSS: Natural Hazards and Cultural Transformations
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Carol Ember, Human Relations Area Files
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 999,469.00

A broad range of natural hazards long have confronted human societies. Through
analyses of societies that have persisted over very long periods of time,
information and insights can be obtained regarding strategies and approaches
that have fostered societal resilience, especially when hazards have been
recurrent. This interdisciplinary research project will employ theories and data
from a broach range of fields, including cultural anthropology, archaeology,
psychology, geography, and climatology in order to compare and contrast a
diverse set of populations subject to different levels of frequency and
predictability of natural hazards, with special attention given to hazards that
have impacted food supplies. Because the investigators will be examining a set
of world-wide databases to characterize hazard-related dynamics of human
societies and cultures over time and space, project findings will help enhance
basic understanding of the factors that have influenced societal success in
dealing with various natural hazards. The project also will assist policy
makers, planners, decision makers, and others in trying to mitigate the
consequences of hazardous events by providing a much broader framework of
knowledge regarding solutions that societies have arrived at over decades,
centuries, or millennia. The project also will provide special interdisciplinary
education and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and
for post-doctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compare
societies and populations normally studied by different disciplines, testing
theories derived from each of the disciplines across varied geographic and
temporal domains. To maximize the range of both environmental and cultural
diversity, the investigators will compare and contrast worldwide samples that
vary in the frequency, severity, and predictability of hazards experience
related to food production, storage, and availability. Research questions that
the investigators will consider include the following: How often have events had
to occur in order for humans to plan for them? Do unpredictable hazards lead to
different cultural transformations than do more predictable hazards? Under what
conditions are contingency plans overwhelmed in the face of natural hazards that
are more severe or more frequent than normal? The investigators will test
hypotheses by conducting analyses and developing models across three different
domains and datasets: (1) a worldwide sample of more than 100 largely
preindustrial ("traditional") societies described by ethnographers; (2) a
worldwide sample of prehistoric traditions described by archaeologists; (3) and
a worldwide sample of 33 contemporary countries with data collected through
individual interviews. To compliment data on natural hazards from historical and
contemporary observations, the investigators will develop measures of
environmental predictability and variability based on rainfall and temperature
data, and they will assemble paleoclimate data to complement the archaeological
dataset. Controlling for different types of economies and political systems, the
researchers expect to identify patterns of resilient behaviors in time and
space, such as contingency plans, subsistence diversification, and sociocultural
transformations that expand and solidify cooperation and networks. These
analyses will help identify the approaches used by societies that have enabled
them to have more or less success in preparing for extreme events and for
reducing their adverse impacts. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.