* 1416259
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: DA: Collaborative Research: Genomes Galore - Core Techniques, Libraries, and Domain Specific Languages for High-Throughput DNA Sequencing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2013,12/31/2018
* Srinivas Aluru, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,285,507.00

The recent emergence of a variety of high-throughput DNA sequencing
instrumentation, and the concomitant rapid decline in the cost per base, is
causing severe data deluge in all areas of life sciences. The heterogeneity of
sequencing instrumentation and the vast diversity of applications enabled by
them are creating numerous analytics problems for the bioinformatics community
to address. In addition, the conventional serial algorithms that have been the
mainstay of bioinformatics research are severely challenged by the ever
increasing data sets. The goal of the proposed project is to develop core
techniques and software libraries to enable scalable, efficient, high
performance computing solutions for high-throughput DNA sequencing, also known
as next-generation sequencing (NGS). To empower the larger community, the
project seeks to 1) identify a set of core functionalities that frequently occur
in many types of high-throughput sequencing applications, 2) develop efficient
parallel algorithms and high performance implementations for them, 3) pursue
mapping to HPC architectures including clusters, multicores, and GPUs, 4)
develop software libraries encapsulating these functionalities with the goal of
enabling the bioinformatics community to exploit HPC architectures, and 5)
design a domain specific language to enable bioinformatics researchers
unfamiliar with parallel processing to benefit from this work through automatic
generation of parallel codes. The research will be conducted in the context of
challenging problems in human genetics and metagenomics, in collaboration with
domain specialists.

This project is focused on a key capacity building activity to facilitate
pervasive use of parallelism by NGS bioinformatics researchers and
practitioners. The goal is to empower the broader community to benefit from
clever parallel algorithms, highly tuned implementations, and specialized HPC
hardware, without requiring expertise in any of these. The software libraries
will be released as open source for use, further development, enhancements, and
incorporation by the community. The project will provide opportunities for
training postdoctoral and graduate students in bigdata analytics and computer
science driven interdisciplinary research. Diverse existing mechanisms at the
partner institutions will be leveraged to advance goals of minority and women
recruitment, undergraduate participation in research, and K-12 outreach.