* 1416541
* SBIR Phase I:  A high-efficiency and compact blood filter for enhanced removal of toxins during hemodialysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Charles Blaha, Silicon Kidney LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is improving the outcomes for patients with End-
Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) and creating significant value with a new blood
filter. In addition to the ability of the blood filter remove more toxins than
current devices, the silicon nanopore membrane (SNM) blood filter will also
confer additional health benefits on ESRD patients because it requires less
blood and less overall blood contact time. The ESRD blood filter market is
approximately $2 Billion dollars per year. In addition, the SNM technology will
also create significant commercial value, have societal impact, and advance
science and technology outside the ESRD population. It can be used in a wide
array of applications, including water filtration, artificial lungs, and for
cell therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a novel
blood filter with SNM to enhance toxin removal during hemodialysis for patients
with ESRD. Today, ESRD patients suffer from numerous serious complications due
to poor clearance of toxins during hemodialysis. The new SNM-based blood filter
will remove toxins more efficiently and significantly improve patient outcomes.
The objective of this research project is to demonstrate the feasibility of
building a compact blood filter using SNM. SNM are fundamentally different than
the polymer membranes currently used in blood filters. Consequently, the SNM
must be designed for use in blood filters and tested as blood filters before
being used clinically. Developing the next-generation SNM and testing a small-
scale SNM blood filter will establish feasibility of the SNM blood filter. At
the conclusion of this project, a new blood filter will have been proved
feasible and the next phase will consist of creating full-scale blood filters
for testing.