* 1416917
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Acidification: RUI: Multiple Stressor Effects of Ocean Acidification and Hypoxia on Behavior, Physiology, and Gene Expression of Temperate Reef Fishes
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Tissot, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2018
* USD 272,951.00

For near shore marine species inhabiting upwelling ecosystems such as the
California Current, climate change resulting from the anthropogenic release of
CO2 into the atmosphere is likely to induce concurrent conditions of ocean
acidification (OA) and hypoxia, which are exacerbated during periods of seasonal
upwelling. Although marine fishes have generally been presumed to be tolerant of
OA due to their competence in acid-base regulation, recent studies in tropical
regions suggest that early life stages may be particularly sensitive to elevated
levels of dissolved CO2 (which lowers seawater pH) by impairing respiration,
acid-base regulation, and neurotransmitter function. Low levels of dissolved
oxygen (DO), which occur during hypoxia, can likewise impact the behavior,
physiology and survival of marine fishes. Few studies have addressed the
potential interactive effects of a low pH, low DO environment. From molecular
tools to whole animal physiology, this research will provide an in-depth
examination of an inherently integrative process. The study will use a multiple
stressor framework to address the potential threats posed by the independent and
combined effects of OA and hypoxia on behavior, physiological capacity, and gene
expression in temperate reef fishes. Because mortality in early life stages has
important carryover effects, understanding the effects of these stressors is
critical for predicting future climate change responses of global fish
populations. Such information will lay the groundwork for further studies that
address the synergistic effects of multiple stressors and the characteristics of
California Current species that influence their ability to tolerate or adapt to
changes in ocean chemistry in a rapidly changing climate. Broader impacts of the
project include educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students at 4 institutions and outreach and educational activities for K-12
students and teachers through the Teaching Enhancement Program. Results will be
communicated to fisheries management agencies, oceanographic observing programs,
and the science community to provide information on climate change impacts for
economically valuable groundfish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to
use a combination of laboratory and field studies to examine ecologically and
physiologically relevant responses of juvenile rockfish (genus Sebastes) to the
independent and interactive effects of ocean acidification and hypoxia. Rockfish
will be captured in the field and then reared in the lab at 4 different pCO2
levels and 4 different DO levels to simulate changes in environmental
conditions. Response variables include: (1) measures of changes in olfactory
capabilities, brain functional asymmetry and problem-solving ability and (2)
effects on swimming capabilities, respiration, aerobic performance, and growth.
In addition, we will use next generation transcriptome sequencing to examine
genome-wide changes in gene expression and enzyme activity for Na+/K+ ATPase
(NKA), citrate synthase (CS), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), as proxies for
acid-base compensation and metabolic shifts between aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism. Oceanographic sensors will be deployed in the field to determine the
frequency and intensity of hypoxia and low pH events in near shore habitats in
Northern and Central California. Adaptive sampling of juvenile rockfish will be
used to evaluate gene expression and physiological responses in individuals
exposed in situ to low pH and low DO events in the field. The effects of OA and
hypoxia will be compared across rockfish species with different life histories
(e.g. larval duration, timing of spawning, etc.) and collected from regions
differing in exposure to low pH/low DO events to address the potential for local
adaptation. The focus of this project is on responses of the early juvenile
stage at the time of settlement, because this stage is exposed to near shore
changes in ocean chemistry during a critical period where physiological stress
and behavioral disruptions may have the strongest demographic effects due to
increased risk of predation.