* 1416700
* Effects of acidification and warming on long-term ocean carbon cycling constrained by observations
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Andreas Schmittner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2019
* USD 259,788.00

The chemical changes associated with ocean acidification will make it more
difficult for important marine species (such as coccolithophores, foraminifera,
and pteropods) to build their calcium carbonate (CaCO3) body parts, and existing
CaCO3 will dissolve more easily. Thus acidification will likely decrease the
production of CaCO3 in the future ocean. Warmer temperatures, on the other hand,
lead to faster metabolic rates, which will likely increase primary and CaCO3
production. Faster warming of surface waters than deeper waters leads to
increased stratification and less nutrient input into the sunlit surface ocean
(photic zone). This may cause shifts in plankton species composition favoring
coccolithophores and thus increasing CaCO3 production. Any change in CaCO3
production may also affect organic carbon fluxes from the surface to the deep
ocean due to the aggregation and association of CaCO3 with organic particles.
This research examines the relative importance of these effects on future global
CaCO3 production and carbon cycling on long time scales (hundreds to thousands
of years) using an improved model calibrated with existing observations. CaCO3
production increases atmospheric CO2, thus its future evolution may be an
important feedback on climate. The sign and uncertainty of this feedback will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An existing global model of ocean biogeochemical
cycles suitable for millennial time scale simulations will be improved by adding
a process based formulation of particle aggregation and sinking. The model will
consider two mineral forms of CaCO3, calcite and aragonite, as well as opal,
terrigenous, and organic matter as components of the aggregates. A global
dataset of particulate organic carbon (POC) will be created by analyzing and
calibrating large volume filtration measurements, bottle, transmissometer and
satellite data including error estimates. This dataset, together with a large
array of existing other global-scale biogeochemical observations will be used to
calibrate the model and estimate uncertain parameters as well as different
structural formulations of (a) the effect of ocean acidification on the
production of CaCO3 and (b) particle aggregation. A Bayesian data assimilation
scheme, designed to quantify three hypothetic mechanisms regarding the control
of the rain ratio (CaCO3 over POC export from the euphotic zone), will be
applied. Probabilistic projections will be carried out to quantify the effect of
each mechanism on long term ocean carbon cycling and its feedback on atmospheric
CO2 concentrations. The ability of the existing observations to constrain the
projections will be evaluated. The project aims to lead to a better, more
quantitative understanding of multi-variable processes that control global
cycling of CaCO3 and carbon in the ocean and their coupling. Improving ocean
biogeochemical cycling in a widely used Earth System Model of intermediate
complexity will enhance infrastructure for research and education. The improved
model will be made publicly available and benefit future research of long-term
carbon cycle processes such as studies of anthropogenic effects or paleoclimate.
The global POC dataset will also be made publicly available. A 3-day workshop
for K-12 educators will be organized with climate change and ocean acidification
as its main topics. Society may benefit from the outcome of this project through
an improved assessment (including uncertainties) of the effects of anthropogenic
carbon emissions on ocean biogeochemical cycles.