* 1416590
* SBIR Phase I:  Encased Cantilevers for Ultra-Sensitive Force and Mass Sensing in Liquids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Dominik Ziegler, Scuba Probe Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,735.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel, low-cost fabrication process and a testing tool for encased Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM) cantilevers. The project will lead to a significant reduction
in fabrication costs and improvement in manufacturability of this revolutionary
encased cantilever technology, enabling widespread adoption for liquid AFM
experiments and biosensors. The market for liquid AFM probes alone is
approximately $50 million, and the new scientific capabilities enabled by these
probes could lead to even greater impact. Encased cantilevers will lead to
significant improvements in diverse fields including health, technology, energy,
and education. The knowledge gained from enhanced resolution of protein
structures will lead to new therapeutics and implants. In-situ imaging of energy
storage materials will advance the engineering of batteries and supercapacitors
for next generation mobile devices, transportation, and grid storage.
Characterization of mineral, hydrocarbon, and brine interfaces will lead to
enhanced oil and gas recovery. These encased cantilevers may become effective
tools for low-concentration biomarker detection, providing early warnings and
preventing disease. Finally, the novel process to be developed may provide
breakthroughs in the fabrication of device architectures for other micro-
electromechanical (MEMS) devices and applications.

AFM operation in liquid has more than an order of magnitude lower sensitivity
versus working in air, leading to loss of resolution and inferior discernment of
surface properties. This problem is solved by introducing engineered cantilevers
which keep the resonator dry using a hydrophobic encasement that traps an air
bubble around the cantilever. The specific technical objectives aim to reduce
fabrication cost by 1) replacing a serial and expensive Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
milling step with an innovative and novel parallel fabrication technique and 2)
by fabricating a testing platform to characterize the performance of fabricated
devices semi-automatically. The novel fabrication process will enable selective
removal of the encasement material at the probe apex of many probes in parallel
and the testing platform will provide frequency and quality factor measurements
for many cantilevers. Successful completion of Phase I will result in a scalable
fabrication and characterization process for encased cantilevers.