* 1416730
* IBSS: Participatory-Ensemble Modeling to Study the Multiscale Social and Behavioral Dynamics of Food Security
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Arika Ligmann-Zielinska, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 999,793.00

Despite recent gains in global agricultural productivity, sustained, equitable,
and stable access to food continues to be a concern in many parts of the world.
This interdisciplinary research project will examine why people in one region
are faced with food insecurities in order to gain insights that will have wide-
ranging utility. This project will enhance understanding of the critical
societal problem of food security and will communicate potential solutions to
decision makers by developing tools that synthesize qualitative and quantitative
information from geography, sociology, decision science, and sustainability
science as well as cross-disciplinary knowledge on food insecurity. Because food
security is a complex problem that involves many stakeholders across different
spatial scales and within different contexts, the investigators will use
computer modeling to enhance understanding of the key elements of the food
system, explain food insecurity, and provide tools for long-term policy making
for improved food availability, access, and stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will focus on a study of food insecurity in dryland West
Africa, a region where changing environmental conditions and socioeconomic
systems have left many people hungry despite increases in agricultural
productivity. The investigators will develop and test a collection of small,
independent computer models to describe and analyze different aspects of the
food system. They will use mental modeling, multilevel structural equation
modeling, agent-based modeling embedded in a geographic information system, and
system dynamics modeling in an integrative, participatory, and iterative manner
in order to examine mechanisms affecting food security. Mental modeling will
help depict and communicate stakeholder perceptions, while multilevel structural
equation modeling will be used to explain how individual attributes and
structural factors affect food availability. Agent-based modeling embedded in a
geographic information system will help describe spatial and temporal
variability of food access, thereby explaining how individual behaviors link
with livelihood vulnerability, while system dynamic models will evaluate how the
dynamics of climate change, drought, hunger, and humanitarian relief over time
impact on food security. Each model will build a progressively richer
understanding of the problem, and an overarching scenario study tool will
encapsulate the models and provide a transdisciplinary platform for synthesizing
information from the models through scenario generation and evaluation. Model
development, evaluation, and application will be informed by on-the-ground
discussions with stakeholders in the study region. This project is supported
through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS)
competition.