* 1416561
* SBIR Phase I:  Tortuga GLIFT: Hardware Security Design and Analysis Toolkit
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jason Oberg, Tortuga Logic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is centered on transforming the way
semiconductor companies are capable of approaching the issue of security - an
aspect of their designs that has wide ranging impacts for our nation's commerce
and infrastructure. The hardware security tool proposed in this project will
enable a formal assessment of hardware system security by providing the ability
to prove security properties on concrete hardware implementations. This work was
motivated by interviews with over 100 prospective end users as part of the
National Science Foundation Innovation Corps program, which determined that 1)
current methods simply fail to address a broad scope of important
vulnerabilities, and 2) there is significant demand for tools that enable
engineers to discover and eliminate those vulnerabilities. With the continued
growth of the cyber security ($77B) and mobile hardware security ($1B) markets,
the proposed research has significant potential for sustained commercial
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop the first tool for secure hardware design. The
senior personnel on this project have learned first-hand that such a tool is
both in high demand from a variety of semiconductor companies and that there is
nothing currently on the market to satisfy this demand. In order to develop the
tool most critically needed by our potential customers, this development project
will focus on three main objectives. First, it will integrate core technology
developed previously by the company's senior personnel with formal solvers in
order to enable the specification and verification of provable security
properties. Second, it will develop a formal language allowing hardware
developers to specify an important class of security assertions that fits
cleanly into modern industry practices. Lastly, this development effort will
extend current state-of-the-art technology to allow hardware designs to be
tested in the presence of multi-level security policies beyond just the
conventional "untrusted" and "trusted" paradigms. The outcome of this project
will be a tool ready to be tested on industry grade hardware designs.