* 1416601
* SBIR Phase I: Prediction of impending earthquakes using data from geographically distributed array of sensors for monitoring behavior of companion animals and large scale data anal
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Alex Treiner, PET WIRELESS, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it may potentially save lives and avoid
hardship for millions of people around the world by predicting impending
earthquakes significantly in advance of their occurrence. Dozens of destructive
earthquakes occur every year. Reliable and timely prediction of earthquake
occurrence has been a holy grail of seismic research for many years, since it
would offer the possibility of minimizing casualties and economic loss. This
project proposes to improve the accuracy of earthquake prediction by
unobtrusively monitoring changes in the behavior of companion animals (such as
cats and dogs) and combining this information with data from seismic sensors and
other sources. Successful completion of the project will allow the development
of powerful data analytics for earthquake prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is addressing a very
challenging problem of advanced earthquake prediction that has not been solved
to date, despite significant advances in science and technology over the past
half century and massive international efforts of governmental, academic and
other institutions. The objective of this project is to collect animal behavior
data using proprietary sensors, and develop analytics for animal behavior data
processed in conjunction with data from seismic, GPS and other sensors, with the
goal of establishing correlations between changes in animal behavior prior to
impending earthquakes and the time of occurrence, location, and magnitude of the
earthquakes. Numerous attempts to prove such correlation have been inconclusive
to date. This project, however, takes a different approach by using proprietary
sensors to collect objective scientific data from companion animals by means of
sensors that are unobtrusive and do not affect the animals' behavior. This
project aims to demonstrate data relevance on a small scale, using data
collected from a small number of animals over a relatively short period of time
in a well-studied and continuously monitored seismically active area with high
probability of frequent earthquake occurrence.