* 1416825
* Comparative Genomics of a Species Radiation: Sequencing the Apple Tribe
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Sarah Mathews, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Sarah Mathews (Harvard University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborator:
Erin MacNeal Rehrig (Fitchburg State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species
radiations are a striking feature of evolution and may be responsible for much
of life's diversity. Yet understanding the evolution of species radiations and
how genome evolution progresses in this context remains a central problem in
biology. Members of the rose family (Rosaceae) include familiar domesticates
such as roses, apples, peaches, almonds, strawberries, and cherries. An
intriguing and important radiation within Rosaceae produced the apple, pear, and
quince genera, along with several valuable ornamentals. These are members of a
clade of about 750 woody species distributed in 35 genera with a base chromosome
number of x = 17 (tribe Maleae). The sister group of this clade is the genus
Gillenia, which has just two species, both herbaceous perennials with a base
chromosome number of x = 9. The Maleae are particularly attractive for the study
of genome evolution in the context of a species radiation because of their
generally small genome sizes and monophyletic roots in a single whole genome
duplication (WGD) that postdates their divergence from Gillenia. Early diverging
Maleae are similar to Gillenia in having dry fruits and few species. But after
the evolution of the pome, the fleshy fruit found in most Maleae and the basis
for their economic importance, they diversified into 32 genera, sorting into
lineages with distinctive phenotypic, life history, and ecological traits,
including lineages in which repeated hybridization and polyploidy events have
contributed to their species-richness. This project will test the hypothesis
that the infusion of a vast numbers of duplicate genes via WGD provided
evolutionary potential for the radiating Maleae. The specific aims are to: (1)
generate genome sequence from a small number of diploid genomes (both pre- and
post-WGD) and determine the extent to which genic regions can be assembled and
the history of duplicated genes reconstructed in selected Maleae genera; and,
(2) establish the best sequencing and assembly approaches for the genome scan of
a diploid/tetraploid species pair in Maleae. If successful, the project will
provide resources for advancing our understanding of the evolution of
economically and ecologically important processes such as fruit development,
volatile production, changes in climate tolerance, and resistance to pests
through the generation of thousands of new markers for breeding programs as well
as genome sequences from two closely related species of Malus that differ with
respect to ploidy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research
training for a postdoctoral fellow and a faculty member from Fitchburg State
University, a primarily undergraduate institution in Massachusetts. All sequence
data will be deposited and accessible through GenBank and the Genome Database
for Rosaceae (GDR; www.rosaceae.org).