* 1416066
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Marketplace for Procedural Documentation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Dylan Tuttle, Vulkans Forge Consulting Ltd
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Phase I project's broader/commercial impact will be marketable software as
a service that should generate tax revenue based on sales and increase the
number of jobs available to U.S. residents. Research says that "as much as two-
thirds of the value created by new Internet offerings has been captured as
consumer surplus." Web-based WYSIWYG XML editors are currently available in the
marketplace as are component content management systems. Topic-based authoring
and reuse are nothing new, but the cost is currently far out of reach for most
manufacturers. This project has the potential to not only bring down the cost of
this technology, but also add unique functionality that will reduce the time and
cost associated with topic-based authoring and reuse; simplify the process of
content creation, management, and exchange; and increase the value of that
content through specialization for learning and collaborative filtering. The US
manufacturing sector employed 10,649,378 workers as of March 2012. An industry
search on a social networking website generates a list of 7,414,000
manufacturing professionals in the US. While the serviceable available market
and revenue potential per person have yet to be determined, the potential of the
target market is significant given that the audience is hungry for knowledge and
peer interaction.

The project will assess the feasibility of an efficient marketplace for the
exchange of procedural documentation among manufacturing professionals. A common
complaint is the cost of compliance with industry standards and government
regulations. Much of this comes down to documentation requirements. Most small
and midsized manufacturers lack an effective knowledge management function.
Without a robust knowledge management function, the benefit of training workers
is questionable given turnover and lack of memory retention. An efficient
marketplace for the exchange of procedural documentation would support self-
regulated learning, reduce the cost of training, and reduce the need for
supervision. This project will advance the state-of-the-art in three related
areas of research; namely, (1) a method for incentivizing the authorship and
exchange of high quality learning content, (2) a method for tagging learning
content to improve fundability, and (3) a method for improving the relevance and
timeliness of learning content through collaborative filtering. Together these
advances will allow for a variety of use cases, including the creation,
management, and exchange of procedural documentation, enabling learners to
reflect on their practice, compare their performance to others, and accelerate
knowledge acquisition.