* 1416780
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Caddo Salt Production in Northwestern Louisiana
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Ian Brown, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 18,016.00

A central goal of NSF funded archaeology is to understand how complex societies
- which include almost all extant in the world today - developed. Archaeologists
believe that economic specialization and associated trade in products thus
produced played an important role and this project will provide insight into
this issue. It will do so in a context also relevant to increasing understanding
of US history and the immediately preceding late prehistoric
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Ian Brown, Paul Eubanks
will explore the role that salt played in the economic and political development
of Caddo Indian societies in northwestern Louisiana during the period of initial
European contact. Using historical documentation and archaeological data, he
examines the issues of economic specialization and salt production intensity at
the Upper and Little salt licks. Located at the Drake's Salt Works Site Complex
near Goldonna, Louisiana, these salt licks were two of the most intensively-
utilized salines in the south-central United States during the eighteenth
century. The excavations proposed in this project seek to determine if the Caddo
salt makers lived at their place of work on a permanent or semi-permanent basis.
If this is the case, then this would lend support to the argument that following
sustained European contact, the Caddo salt makers, as economic specialists, were
able to derive a substantial portion of their livelihoods by participating in
the economy of salt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eubanks's dissertation addresses key
anthropological issues concerning the linkages between economic specialization
and potential sources of power such as control over the production, trade, and
consumption of salt. In addressing these issues, his project will be the first
to conduct a systematic study of Caddo salt production in northwestern
Louisiana. His dissertation will also report on his excavations of a North
American "Briquetage Mound." This mound is an artificial rise on the Little Lick
salt flat composed almost entirely of salt production debris (burned earth,
pottery fragments, and charcoal). It was identified by Eubanks during the site's
first professional archaeological survey in the fall of 2012. Mounds such as
these have been documented elsewhere in Africa, Asia, Europe and Mesoamerica,
and thus, the investigations at this mound present an excellent opportunity to
compare Caddo salt production techniques to those from other societies from
around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to
benefit and inform both academic and non-academic communities alike. Eubanks has
already taken the initial steps in clearing the way for the construction of the
Drake's Salt Works Museum by conducting archaeological tests in the proposed
construction area near the Upper Lick salt flat. The construction of this museum
is currently underway, and the data gathered from this project will be used to
create an exhibit on Caddo salt production. Eubanks has also conducted several
interviews with local newspapers and news broadcasters concerning the role of
salt in Caddo Indian societies. The results of this project will also be made
available in the form of peer-reviewed journal articles and at national and
local archaeological conferences. In addition, free access to the primary data
and a final copy of his dissertation will be made available online for public
use. Lastly, this research will also assist in training undergraduate and
graduate students in archaeological field and laboratory methods.