* 1416842
* Resolving the Degree of Chemical Heterogeneities in the Mantle by Dual Bootstrap Stack
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 123,084.00

On Earth, surface plates are continuously recycled into the deep mantle by
subduction, but it is still very poorly understood how quickly these subducted
plates are mixed and homogenized by mantle convection. Observational constraints
are limited in spite of innumerable speculations on the chemical state of the
mantle. Previous attempts to deterministically detect small-scale
heterogeneities in the mantle have relied on scattered waves with relatively
high amplitudes, which can be identified in original seismic data before
stacking. This limitation on signal strength leads to a bias in our detection
capability, restricting us to spatially extensive features such as lateral
discontinuities and dipping reflectors. Recently, a powerful signal detection
technique called dual bootstrap stack (DBS) has been developed. Built with
rigorous statistical tests for signal significance and coherency, DBS can
achieve a clean separation of signal and noise. Unlike conventional nonlinear
stacks, it can detect signals even when the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) is lower
than unity, and compared to simple linear stack, the number of traces required
for unambiguous signal detection is reduced by up to two orders of magnitude.
The proposed project aims to conduct a systematic test of this new signal
detection technique by revisiting published data and to better understand its
potential for producing convincing observational constraints on the chemical
state of the mantle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, we will revisit
the study of Kaneshima and Helffrich [2010], who reported an extensive study on
small-scale heterogeneities in the mid-lower mantle beneath the circum-Pacific
area. The existing DBS-based migration code will be modified to handle S-to-P
scattering for this purpose. The number of events they used is: 23 for the Izu-
Bonin region, 11 for the Kuril region, 28 for the Fiji region, and 12 for the
South America. In addition to S-to-P scattering, which was exploited by this
previous study, we will also seek evidence for P-to-P scattering, and if time
permits, we will investigate other events to see how reproducible detected
scatterers are, in light of DBS-based teleseismic migration.