* 1416785
* Ocean Acidification: Mechanisms of Coral Biomineralization
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Falkowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,411,573.00

This research seeks to understand how corals make their skeletons. The skeletons
of stony corals are critically important biological structures that support huge
areas of tropical and subtropical marine life as well as providing natural
barriers against waves, storms, and floods. However, it is not yet known how
corals construct their skeletons, nor is it fully understood what the effect of
ocean acidification will have on this process. To address these fundamental
questions, this project follows a two-pronged approach that utilizes information
in the genes of living corals coupled with ultra high-resolution microscopy and
physical chemical techniques to understand the mechanism that underlies
precipitation of the carbonate mineral that forms the skeleton of stony corals.
This effort will further develop techniques that will allow the culturing of
coral tissues and the analysis of coral genomes to infer gene functions. The
research is relevant to understanding the potential threat of ocean
acidification to the viability of corals in the coming decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although biomineralization in corals has been studied for
decades, the basic mechanism responsible for the precipitation of the aragonite
skeleton remains enigmatic. Using a forward genetic approach, a group of highly
acidic proteins derived from the common stony coral, Stylophora pistillata was
recently identified and cloned. All of the cloned proteins precipitate aragonite
in seawater at pH 8.2 and at 7.6 in vitro. However, it is not clear if the
expression of these proteins in vivo is sufficient for the formation of an
aragonite skeleton at seawater pH values below ~7.8. Using a combination of
molecular, biophysical, genomic, and cell biological approaches the core
hypothesis to be tested here is that, unless wounded or otherwise having
skeletal material exposed directly to seawater, stony, zooxanthellate corals
will continue to calcify at pH values projected for the CO2 emissions scenarios
for 2100. The multi-disciplinary research approach is designed to inform how pH
of the ocean influences the key physiological processes responsible for
calcification in zooxanthellate scleratinian corals. The research team will
create online learning modules for undergraduate students. In addition, the
research will be incorporated into the Education and Public Outreach group at
Rutgers University for marine science education of K-12 students and training of
K-12 teachers. Finally, the project includes training and career development for
two post-doctoral fellows.