* 1416900
* IBSS: Religious Infusion and Asymmetric Group Conflict
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Steven Neuberg, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2019
* USD 979,229.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine how differences in
religious ritual, doctrine, and context shape the motivations and capacities of
groups in which religion permeates many aspects of private and public life,
sometimes leading those groups to initiate conflict against stronger groups. The
project will enhance basic understanding about religion, ethnicity, and conflict
by testing hypotheses about different mechanisms through which religion may
shape conflict. It will extend and integrate theoretical perspectives in
political science, economics, anthropology, and social psychology that connect
religion and conflict. It also will assess the motivations and processes though
which some religiously infused, low-power groups engage in asymmetrical conflict
against groups that seemingly are much more powerful. The project will help fill
a significant gap in knowledge for U.S. and international agencies and
organizations by providing insights and information regarding the ways in which
groups differ in their religious infusion and how these differences translate
into group conflict. These insights will assist policy makers and practitioners
in identifying factors that create or mitigate conflicts. As recent events have
demonstrated, enhanced understanding of the causes, facilitators, and inhibitors
of asymmetric conflict between groups having great disparity in power has great
significance for enhancing the national security of the U.S. and other nations.
The project also will provide interdisciplinary education and training
opportunities for students in a range of different
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct this project using
three complementary methods in order to test nine hypotheses about the ways
through which differences in religious ritual, doctrine, and context affect the
motivations and capacities of weak, religiously infused groups to initiate
conflict against stronger groups. They will conduct case studies comparing two
transnational Muslim ethnic groups in the Middle East and South Asia (the Kurds
in Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Turkey and the Baluchi in Iran, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan). They will conduct qualitative comparative analyses of 40 relatively
resource-weak groups around the world, and they will conduct laboratory-based
experimentation in the U.S. and India. These approaches will elucidate the
factors shaping the circumstances in which resource-poor, religiously infused
groups engage in asymmetric conflict, and they will facilitate identification of
the circumstances in which religious infusion may lead to more peaceful
outcomes. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.