* 1416595
* SBIR Phase I:  Intelligent tutoring system with EEG-based instructional strategy optimization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Walid Soussou, Quantum Applied Science & Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 149,981.00

This SBIR Phase I project's broader/commercial impact is a proposed tutoring
system with the potential to meet the need for truly scalable personal tutoring
by consistently equaling the performance of an above-average tutor. One-on-one
instruction by qualified personal tutors is the optimum form of teaching. Well-
trained personal tutors, however, are a limited resource, particularly in
disadvantaged areas and for science, technology, engineering and mathematics,
and are outside the budget of the vast majority of school districts and parents.
However, unlike human tutors, the system proposed here can be available at any
time outside school; it can be stopped and resumed at will, can be utilized at
home, and is blind to economic, gender and other social cues. The system will be
offered to the $34 billion after-school education, test-prep and eLearning
market, with an initial entry point in Advanced Placement (AP) exam preparation
services to high school students. Subjects suitable for the learning paradigm of
the proposed system account for 1 million annual exams, resulting in to an
initial Total Available Market of $400 million annually. This beachhead market
will be expanded to include general year-round tutoring for both high school and
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a computerized
tutoring platform that adapts its teaching strategy to students in real-time by
monitoring their brain activity. This innovation will meet shortfalls in current
computer-based adaptive training technologies, which rely on generalized learner
state models and inferences of student engagement and cognitive workload, and
thereby lack some of the key abilities of human tutors. This platform will
combine the strengths of an Intelligent Tutoring System modeled after expert
human tutor behavior and has an innovative scaffolding mode with newly-developed
wearable brain monitoring technology. The Phase I objectives are to evaluate
EEG-based gauges of cognitive workload and engagement on students executing
learning tasks in a classroom environment, evaluate the gauges in response to
learning tasks of defined difficulty, and define methods of using the gauges to
modify instructional content. A trial will be carried out on students at a
partner high school, the anticipated outcome of which is the measurement of
cognitive gauges with high classification accuracy. A structural framework of
how the cognitive state gauges will interface with the tutoring system and
optimize its instructional strategy will be developed, and user requirements for
the prototype system will be defined.