* 1416690
* Ocean Acidification/Collaborative Research/RUI: Effects of Ocean Acidification on Larval Competence, Metamorphosis, and Juvenile Performance in a Planktotrophic Gastropod
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Anthony Pires, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2018
* USD 248,040.00

Levels of CO2 in the air are now about 40% higher than they were 200 years ago
at the start of the Industrial Revolution. At least 1/3 of excess CO2 production
has been absorbed by the ocean, making it more acidic as the CO2 forms carbonic
acid. Understanding the likely impact of this increasing ocean acidification
(OA) on marine animals and ecosystems is complicated by the fact that other
features of the environment are also expected to change appreciably (e.g.,
seawater temperatures will increase and food availability and nutritional value
may decline), by the fact that stresses experienced in early development can
have lasting effects, and because the molecular mechanisms of the responses are
poorly understood. This study examines how OA under different environmental
conditions will impact the development, dispersal, and metamorphosis of the
marine snail Crepidula fornicata, a common species native to the eastern U.S.
that has now become established in the Pacific Northwest, Europe, and elsewhere.
This study will include: 1) the impact of OA on relative rates of tissue and
shell growth in larvae; 2) long-term impact of larval exposure to OA on the
survival and growth of juveniles; 3) influence of OA on gene expression patterns
in both larvae and juveniles; 4) impact of OA on time until metamorphosis and on
the ability to metamorphose in response to environmental inducers; 5) effect of
elevated temperature on responses to OA; 6) impact of larval diet on
vulnerability to OA; and 7) impact of OA on larval swimming ability and
settlement behavior. The study species is native to the East coast of the United
States but has now become an important invasive in many other parts of the
world. The results will have important implications for understanding the
continued spread of this species. In addition, the work includes opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate student training, outreach to high school
teachers and development of new classroom exercises.

Molluscan larvae are expected to be especially susceptible to the effects of
ocean acidification (OA) in the coming years, due to their thinly calcified
shells. In addition, water temperatures are expected to amplify some impacts of
OA. Some effects, such as potentially reduced growth rates, reduced shell
thickness, and altered dispersal capability are likely to be immediate, while
others (latent effects) may appear only later in development, well after
metamorphosis has taken place. In addition, OA--with or without ocean warming--
may alter larval behavior and physiology in ways that affect the timing of
metamorphosis and the fitness of juveniles,thus altering dispersal potential and
vulnerability to predators. OA may also alter the abundance and nutritional
quality of phytoplankton. We will investigate the consequences of OA under
different environmental scenarios for larvae of the marine gastropod Crepidula
fornicata, an easily cultured species that is receiving increasing attention
both as a general model for lophotrochozoan development and as an ecologically
significant invader in benthic subtidal communities. Our study will include: 1)
impact of OA on rates of larval tissue and shell growth; 2) latent effects of
larval exposure to OA on juvenile survival and growth; 3) effect of elevated
temperature on responses to OA; 4) influence of elevated OA on larval and
juvenile gene expression; 5) impact of OA on the development of competence for
metamorphosis; 6) impact of OA on the response of competent larvae to a variety
of metamorphic inducers; 7) impact of larval diet quality on vulnerability to
OA, both in the larval stages and following metamorphosis (latent effects); and
8) impact of OA on larval swimming and settlement behaviors, and the neural
correlates of those behaviors.