* 1416769
* IBSS-Ex: Exploratory Research Regarding the Return Home of Trafficking Survivors
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Elzbieta Gozdziak, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2016
* USD 249,888.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the return and
reintegration of victims of human trafficking by combining exploration of the
utility of the Global Human Trafficking Database developed by the International
Organization for Migration together with the conduct of interviews with
returnees and with community stakeholders. The project will help assess what
types of data are needed to better understand the dynamics and processes of
return and reintegration of persons who have been the victims of human
trafficking. Through analysis of existing data and empirical research eliciting
new qualitative and available quantitative data, the investigators will help
identify future research needs to understand decision making related to return,
ongoing service needs, and the availability of programs to meet these needs as
well as community attitudes towards returned survivors. The project will
facilitate a transition to a focus on empirical evidence as a means of
addressing the needs and rights of returned victims, thus laying groundwork for
evidence-based evaluation of existing programs. This project should help set the
stage for future work that will more accurate information about the effects of
return, including both the survivors' ability to re-integrate into the
communities of origin and the risks for re-trafficking. Project findings will
help assess the ongoing employment, education, and health needs of trafficked
survivors after they return as well as the returnees' access to effective
services fostering sustainable socioeconomic
reintegration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use a mixed-methods
approach to gain insights from three different data sources. They will conduct
statistical analyses of a database on 138,092 trafficking victims from around
the world that was developed by the International Organization for Migration.
This database includes nearly 200 items about demographics, pre- and post-
trafficking experiences, and the individual and non-governmental organization-
provided resources for return and reintegration. The investigators will engage
in field work with service providers in Moldova and Nepal to gain an
understanding of the challenges of reintegrating survivors, and they will
conduct interviews with selected survivors who returned as adults to obtain an
insiders' perspective about the challenges and prospects for long-term
socioeconomic reintegration. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.