* 1416598
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Sensitivity & Contrast Enhancement in Solution MR Spectroscopy & Microimaging by Indirect Detection and Spin Amplification
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Yung-Ya Lin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2017
* USD 410,000.00

Magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy/imaging has become one of the most
successful analytical techniques for a diverse array of applications in
chemistry, physics, biology, materials, and medicine. In this project funded by
the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Yung-Ya Lin will establish new international collaboration between
UCLA and National Taiwan University (NTU) to develop innovative approaches to
significantly enhance the sensitivity and contrast in MR spectroscopy and
imaging, two major challenges in modern MR. This is particularly important for
biomolecular MR where the atoms in the molecules of interest are only weakly
magnetic, or when the molecules are present only at low concentrations.

From recent research funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of
the Chemistry Division, Prof. Lin and his coworkers have discovered and
investigated nonlinear/chaotic dynamics in solution MR. The well-known
"butterfly effect" or "avalanching effect" exhibited by nonlinear/chaotic
systems, i.e., extreme sensitivity to initial conditions, will be developed into
powerful new approaches for sensitivity/contrast enhancement for MR spectroscopy
and imaging. The proposed research utilizes cutting edge techniques from both
the UCLA group and the NTU group to achieve significant MR sensitivity/contrast
enhancement, thereby extending its impacts to biomedicine, biochemistry, and
biophysics. Its intellectual merits are: (i) Utilizing emerging aspects of
nonlinear/chaotic spin dynamics for the first time to alleviate the fundamental
limitation in MR sensitivity/contrast; (ii) Engineering a general
sensitivity/contrast enhancement mechanism based on indirect detection and spin
amplification at high fields; and (iii) Controlling the nonlinear spin dynamics
and optimizing the amplification gains by an electronic feedback control device.
This collaboration will be highly complementary and beneficial to both teams and
is only possible through this unique combination of team members and resources.
Its broader impacts are (i) Making use of unique resources and complementary
capabilities and demonstrating a high level of synergy through the formation of
new international collaborations; (ii) Constructing a Nonlinear MR Simulator and
web-based interactive course for research, mentorship, teaching, and outreach to
enable cross-fertilization between research and education.