* 1416781
* Learning about Ecosystems Science and Complex Causality through Experimentation in a Virtual World
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Christopher Dede, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/29/2020
* USD 3,114,273.00

Comprehending how ecosystems function is important knowledge for citizens in
making decisions and for students who aspire to become scientists. This
understanding requires deep thinking about complex causality, unintended side-
effects, and the strengths and limitations of experimental science. These are
difficult concepts to learn due to the many interacting components and non-
linear interrelationships involved. Ecosystems dynamics is particularly
difficult to teach in classrooms because ecosystems involve complexities such as
phenomena distributed widely across space that change over long time frames.
Learning when and how experimental science can provide useful information in
understanding ecosystems dynamics requires moving beyond the limited affordances
of classrooms. The project will: 1) advance understanding of experimentation in
ecosystems as it can be applied to education; 2) show how student learning is
affected by having opportunities to experiment in the virtual world that
simulate what scientists do in the real world and with models; and 3) produce
results comparing this form of teaching to earlier instructional approaches.
This project will result in a learning environment that will support learning
about the complexities of the earth's ecosystem.

The project will build upon a computer world called EcoMUVE, a Multi-User
Virtual Environment or MUVE, developed as part of an earlier NSF-funded project.
A MUVE is a simulated world in which students can virtually walk around, make
observations, talk to others, and collect data. EcoMUVE simulates a pond and a
forest ecosystem. It offers an immersive context that makes it possible to teach
about ecosystems in the classroom, allowing exploration of the complexities of
large scale problems, extended time frames and and multiple causality. To more
fully understand how ecosystems work, students need the opportunity to
experiment and to observe what happens. This project will advance this earlier
work by developing ways for students to conduct experiments within the virtual
world and to see the results of those experiments. The project will work with
ecosystem scientists to study the types of experiments that they conduct,
informing knowledge in education about how ecosystem scientists think, and will
build opportunities for students that mirror what scientists do. The project
will develop a modified virtual world and accompanying curriculum for middle
school students to help them learn to more deeply understand ecosystems patterns
and the strengths and limitations of experimentation in ecosystems science. The
resulting program will be tested against existing practice, the EcoMUVE program
alone, and other programs that teach aspects of ecosystems dynamics to help
teachers know how to best use these curricula in the classroom.

.