* 1416964
* Water Conservation and Hydrological Transitions in American Cities
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Hess, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 07/31/2018
* USD 717,585.00

American cities recognize water supply as a central scientific, technological,
and socioeconomic problem. In response to the public concern with the risks
posed to water supplies, cities and related metropolitan water organizations
have faced the need to undertake transitions in their systems of water supply
and management. These transitions involve a mix of social, economic, political,
and technological change. Of the various approaches to satisfying water demand,
water conservation, as an essentially free new "source" of water, is typically
the most cost effective. Water conservation also has significant indirect
benefits, such as energy conservation and the reduction of stress on ecosystems.
The goal of this research is to understand better why some cities have moved
ahead to have extensive water conservation policies and some have not. The
research also will investigate why cities with similar water shortage regimes
respond differently to proposals to deepen and extend water conservation. An
extensive data base on water availability, water use, and the conservation
policies for major cities in the U.S. will be assembled and analyzed. Interviews
with public officials involved in water conservation planning will provide
context. The project will educate students across many disciplines and will
produce results that will be useful in guiding water managers and political
leaders on different water conservation strategies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several
major research questions will be addressed to understand how U.S. metropolitan
areas have transitioned to advanced water conservation strategies to minimize
impacts of water stress. What is the range of water conservation transitions in
American cities? What social and hydroclimatological factors affect the pattern
of water conservation transitions? The research project will test hypotheses
developed from the existing literature on sustainability and related policies to
determine the factors that affect the pace and depth of the transition toward a
higher level of water conservation. A comprehensive data set for as many as 381
cities will be assembled and analyzed using statistical and data visualization
methods. The project will develop the first systematic, interdisciplinary
database of water conservation regimes in American cities. The research will
develop detailed case studies of four cities using interviews of key public
officials and will incorporate the information gained into mathematical models
that include decision variables as well as physical constraints. These studies
will explore the complex properties of the interactions of political power, user
practices, infrastructure design, and hydroclimatology in achieving high levels
of water conservation.