* 1416791
* IBSS-Ex: Maternal Speech and Children's Physiological and Behavioral Regulation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Jennifer Cole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 249,744.00

The ability to regulate stress is central to emotional and physical health
across the human lifespan. Individual differences in stress regulation are
shaped, in part, by the early caregiving environment, particularly parental
support during challenge. Little is known, however, about specific features of
the parenting response that promote children's regulatory functioning. This
interdisciplinary research project will examine prosody, a potentially vital but
largely unexamined feature of parental behavior that is defined as the rhythm
and intonation of speech and is assessed by investigating the acoustic
properties of maternal speech. The investigators will conduct the project by
drawing on and integrating theory and evidence from psychology,
psychophysiology, linguistics, and speech science. The project will assess the
degree to which the acoustic properties of language may elicit parasympathetic
activity and, in turn, act as a mechanism by which social experiences "get under
the skin" to affect attention and behavior of children during their early years.
Project results will enhance knowledge about direct sensory links between
parenting and child regulation and will help advance understanding of early
socialization processes and child development. Results also will inform key
questions in linguistics regarding the biological mechanisms through which
communication may operate and, relatedly, may lay groundwork for building models
of prosody in spontaneous speech. A more fine-grained understanding of
caregiving and its influence on child regulation will be valuable in the design
and implementation of prevention and intervention programs for families in high-
stress circumstances. This project also will provide valuable educational
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students from multiple disciplines,
including training in observational methodology, acoustic analysis,
physiological assessments, and advanced data-analytic techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together theory and evidence in
psychophysiology as well as burgeoning findings from linguistics and speech
sciences regarding the acoustic correlates of perceived emotional arousal. The
investigators will examine associations between the acoustic properties of
maternal speech and children's physiological and behavioral regulation. They
will focus on children between 3 and 5 years of age, a developmental period in
which regulatory capacities show tremendous growth and caregivers may play a
particularly salient role. Mother-child dyads will participate in visits to the
laboratory playroom during which time video, audio, and physiological data will
be time-synched and recorded continuously during a baseline assessment, a
mother-child play session, and two mother-child challenge tasks. Because the
stress response unfolds over real time, the investigators will adopt a dynamic
analytic approach that permits investigation of the relations between maternal
prosody and child regulation across time. Comparisons across interactive tasks
will explore whether such processes are more salient under challenge conditions.
Because of the pervasiveness of spoken language and the acoustic properties of
speech in everyday life, this project will yield information and insights of
value for a wide array of disciplines in the social and behavioral sciences.
This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and
Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.