* 1416300
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Optical Modulators Using Submicron Lithium Niobate Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Payam Rabiei, Partow Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will enable a dramatic leap in the
technology of electrooptic modulators. Electrooptic modulators have widespread
applications in fiber-optic telecommunications. The modulators are also key
components for optically-steered phased-arrayed antennas, electromagnetic-
attack-resistant and radio-over-fiber radio frequency photonic links, light
detection and ranging, optical sensing, metrology, storage, sampling and
communications, all-optical signal processing. The most important future
application is in optical interconnects for supercomputers and data centers. The
high-performance devices developed under this program will eventually be found
in data communication to transmit data between racks of data centers and
supercomputer facilities and between microprocessors, graphic and memory
chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project aims at developing high-performance optical modulators using a novel
lithium niobate (LiNbO3) on silicon waveguide technology. LiNbO3 has been long
regarded as the most attractive material for electrooptic modulation for high-
performance optical communication systems. However, the weakly confined LiNbO3
waveguides formed by diffusion or implantation of dopants do not lend themselves
to high-level chip integration. The goal of this proposal is to merge two
complementary photonic technologies (i.e., silicon and LiNbO3 photonics) and
make a hybrid platform that offers the advantages of both technologies, while it
avoids their respective disadvantages. Based on the technology, LiNbO3-on-Si
waveguides, microring resonators and electrooptic modulators (Mach-Zehnder
interferometer and microresonator types) will be commercialized. The Mach-
Zehnder devices are expected to operate at voltages several times less than
commercial devices and several times more compact.