* 1416663
* Ocean Acidification:  Collaborative Research:  The response of calcareous nannoplankton to ocean acidification during the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Elizabeth Hajek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2020
* USD 747,063.00

One of the most significant threats for marine organisms is acidification as a
result of unabated anthropogenic CO2 emission. On a global scale, acidification
has the potential to impact biota that make their shells out of the minerals
aragonite and calcite, that have a hard time forming shells in low pH waters.
One such group, the calcareous nannoplankton (haptophyte algae including
coccolithophores that build shells of the mineral calcite), are a vital part of
the open-ocean food chain. Laboratory experiments suggest that coccolithophores
can adapt to more acidic conditions, but whether the group can adapt in the
natural environment is uncertain. The geological record contains a series of
natural experiments that allow us to address the biological response of
nannoplankton to greenhouse gas perturbations. The Paleocene-Eocene thermal
maximum (PETM), a ~200,000 year long transient warming event 56 million years
ago, is likely the best ancient model for the impact of massive greenhouse gas
on marine ecosystems. Studies of nannoplankton from deep-sea sites show new taxa
during the PETM including an increase in malformed morphotypes that could
signify adaptation to lower calcite saturation. Moreover, geochemical evidence
suggests a similar magnitude pH decline during the initial stages of the event
as projected to occur in the 21st century. The insight gained from this study
will complement modern experimental and ecological studies, allowing mapping of
the impact of progressive carbonate undersaturation on the ancestors of modern
nannoplankton through space and time. In addition to better understanding the
long-term consequences of ocean acidification, broader impacts include training
of students at the graduate and undergraduate level, support of a postdoctoral
researcher, and outreach to K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the
information on the PETM derives from the study of cores drilled in the deep sea.
However, as the deep ocean also acidified during the event, the key early stage
of the PETM and likely when the maximum surface ocean acidification took place,
calcium carbonate has been dissolved in most deep-sea locations. Thus to study
the full impact of ocean acidification on nannoplankton, this research focuses
on nannoplankton contained within sedimentary sections deposited at continental
shelf water depths. A superb opportunity to explore the impact of ocean
acidification on PETM plankton exists in cores from the shelf on the Atlantic
Coastal Plain where some of the shallowest and most expanded records of the
event are found. These core sections offer high temporal resolution and preserve
a high-fidelity record of the early part of the PETM. This project will use new
and existing cores from Maryland and New Jersey to study the development and
impact of acidification on the coastal ocean over millennial time scales. The
goal is to address the following hypotheses: (1) Surface ocean carbonate
saturation reached a minimum within the first twenty thousand years of the PETM
then slowly recovered; (2) The response of nannoplankton to surface
acidification was systematic with existing species tolerant of low saturation
increasing in abundance followed by the evolution of new species and
morphotypes; and (3) Eutrophication in the coastal ocean amplified the impact of
acidification locally and played a critical role in drawing down CO2 during the
early stages of the PETM. These hypotheses will be addressed using closely
integrated: (a) nannoplankton assemblage studies to determine how species
composition and morphology changed; (b) a suite of inorganic and organic proxies
to elucidate the nature of environmental changes and particularly to unravel
acidification from temperature signals; and (c) models to simulate the temporal
variability of pH, saturation state and eutrophication on the shelf.