* 1416220
* SBIR Phase I:  Wearable sensor devices to measure and improve sleep quality at home
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Madhvi Upender, Awarables, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,028.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase self-awareness, promote health
literacy, improve patient-physician communication, and reduce the cost of
healthcare. The annual individual and societal costs of sleep loss and sleep
disorders are estimated to be in billions of dollars in both direct and indirect
costs related to co-morbid medical conditions, hospitalization, accidents, and
productivity loss. Wearable, wireless systems are said to be a revolutionary
technology for health and wellness management. While this likely exaggerates
their impact, we believe that the application of these technologies to specific
groups, such as children with ADHD or autism spectrum disorder, will help those
individuals and their families address a critical problem in their lives. By
extension, one can foresee applications of the technologies to help the elderly
and people with depression, schizophrenia, addiction and other mental and
physical disorders.

The proposed project addresses the need for safe, effective measures for
assessing and understanding sleep in the home and promoting sleep literacy among
consumers. We propose to provide technology, systems, and support for user-
centered sleep healthcare. The first component will focus on Data acquisition
(DAQ) using low cost, unobtrusive wearable sensor technology to monitor
activity, sound (snoring and speech), heart rate (heart rate variability),
respiration rate, pulse transit time, temperature, etc. over 24 hour periods or
longer. The DAQ methods will employ mobile technology to support their use at
home. The second component will incorporate signal processing and feature
extraction tools that employ nonlinear, complex systems analysis to harvest
clinically relevant sleep quality, quantity, and health information from
variables such as sleep stage transitions and heart rate variability. In
addition, development of neurocognitive tests, including reaction time tests
similar to psychomotor vigilance tests (PVT), will evaluate the impact of sleep
quality and quantity on cognitive performance. These devices and tools will be
designed for use by consumers (and clinicians) to assess the effectiveness of
treatment systems such as Cognitive Behavior Therapies (CBT) intended to improve
sleep