* 1416509
* IBSS: Spatiotemporal Modeling of Human Dynamics Across Social Media and Social Networks
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Brian Spitzberg, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/29/2020
* USD 999,887.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine human dynamics across
social media and social networks and will focus on the modeling of information
diffusion over both time and space. It also will study the connection between
online activities and real world human behaviors. Because the research team will
employ a broad range of different research approaches to study the processes
through which people's behavior is reflected in electronic media, the project
will yield new communication theories, knowledge-discovery tools, and
computational models. It will facilitate the convergence of information and
insights across a diverse set of fields, including spatial science, social
media, communication, computer science, and social behavioral analysis. The
project also will facilitate the adoption of computational applications and
modeling approaches in behavioral and social science research. The investigators
will conduct tests of two different scenarios (public response to disaster
warnings and alerts and referendums of controversial social topics at state and
national levels) to refine a new theory about communication dealing with memes,
or reproducible messages. One product of the project will be a prototype social
media outreach platform designed and tested in coordination with the city of San
Diego's Office of Emergency Services. The prototype will facilitate rapid
dissemination of official alerts and warnings notifications during disaster
events via multiple social media channels to targeted populations. The platform
will be designed to identify and recruit 1,000 social media volunteers based on
their social network influence factors, thereby enabling government agencies to
communicate more effectively to the public and to be better prepared for both
natural disasters and human-related crises. The project also will provide
research and educational opportunities for students in multiple disciplines,
including geography, linguistics, computer science, social science, and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People move in time and space, and while
they do so, they communicate. With modern communication technologies, they leave
traces of and refer to their behavior while they engage in everyday behavior.
These informational echoes have enormous potential to provide insights into
people's behavior. The research team will analyze the diffusion patterns of
human messages, activities, and communications using computational methods, such
as social network analysis, geographic information systems, and machine-
learning, as well as traditional social scientific research methods, such as
qualitative analysis, inferential statistics, and behavior analysis. The
investigators will build an interdisciplinary research framework for studying
human dynamics and information diffusion from a spatiotemporal modeling
perspective. They will validate and improve the Multilevel Model of Meme
Diffusion (M3D) communication theory for online human communications across
social media and social networks. They will analyze the dynamic changes of
spatiotemporal patterns with two scenarios of human dynamics (disaster
warnings/alerts and referendum/propositions of controversial social topics)
using computational predictive methods and agent-based modeling (ABM)
approaches. They also will develop effective and accessible data processing,
visualization, and analytical tools for social scientists to study human
dynamics and information diffusion by combining high-performance computing, Web-
based geographic information system tools, agent-based modeling, and open-source
software. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.