* 1416355
* SBIR Phase I:  Transparent Antenna Technology for Next Generation Wireless Consumer Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Yakup Bayram, PaneraTech Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2015
* USD 173,325.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it offers low
cost, and compact&lt;br/&gt;tablet/mobile devices with better wireless
connectivity and increased battery life. Lower cost of these&lt;br/&gt;devices
will enable their widespread use in the society and enable use of broadband
services with higher&lt;br/&gt;efficiency and better connectivity. The
transparent antenna technology offers a platform on which&lt;br/&gt;several
other applications can be built. For instance, compact health monitoring sensors
can be&lt;br/&gt;integrated with wireless capability by integrating antennas on
their displays. This technology also will&lt;br/&gt;also improve wireless
capability of wearables as they have very limited real estate for
antennas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop transparent antenna&lt;br/&gt;technology for
wireless consumer devices. This SBIR project will advance our understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;interactions between touch sensor and transparent antennas and
enable development of multifunctional&lt;br/&gt;touch sensors that not only
operates as a touch sensor but also a transparent antenna as&lt;br/&gt;well. A
very comprehensive research approach will be undertaken in Phase I. Namely, in
addition to&lt;br/&gt;evaluating performance of the antenna technology in the
presence of touch sensor, performance of&lt;br/&gt;touch sensor in the presence
of transparent antennas will also be characterized to ensure that
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed multi?]functional touch sensors meet the requirements of
wireless consumer devices such as&lt;br/&gt;tablets and mobile phones.