* 1416116
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Mechanistic studies of oxygen electrocatalysis by nanoelecrochemical techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Michael Mirkin, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2018
* USD 261,000.00

In this International Collaboration in Chemistry project supported by the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael Mirkin
and his research team at the City University of New York, Queens College is
collaborating with Prof. Christian Amatore and his group at the Ecole Normale
Superieure, Paris, on molecular mechanistic studies of the electrochemical
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The ORR process is central to many
technological systems (e.g., fuel cells, lithium and sodium batteries,
catalysis) as well as biological processes, including oxidation of food and drug
molecules in liver, ageing, and numerous diseases. Despite extensive research on
the ORR during several decades, basic questions about its molecular mechanism
remain open. Professor Mirkin is developing new experimental and computational
methods to study the ORR with the aim of advancing our understanding of these
fundamentally interesting and practically important electrocatalytic reactions.

Nanoelectrochemical techniques, including scanning electrochemical microscopy
and voltammetry at the nanopipette-supported interface between two immiscible
liquids are used for the mechanistic analysis of the ORR. Very fast mass-
transfer, high sensitivity and selectivity of these techniques enable the
detection and quantification of short-lived ionic species produced in the course
of the ORR, such as superoxide. The kinetics of the intermediate formation and
consumption are analyzed with the help of the recently developed KISSA-2D
simulation package. The anticipated results have significant implications for
fuel cells, other alternative energy systems, and sensors. The proposed
activities enhance the infrastructure for research and education at the City
University of New York, Queens College by stimulating the development of new
instrumentation. The established international collaboration provides additional
training opportunities for students in both research groups and exposes them to
a wide range of experimental and computational approaches. The proposed
activities provide research opportunities to high school students and
undergraduate students.