* 1416589
* SBIR Phase I:  A Data Aggregation and Mining Platform for Materials Research and Development
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Gregory Mulholland, Citrine Informatics
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to create a data-
driven electronic infrastructure for rapidly developing new advanced materials.
Advanced materials are crucial to a $100 billion cross-section of the American
economy, from clean energy (catalysts, batteries, solar cells), to aerospace
&amp; defense (heat shields, armor), to automotive (lightweight alloys), to
electronics (semiconductors, LEDs). Unfortunately, inventing better materials is
very challenging?the process can take 10-20 years?and a key part of the problem
is a lack of consolidated, searchable, analytics-friendly materials databases
that can inform research efforts. This project will build an advanced database
of catalyst materials and their properties, which will allow for the use of the
same data-driven strategy to accelerate the pace of innovation in many other
materials applications. This project can immediately strengthen the United
States? competitive position in research and manufacturing in the $14 billion
global catalyst market, and position the nation for a future information
technology advantage in other materials-related
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses a critical technical problem plaguing the materials
industry at large: a lack of comprehensive databases of materials and their
properties. Without access to such data, the materials industry cannot
systematically exploit trends in those data to invent next-generation materials.
This particular project focuses on catalyst materials, but will be readily
extensible to other areas of materials development in the future. Cost-
effectively collecting, storing, and searching data on tens of thousands of
materials is a major technical challenge, which this project plans to address by
developing cutting-edge text mining algorithms and database infrastructure. Such
technologies, if successful, will enable rapid harvesting and aggregation of
materials data from text, tables, and smaller databases. These technologies
could be readily applied to build out materials property databases in many other
areas beyond catalysis, and thereby fuel the materials industry with an enormous
infusion of data.