* 1416675
* The 2015 INFORMS Computing Society Conference NSF Student Poster Session; Richmond, Virginia; January 11-13, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* James Brooks, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 07/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

The INFORMS Computing Society NSF Student Poster Session is proposed to be held
at the 2015 INFORMS Computing Society (ICS) Conference, which would be the first
student poster session for the regularly-held ICS conference. This poster
session is set up to encourage graduate students to interact with faculty,
industry and fellow students by giving a technical poster presentation on a
research project useful to operations research computing and related areas. The
student poster session encourages students to engage in high quality, sound, and
original research, strengthen their comprehension of research and research
methods, and provide an opportunity for students to develop their effective
writing and communication skills for the dissemination of research information,
and become creative and self-reliant lifelong consumers of the knowledge. As
such, the students will acquire necessary professional development skills to
become an integral part of the operations research and computing profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experience gained through the professional
development, the presentation of research, and the interaction with senior
professionals in the field will positively affect the students' persistence to
obtain a doctoral degree and practice in related fields. The abstracts of
accepted posters together with the abstracts for other presentations will be
published on the conference website. Students will also have the option to
submit a paper to be reviewed for inclusions in the conference proceedings. If
successful, the efforts supported by this grant will increase the number and
diversity of operations research and computing professionals. The interaction of
the students with known professionals in the field along with other students
will assist in developing a network of colleagues to provide guidance to advance
their careers.