* 1416949
* STTR Phase I:  A platform for biological information integration and knowledge discovery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jinfeng Zhang, INSILICOM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to help researchers to identify novel
scientific hypotheses and make discoveries by harnessing the power of big data
being generated in biological and biomedical fields. It is well known that big
data have significant commercial potential, but also present some new
challenges. For example, unstructured information in scientific publications
needs to be converted to a structured form. This task is important for
organizing existing scientific discoveries in a structured format for downstream
applications. In addition, heterogeneous, large volume biological information
needs to be integrated into a data structure effective for knowledge discovery.
For example, integrating disease-protein relationships and protein-small
molecule relationships will likely help us to identify small molecule drugs for
treating diseases. Integrating the research findings from different sources is
essential for understanding the big picture of biological systems. An effective
integration will open the doors to important applications with commercial
potential, such as drug repurposing and drug side effect
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop three commercial
products. The first product is a software tool for bio-entity relationship
extraction based on a novel, proprietary method for extracting bio-entity
relationships from unstructured texts. The second product is a commercial
database for context-specific molecular interaction information based on the
integrated molecular interaction database (IMID) developed previously. IMID
integrates multiple types of bio-entity relationships with versatile query
functions. A commercial version of IMID will be built using updated information
with additional functionalities. The third product is a platform for biological
information integration and data mining with applications in drug repurposing
and drug side effect prediction. Integrated bio-entity network (IBN) is a novel
data structure for biological information integration and data mining. It offers
some unique advantages compared to existing systems/approaches. Knowledge
discovery tools based on IBN will facilitate biologists to search direct and
indirect bio-entity relationships effectively. Two drug related data mining
applications will be built: Drug repurposing search and drug side effect
prediction, which utilize the unique advantage of IBN in identification of
dysregulated pathways and subnetworks between two biological conditions.