* 1416444
* SBIR Phase I: Collaborative Subsea Manipulation Interface
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Fredrik Ryden, BluHaptics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes technological
advancement for a wide range of telerobotic applications including and
manipulation tasks in hazardous or remote environments, search and rescue,
remotely operated construction and maintenance, mining, bomb disposal, munitions
remediation. This project will result in new understanding into how spatial
awareness and telepresence can improve performance in human-in-the-loop
teleoperation. Improving the communication of intent between the expert of the
remote task and the expert of operating the telerobotic equipment will benefit
industries where non-intuitive tasks are to be executed in a safe and efficient
fashion. Modern demands are pushing current systems beyond their limits.
Development of the tools of this project will make a wide range of telerobotic
tasks achievable with greater efficiency, safety and cost
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project develops a collaborative interface for subsea
manipulation tasks. Current methods for teleoperation in unstructured and
dynamic environments are inadequate for collaborative tasks where precision is
required. This is often the case in subsea infrastructure development,
maintenance, and repair. Highly skilled operators are called on to execute
complex manipulation tasks that require high spatial accuracy and time-
efficiency. As demand for this work increases, the tolerance of both customers
and regulators for mistakes that result in polluting damage is, in fact,
decreasing. The major innovation in this work is the combination of the skill
and experience of the operator with the accuracy and repeatability of an
automated robotic system. This is achieved by augmenting the telerobotic control
architecture with real-time force feedback to the operator?s hands, to guide the
operator in robot tasks. Phase I will demonstrate feasibility for an advanced
telerobotic system allowing pilots and supervisors to collaboratively execute a
complex subsea manipulation task. This includes validation of
operator/supervisor collaboration using head-mounted display and fusion of
multiple sensor types. Phase II will demonstrate that the method improves
operational performance in an actual subsea setting.