* 1416885
* IBSS: The Evolution of Culture and Institutions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Joseph Henrich, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 841,692.00

This interdisciplinary research project will provide new insights regarding the
long-term impacts that formal institutions have on cultural traits. The project
will consist of a series of behavioral experiments designed to examine the
tendencies of individuals to follow vs. deviate from established rules within
the historical context of societal institutional structure. The project will
help address a fundamental question about individual human behavior and the
evolution of societies by providing evidence about the impact of formal laws and
institutions on the values and beliefs of individuals. Project findings will
enhance knowledge of how internal norms respond to external incentives that are
shaped by laws and institutions. Whether formal laws and institutions crowd out
or reinforce the internal norms of individuals will have significant importance
for ascertaining how human beings respond to policies, laws, and institutions.
The project therefore will generate insights relevant to policy makers and
others seeking to enhance collective societal effectiveness while recognizing
the highly variable nature of individual action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will conduct a set of behavioral experiments involving different
sets of individuals, some of whom reside in a region that historically was part
of a political entity that included executive councils, a bureaucracy, an
elaborate court system that featured trial by jury, a police force, a military,
a system of taxation, and extensive public goods provision. Comparable tests
will be conducted on individuals from nearby areas whose villages lacked these
institutional frameworks. The behavioral experiments will measure the proclivity
to participants to cheat rather than follow established rules. In the
experiments, participants will face a trade-off between following the rules of
the game and receiving less money vs. cheating and receiving more money. The
games will be created so that cheating by a single individual can neither be
discovered nor sanctioned (and this fact will be known by participants), but by
analyzing the actions of larger groups of individuals, it will be possible
statistically to detect cheating. The experiments will be conducted in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, where some of the participants in the experiments
reside in an area once known as the Kuba Kingdom, which was formed in the early
17th century and persisted to some degree until European contact early in the
20th century. Other participants come from nearby areas that were not subject to
state-related institutional structures over the time period when the Kuba
Kingdom functioned. Preliminary research identified a tendency for individuals
whose ancestors resided in more formally structured institution environment to
cheat rather than follow rules, actions consistent with the notion that formal
institutions can crowd out internal norms. This project will build on the
earlier pilot study by significantly increasing the sample size, addressing
issues of recent migration to larger cities by sampling individuals from other
villages and cities, adding detailed historical data into the analysis, and
expanding the scope of cultural traits being examined. Although focusing on an
African case that provides a solid natural experiment-style research design, the
project will provide new insights that can be used to examine the relationships
between societal structures and the cultural traits and behaviors of individuals
across a broad range of settings, including many locales in the United States.
This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and
Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.