* 1416665
* Collaborative Research:   Ocean Acidification:  microbes as sentinels of adaptive responses to multiple stressors: contrasting estuarine and open ocean environments
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Dana Hunt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2019
* USD 798,452.00

Collaborative Research: Ocean Acidification: microbes as sentinels of adaptive
responses to multiple stressors: contrasting estuarine and open ocean
environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes in the oceans provide essential
ecosystem services including primary production (photosynthesis) and organic
matter turnover that sustain all higher marine organisms. It remains unclear how
marine microorganisms will adapt to the acidification of the oceans (i.e.,
decrease in seawater pH due to increased atmospheric CO2) and how much their
activities will be affected. It is also important to quantify how multiple
stressors related to ocean acidification (OA) such as higher temperatures
interact with increased acidity to represent the impact of multiple stressors on
marine microbial communities. Advancing our understanding of these issues is
essential in order to predict the consequences of OA on ocean life and
fisheries, identify areas of the ocean that might be more vulnerable to OA, and
propose modes of action to counteract potential adverse effects. This
collaborative project by Duke University and Georgia Institute of Technology
researchers will combine oceanographic and advanced molecular techniques to
characterize the adaptive responses of microbial communities to multiple
stressors associated with OA. In particular, microbial communities from
estuarine and coastal ecosystems as well as open ocean waters will be incubated
under conditions of increased acidity or temperature or both, and their
activities will be measured and quantified. By integrating multiple types of
data, this project will provide a predictive and mechanistic understanding of
microbial community responses and feedbacks to OA, including essential ecosystem
services. In addition to providing advanced training for undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral students, results from this research project will be translated
to broad public and K-12 education on OA through the development of an
interactive museum display and iPAD
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data from time-series observations
of a coastal temperate estuary shows that pH, temperature and other stressors
vary over multiple space and time scales, and this variability is relatively
higher than that observed in open ocean waters. Based on this evidence, the
guiding hypothesis of this work is that microbes in coastal ecosystems are
better adapted to ocean acidification as well as multiple stressors compared to
similar microbes from the open ocean. To quantify the adaptive genetic,
physiological and biogeochemical responses of microbes to OA, the team's
specific goals are to: (1) characterize complex natural microbial community
responses to multiple stressors using factorial mesocosm manipulations, (2)
assemble a detailed view of genomic and physiological (including
transcriptional) adaptations to OA at the single species level using cultured
model marine microbes (e.g. Prochlorococcus, Synechococcus, Vibrio) identified
as responsive to stressors in whole community mesocosm experiments, and (3)
assess the power of model microbial strains and mesocosm experiments to predict
microbial community responses to natural OA variability in a temporally dynamic,
temperate estuary and along a trophic/pH gradient from the Neuse-Pamlico Sound
to the Sargasso Sea. By comparing an estuarine ecosystem to its open ocean
counterpart, this study will assess the sensitivity of microbial structure and
function in response to ocean acidification.