* 1416366
* SBIR Phase I:  A Fleet-based Fault Detection System Based on Clustering Approach
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Edzel Lapira, PREDICTRONICS CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve efficiency and reduce
operating costs across a number of target industries. An innovative cluster-
based approach is proposed for analyzing the performance of groups of similar
machines and predicting maintenance requirements. Adopting this approach will
broaden the scope of existing equipment monitoring methods, increasing the
potential for capturing critical issues before they occur, thereby improving
safety and uptime while also reducing maintenance costs. Increased
competitiveness - especially in manufacturing - through increased uptime and
lower maintenance costs is critical to the viability of the nation's industries.
The broad applicability of this approach - which can be implemented in a wide
range of industries that utilize groups of similar machines or devices -
increases its potential for making real technological and economic impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to advance data-driven fault detection technology by leveraging
data streams obtained from a collection of similar machines to develop analytic
models for predicting performance and maintenance requirements. An advantage of
the proposed technology is that it is applicable to newly commissioned or
recently repaired equipment, for which historical data may be limited or non-
existent. A cluster-based approach is utilized to aggregate data from similar
machines operating under similar conditions, allowing the development of
accurate, localized health assessment models that will enable machine operators
to benchmark machine performance and optimally prioritize maintenance
activities. This project will primarily cover fault detection and maintenance,
but the proposed approach can evolve to other condition based monitoring tasks
such as performance prediction and fault diagnosis. A technology prototype will
be demonstrated with fleets of discrete equipment, such as industrial robots
used in automotive manufacturing. The approach can also be applied to equipment
containing a multiplicity of similar components.