* 1416837
* Ocean Acidification: Collaborative Research: Interactive effects of acidification, low dissolved oxygen and temperature on abalone population dynamics within the California Current
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* C. Brock Woodson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2018
* USD 184,914.00

Ocean acidification is increasingly recognized as a significant driver of change
in marine ecosystems. In particular, ecosystems in eastern boundary current
systems, including the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem (CCLME),
routinely experience upwelling driven low pH, low dissolved oxygen (DO) waters
in shallow near shore habitats, and these occurrences have been increasing in
magnitude and duration over the past decade. The goal of this project is to
study the consequences of ocean acidification and other climate-related changes
(dissolved oxygen(DO), temperature) in oceanographic conditions on near shore
marine communities over a large scale oceanographic gradient in the CCLME.
Understanding how the effects of ocean acidification combined with other
climate-related changes on individual marine organisms or life stages will
cascade to populations and the services they provide is a high priority for
science, management, and policy. By integrating the results of oceanographic
field measurements and laboratory experiments in a demographic and bio-economic
modeling framework, the present project will advance our understanding of the
role of oceanographic variability on the dynamics of marine populations and
fisheries. In particular, this research will provide key insights regarding the
interactive influences of simultaneous changes in pH, DO, and temperature on
nearshore populations and fisheries. By investigating the effects of multiple
stressors on coastal marine ecosystems, the project will allow us to better
anticipate possible ecological and fishery impacts of increasing frequency
and/or intensity of low pH and low DO events. A deeper understanding of the
linkages among ocean acidification, coastal oceanographic processes and the
health of nearshore marine ecosystems in the CCLME will inform adaptation
strategies for future ocean conditions. The project will also train high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and early-career fellows in basic and
applied research on ocean acidification.

The research program will implement a novel individual- to population-level
approach to specifically investigate how the direct effects of ocean
acidification, alone or in combination with low DO and temperature, on two model
species of great ecological and commercial relevance, red and pink abalone, will
manifest at the population level, and ultimately, the services these species
provide to humans. Researchers will: 1) measure and characterize the temporal
variability of pH, DO and temperature in nearshore abalone habitat in Monterey
Bay, Central California, and Isla Natividad, Mexico, particularly in relation to
the duration and intensity of extreme low pH, low DO events, under alternative
scenarios of future climate change, 2) conduct laboratory experiments to
investigate the effects of low pH, low DO conditions on the reproductive
success, growth, calcification, and survival of juvenile red and pink abalone,
and 3) develop demographic and bio-economic models to estimate the impacts of
environmental and local anthropogenic stressors on the resilience of abalone
populations and to assess what management and conservation strategies, including
the implementation of networks of marine reserves, may contribute to buffering
the negative effects of increased frequency and/or intensity of low pH and low
DO events expected under near-future climate scenarios.