* 1416860
* IBSS: Multi-Scale Processes Affecting Spatial Population Distributions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Deborah Balk, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the different demographic,
socioeconomic, and geographic factors and processes that influence population
levels and distributions at different scales ranging from local to national. The
investigators will develop a new, multi-scale modeling framework to assess the
relative importance of these factors and processes and increase knowledge
regarding how and why the spatial distribution of the human population changes
over time. Project results will help improve projections of possible future
population change, and they will enhance theories and methods in demography,
geography, economics, and sociology as well as in topically focused realms, such
as disaster preparedness and environmental change. Project findings will be
disseminated broadly through major interdisciplinary and disciplinary journals,
while and the methods used to generate them will be made available from long-
term publicly accessible repositories.

Understanding how and why the spatial distribution of the human population
changes over time, both across large geographic regions and at the local scale,
is fundamental to a variety of scholarly and policy arenas, including migration,
economic development, environmental change, and the spread of infectious
disease. A significant obstacle to a holistic understanding of spatial
population distribution and change is that the determinants of change act at a
range of scales. These scale-dependent determinants interact with one another,
complicating both theory and modeling efforts. This research project aims to
improve the understanding of the dynamics of spatial population change by
bridging geographic scales and scientific disciplines to develop a novel
explanatory framework. The investigators will bring together theoretical
perspectives from demography, geography, and economics, and they will use those
perspectives in the conduct of a multi-scale analysis of spatial population
distribution and its determinants in the U.S., Mexico, and India. These sites
have been chosen to represent a range of socioeconomic conditions and behaviors
as well as a range of data quality and availability. The investigators will
assess how spatial population outcomes result from an interrelated set of
influences at the national, aggregate urban/rural, city, and local levels, and
they will assess how the relative importance of these influences varies across
countries at different levels of economic development and within countries by
socio-economic conditions, demographic behaviors, and geographic
characteristics. Hypotheses will be tested using several decades of spatial
population data that will be merged with other economic and demographic and
geophysical data in a spatially explicit, quantitative framework. This project
is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition.