* 1416037
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial production of renewable monoethylene glycol
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Brian Pereira, ARTeKCO
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project would be supplanting the
traditional, fossil fuel-based chemical process for monoethylene glycol (MEG)
production with a novel, sustainable bioprocess. MEG is a commodity chemical
produced in large quantities and has primary application as one of the
precursors for poly(ethylene terephthalate), a polymer that is commonplace in
the form of polyester fabric and plastic beverage bottles. Presently, MEG is
mainly derived from fossil fuels, limited resources that are responsible for the
significant greenhouse gas emissions and carbon footprint associated with MEG
production. Therefore, utilizing sustainable source materials has a positive
effect by reducing the environmental impact. This project proposes a new
technology in which plant-derived sugars are converted into MEG in a single-step
bioprocess; this technology if successful, would dramatically reduce the carbon
footprint of MEG. Furthermore, the bioprocess should be cost-competitive with a
significantly less capital investment.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is for the development
of a single-step bioprocess for the conversion of plant-derived sugars into MEG.
The bioprocess will consist of fermentation in which a microbial strain
metabolizes sugars and yields MEG as the product. Because MEG is not a typical
fermentation product, the Phase I research will be to engineer a microbial
strain toward this goal. The first step is to design one or more series of
biochemical reactions that result in MEG starting from sugars. The design
consists of identifying enzymes that carry out the appropriate reactions and
identifying reactions that may result in other products. The next step is to
engineer the designed metabolic pathway into the host microbe. For this, the
microbe is genetically modified through molecular biological techniques such
that it contains the necessary enzymes and lacks those that lead to side-
products. The microbe is tested, and after the metabolic pathway has been
demonstrated, the system will require optimization. The optimization will
comprise of further genetic modification and/or adjustment of fermentation
conditions. It is anticipated that the Phase I research will prove out the
company's uniquely designed metabolic pathways and demonstrate feasibility on a
microbial fermentation approach for renewable MEG production.