* 1416490
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamically Assessing Network Security Policy Compliance with NP-Live
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Robin Berthier, Network Perception, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project results from its potential to significantly
strengthen the ability of network operators and security administrators to
implement the correct set of rules to keep critical assets out of reach of cyber
adversaries. The power grid has been said to be the most important engineering
achievement of humankind. Modern civilization depends on electricity at such an
intrinsic level that we cannot imagine a world without it. In fact, disruptions
of power infrastructures quickly lead to chaotic situations in which human lives
are at risk. Now that power grid control centers are relying on IT
infrastructures, it has become of the utmost importance to ensure the resiliency
of systems and networks through methodical IT security protection, monitoring,
and response. Through automated continuous verification technologies, this
project has a direct impact on the capabilities of our nation to improve its
resiliency. The benefits to the power industry, to computer science security,
and for society at large are realized through a technological advance that will
improve the security of our most important resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project plans to develop a
constructive approach to providing network security. Cyber security tools are
often driven by the necessity to respond to market demand without having the
time and resources to develop the proper formalisms and algorithms to solve
long-term issues. The innovation proposed here is uniquely positioned to change
this paradigm thanks to having roots in both a fundamental academic background
and an extensive collaboration with industry partners. Consequently, this
project responds to critical customer needs while providing innovations in
science, technology, and engineering of critical infrastructure security. The
approach the company is taking to compliance assessment has been evaluated in
the field and provides a basis for new research leading to theoretically sound
solutions to network security modeling, and further development of innovative
and provably correct algorithms and tools for accurate and scalable cyber
security assessment under real industry constraints.