* 1416265
* SBIR Phase I:  Metal Matrix Composite Diamond Blades
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Josh Loukus, REL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
metal matrix composite concrete cutting diamond blade. This project has the
potential to address a distinct need in a $2 billion domestic market. The
technology for cutting concrete hasn't changed in over 20 years and the industry
continues to deal with the same issues: blade overheat and warping, slow cutting
speeds, multiple blade compositions, loud cutting and blade "sing", and short
blade life. The proposed technology addresses each of these issues; it will be
commercialized by working with industry partners to insure a faster transition
of developed technology from lab concept to industrial application. These
partnerships will result in a product line that will permit new domestic
manufacturing operations (a majority of current blades are imported) and a
reduced environmental impact (harmful byproducts are a result of today's blade
manufacturing processes). The 200% increase in blade life and faster cutting
operations enabled by this technology will reduce overall operating costs for
users. Finally, the aluminum-diamond metal matrix composite (MMC) technology to
be utilized will find utility in additional applications, such as stone
polishing, stone quarries, and wear and thermal management applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed aluminum MMC diamond blade will have
significantly better thermal properties and longer life span compared to
conventional blades. Conventional concrete blades have diamond particles
embedded in segments within an iron (Fe)-cobalt (Co) matrix. The Fe-Co matrix
hardness has to be changed for different concrete aggregate to enable effective
cutting. When mismatched, the blade will overheat and warp, becoming unusable.
The proposed diamond MMC blade material has high thermal conductivity that
rapidly draws the heat from the cutting zone, thereby avoiding these issues,
while increasing the life of the blade. The cast MMC blade will include MMC
diamond-containing segments attached to an MMC hub which can be tailored for
stiffness, noise mitigation, and optimized thermal properties. The Phase I
project will focus on design and development including 1) an optimized segment
composition, 2) geometry of the segments and the hub, and 3) an MMC casting
process optimized for blade efficiency and life. Finally, field testing will be
conducted to verify and optimize blade performance. Process scale-up will follow
to meet specific product requirements as required by end users of the
technology.