* 1417585
* Identifying an Effective and Scalable Model of Lesson Study
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Motoko Akiba, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2018
* USD 449,910.00

This project investigates the variation in teachers' practice of lesson study to
identify effective and scalable design features of lesson study associated with
student mathematics achievement growth in Florida. Lesson study is a teacher
professional development model in which a group of teachers works
collaboratively to plan a lesson, observe the lesson in a classroom with
students, and analyze and discuss the student work and understanding in response
to the lesson. Florida is the first state to promote lesson study as a statewide
professional development model for implementing the Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics and improving instruction and student achievement. The original
lesson study model imported from Japan poses a challenge for implementation and
scalability in the United States, and there is emerging evidence that
modifications have been made to make it feasible within the constraints of
teachers' work schedules and school structures. Thus, there is an urgent need to
investigate the variation in lesson study practice and how modified design
features of mathematics lesson study are associated with improvement of student
mathematics achievement. The research team will conduct a statewide survey of
approximately 1,000 teachers in grades 3-8 who are practicing mathematics lesson
study during the 2015-2016 academic year. They will examine variations in four
design features of lesson study (structure, facilitator, knowledge resources for
lesson planning, and research lesson and discussion) and their associated
organizational supports. They will examine the relationships between these
design features and the original lesson study model, teacher learning, and
students' mathematics achievement growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
designed to advance the scholarship and practice of lesson study by: (1)
identifying an effective and scalable model of mathematics lesson study with
specific design features that are associated with positive teacher learning
experience and improved student mathematics achievement; (2) advancing practical
knowledge on how this effective and scalable model of mathematics lesson study
can be practiced, based on in-depth case studies of lesson study groups; and (3)
contributing to teacher learning principles that can be applied to various
professional development programs in mathematics. The project will disseminate
evidence regarding the characteristics of an effective and scalable mathematics
lesson study model to state and district-level facilitators across the country.
The project will also develop a Florida Lesson Study Network (FLSN) to share
resources and facilitate communications regarding lesson study practice.