* 1417186
* Measuring and modeling postseismic deformation processes of Andaman Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* John Puchakayala, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2016
* USD 108,725.00

Nearly a decade after the great (Mw 9.3) Sumatra-Andaman earthquake, the
understanding of the post-event processes responsible for relaxation of the co-
seismic stress change still remains incomplete. Modeling of early Andaman
Islands GPS displacements indicated near-field motions were dominated by slip
down-dip of the rupture, but various researchers ascribe elements of relaxation
to dominantly poroelastic, dominantly viscoelastic and dominantly fault slip
processes, depending primarily on their measurement sampling and the modeling
tools used. Intriguingly, uplift and right-lateral horizontal shear deformation,
observed in the Andaman data, is exactly opposite the predictions of radially-
symmetric viscoelastic relaxation models. We hypothesized then that, either
radially-symmetric models neglect heterogeneities in flow properties that are
important to understanding the earthquake cycle, or transient slip still
dominates the near-field signals years after the event. Modeling of GPS
displacements suggests that the twin (M8.6 and M8.2) ruptures of 2012 intra-
plate oceanic earthquakes could have possibly accelerated the ongoing slow slip,
along the lower portion of the thrust fault beneath the Islands with a month
long slip of 4-10 cm. Thus, the continuing postseismic deformation excited by
the December 2004 Sumatra-Andaman (Mw = 9.2) co-seismic stress change and
interfered by 2012 M8.6 and M8.2 twin earthquake, is the primary objective of
this continued work. There is also the need for better models for the near field
deformation along the Andaman Islands. Currently there are models that either
explain the far field deformation or near field deformation but not both
combined.

Measurements will continue at five continuous and twelve campaign stations in
the Andaman Islands. UNAVCO facility has loaned GPS receivers that are operating
in this region. Data from these sites along with surrounding IGS sites will be
processed using GAMIT/GLOBK software. PYLITH finite element software will be
used to model the post seismic deformation combining both after slip and
viscoelastic relaxation due to 2004 co-seismic change and that of 2012 Sumatra
twin earthquakes. Data collected will be archived at the UNAVCO facility and is
open for all. This endeavor is in collaboration with Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Advanced Scientific Research Bangalore, India. In the coming year we will
initiate the processes to hand over the complete technology transfer to this
institute in main land India and to locals in the Andaman Islands to maintain
the network of GPS stations. This includes training of the locals and those in
JNCASR in Bangalore.