* 1417061
* STTR Phase I:  Handheld Open Source Photometer as enabling tool for Enzyme-based analytical chemistry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Wilbur Campbell, Nitrate Elimination Company, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to make chemistry
more accessible by developing a rugged, compact, LED-based photometer that
communicates data to other devices via Bluetooth. The photometer and data
processing functions will be designed to work with the company?s simplified test
kits for Green Analytical Chemistry. The photometer will be sold at just above
cost, estimated at $200, because it enhances the utility and value of company?s
easy to use test kits. The business model is inkjet printer (the photometer),
with test kits as the cartridges. The product development focuses on simplified
test kits based on recombinant enzymes and no hazardous reagents. These kits
enable unskilled operators to obtain actionable data. The initial target market
is the Technical Service Providers who advise agricultural producers on
fertilizer application decisions, giving them a new value-added service to
offer. This project will produce a tool for enabling ?citizen science?.
Technical tools in the hands of many people can benefit scientific understanding
and stewardship of the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project integrates recombinant
protein technology with advances in LED-based photonics and the power of
portable computational devices. The company was founded in 1993 to commercialize
its founder?s basic research into enzyme structure and function, concentrating
on the plant enzyme Nitrate Reductase (NaR). It now develops and manufactures
recombinant enzyme reagents and test kits for green analytical chemistry,
replacing heavy metals and concentrated acids with environmentally benign
proteins. The company?s AtNaR is now a US EPA alternative standard method for
nitrate analysis. These simplified test kits are designed for onsite use by
unskilled users. The new enzyme-based kit for measuring phosphate content in
soils yields results in the UV (260 nm) and requires a photometer, but there is
no suitable device on the market (assay volume is one milliliter). The customers
in the agriculture sector need new technology for soil testing to optimize
fertilizer applications, decrease wasting and damaging runoff while maintaining
high yields. They need data that that is compatible with commercial agriculture
software packages, including GPS location and sample identification. The
photometer will read two wavelengths, 540nm for nitrate and 260nm for phosphate,
send results in the users? preferred measurement unit.