* 1417103
* GOALI: Application of Wave Gradiometry to Exploration Seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Charles Langston, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 64,971.00

The search for energy resources is primarily based on the use of seismic waves
that allow geophysicists to image geological structures in the subsurface of the
Earth. Seismic waves for these imaging experiments are usually created through
detonation of small explosions or use of large truck-mounted vibrators that
propagate waves into the Earth where they reflect and scatter from faults,
geological strata, and hydrocarbon reservoirs. Research in this project is
centered about the application of a new mathematical method to analyze seismic
wave data collected from arrays of hundreds of seismic instruments that give a
high-fidelity recording of the seismic wave over the Earth's surface. This
method, called "wave gradiometry", is able to quantify how a seismic wave
propagates in space and in time in such a way that the resulting inferred wave
characteristics can be related more directly to the geological structure between
the seismic source and recording array of instruments. This approach has not
been tried before because appropriate datasets have not been available until
now. Global Geophysical Services has deployed an experimental seismic array over
a gas prospect in eastern Ohio that was designed to collect data that can be
analyzed with wave gradiometry. We will be researching the use of this new
technique on the field dataset to discover new seismic processing methods that
will improve the imaging of Earth structure for resource development and
scientific studies of the crust.

Data from a dense, 2D array consisting of 400 elements 30m apart with 3 vertical
sensors at each element have been collected by Global Geophysical Services
(Global) in conjunction with a 3D seismic reflection experiment in eastern Ohio.
Approximately 7600 2-lb dynamite shots and auxiliary fill-in vibroseis signals
were recorded by this array resulting in a ~1Tbyte dataset. These unique data
were collected in consultation with investigators at the University of Memphis
to test new seismic processing techniques centered on wave gradiometry. The
dense, redundant array element spacing will allow computation of wave spatial
gradients that, when combined with the original wave field, will yield wave
attributes of slowness, azimuth, geometrical spreading change, and radiation
pattern change for the wave field as a function of time over the area of the
array. Small-scale gradiometers have been previously deployed at the University
with off-the-shelf geophones to demonstrate feasibility of larger scale
experiments such as this one. We will investigate the use of wave gradiometry in
producing tomographic maps of wave attributes that will be used to estimate
near-surface velocity structure to compute statics corrections from ground roll,
investigate the nature and signature of shallow mined out voids under part of
the array, and investigate wave characteristics of near-vertical reflections
that could be used in stacking, migration, or AVO. Collecting data over spatial
scales of a fraction of a seismic wavelength represents fertile new terrain in
examining how stable the seismic wave field is with position. We will be
developing processing techniques in computing wave spatial gradients and
inverting tomographic maps of diverse wave attributes from particular seismic
waves to determine seismic velocity structures or to examine particular aspects
of the structure as in AVO analysis. This work represents an initial exploration
of a unique dataset using a new paradigm of wave analysis that will very likely
result in new insights and knowledge of seismic wave propagation.