* 1417505
* Connecting Particle Physics with Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Savvas Koushiappas, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds part of the research activity of Professor Savvas Koushiappas
at Brown University. The main goal of this award is to unite theoretical studies
of the physics of dark matter with current and future experimental efforts. The
experimentally motivated theoretical projects use observations of high energy
photons and other energetic particles such as positrons and neutrinos (into
which dark matter might decay or annihilate) in order to tackle fundamental
questions about the nature of dark matter, the origin of astrophysical
backgrounds, the astrophysical effects of cosmology and most importantly the
interplay and connections among these different topics. The primary goal is the
interpretation of dark matter indirect detection search data in the context of
dark matter properties and the implications for accelerator studies. A secondary
goal is the understanding and improvement of systematic uncertainties that arise
from astrophysical processes and the cosmological context. The outcome of this
work will help understand the confidence at which theoretical dark matter
interpretations can be ruled out from null searches, and to establish the
confidence to which dark matter's physical properties can be measured in future
experimental efforts.

Any dark matter experimental technique is ultimately linked to the details of
the interplay between particle physics, astrophysics and cosmology. For example
direct detection experiments depend on the local density and velocity
distribution of dark matter, indirect detection experiments depend on the square
of the dark matter density along a line of sight, and each of these techniques
depends on the cross section of interactions and the mass of the dark matter
particle, both of which are probed in accelerator searches. It is therefore
imperative that theoretical interpretations of experimental results in the
context of particle physics must take into account this amalgamation of
information. This research will bridge the gap between these disciplines, making
the connection between astrophysics, cosmology and particle physics possible by
understanding the uncertainties and connections between different disciplines.
These goals will be achieved by sophisticated theoretical modeling, and new and
existing statistical and analysis tools. In addition, the broader impact
pertains to the synergy between indirect detection, direct detection and Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) searches, thus connecting the laboratory to the sky, a
necessary link that must be in place for any convincing dark matter
interpretation of any signal. Furthermore, graduate and undergraduate education
at the PI's institution will benefit from the exposure to cosmology, particle
physics and computing, as well as the development and implementation of new
computational and analysis tools. And finally, the proposed outreach activities
of the PI will allow the public and students within Providence to engage in
science-related activities.