* 1417229
* Investigation of the earth's mantle plumbing system at the global scale using an advanced seismic imaging approach.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2018
* USD 259,532.00

Improving the resolution of earth's mantle structure through seismic imaging is
important for our understanding of the deep dynamic processes that are reflected
in surface tectonics and ultimately give rise to earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions. Seismic tomography utilizes seismic waves originating from natural
earthquakes to illuminate the earth's interior using similar principles as used
in medical imagery. While the long wavelength, smooth structure is now well
documented, we strive to sharpen the picture and resolve smaller scale features
that will help understand in detail how the internal circulation drives the
motions of tectonic plates, and vice-versa, and obtain a better view of how heat
is channeled from the deep interior to the surface, resulting not only in the
system of volcanoes mid-ocean ridges but also in mid-plate volcanoes called
"hotspots", such as the Hawaiian chain. Because hotter than average regions
correspond to low seismic velocities, which are particularly difficult to image,
their accurate imaging has not been possible until recently, with the advent of
numerical methods to accurately compute the seismic wavefield propagation across
the earth's mantle. This project builds upon our recent efforts to develop
global seismic images of the entire mantle using such computations, and improve
the sharpness of these images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to finalize the construction of higher resolution (up to 200-400 km
laterally) global 3D radially anisotropic shear velocity model of the whole
mantle based on a time domain waveform inversion approach that has so far been
applied only to the upper mantle, with promising results. This waveform
inversion methodology builds upon 20 years of experience of the PI in waveform
tomography using mode-based wavefield computations, as well as two generations
of global upper mantle shear velocity models developed using long period
fundamental mode and overtone waveforms (periods &gt;60s) and numerical
wavefield computations (Spectral Element Method). In order to resolve lower
mantle structure, isolating wavepackets that contain body wave energy is
necessary, therefore we propose to extend the period range of our dataset to 30s
- this will also increase spatial resolution further in the upper mantle, while
keeping computations manageable. Further goals of the proposal are to (1) obtain
higher resolution in the lateral variations of radial anisotropy throughout the
mantle, (2) test the sensitivity of the 30 s dataset to inversion for a global
averaged S/P velocity conversion factor and (3) collect additional, shorter
window (~30mn after origin time) waveforms down to 20s to include more P wave
energy and perform additional iterations to obtain a global P velocity model of
the lower mantle.