* 1417878
* Fostering STEM Trajectories: Bridging Early Childhood Education Research, Practice, and Policy
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Michael Levine, Joan Ganz Cooney Center
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 03/31/2017
* USD 296,717.00

Fostering Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Trajectories:
Bridging Early Childhood Education Research, Practice, and
Policy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early childhood education is at the forefront of the
minds of parents, teachers, policymakers as well as the general public. A strong
early childhood foundation is critical for lifelong learning. The National
Science Foundation has made a number of early childhood grants in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) over the years and the knowledge
generated from this work has benefitted researchers. Early childhood teachers
and administrators, however, have little awareness of this knowledge since there
is little research that is translated and disseminated into practice, according
to the National Research Council. In addition, policies for both STEM and early
childhood education has shifted in the last decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Joan Ganz Cooney Center and the New America Foundation are working together to
highlight early childhood STEM education initiatives. Specifically, the PIs will
convene stakeholders in STEM and early childhood education to discuss better
integration of STEM in the early grades. PIs will begin with a phase of
background research to surface critical issues in teaching and learning in early
childhood education and STEM. The papers will be used as anchor topics to
organize a forum with a broad range of stakeholders including policymakers as
well as early childhood researchers and practitioners. A number of reports will
be produced including commissioned papers, vision papers, and a forum synthesis
report. The synthesis report will be widely disseminated by the Joan Ganz Cooney
Center and the New America Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed project.