* 1417144
* STTR Phase I:  An Innovative Spray Pyrolysis Process for Producing Pyrochlore Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Jeffrey Harrison, Pyrochem Catalyst Company
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
continuous and low-cost spray-pyrolysis process for making mixed metal oxide
(MMO) materials that can be used in the petroleum and chemicals synthesis,
precursors for solar panels, electrode materials, fuel cells, oxygen selective
membranes, and chemical sensors. Of particular interest are crystalline
pyrochlore mixed metal oxides for catalyzing chemical reactions because they
offer atomic dispersion of the catalytic metals and the ability to influence
activity and selectivity through the control of the elemental composition. As
catalysts, crystalline MMOs offer unparalleled thermal stability, resistance to
poisons and lifetimes that exceed conventional supported metals. The problem has
been that MMOs require a time-consuming and costly batch process for producing
crystalline materials and this has limited their use to mainly niche
applications. In contrast, the spray pyrolysis process uses similar solution
chemistry but creates very small droplet size and high temperatures to rapidly
form the crystalline materials. While the process has been applied to pure
oxides, this represents the first application to MMOs. The development of a
continuous and low cost process can finally unlock the potential of MMOs for new
and existing applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase 1 project focuses specifically on identifying the process
parameters of a continuous spray pyrolysis process that control MMO particle
size, crystallinity, surface morphology, surface area and catalytic activity for
certain chemical reactions. The process parameters of interest include
temperature, multiple reaction zones, droplet size, flow patterns, droplet
residence time and metal solution concentrations. For this project, the spray
pyrolysis process will target the production of crystalline pyrochlore materials
used as catalysts in the partial oxidation and reforming of hydrocarbons. These
materials (synthesized in batch mode) have demonstrated superior performance for
steam reforming, CO2 reforming and partial oxidation reactions important in
syngas and hydrogen production, so there is an excellent baseline for comparison
of performance. The project, led by Pyrochem Catalyst Company (New Brighton, PA)
brings together expertise from the National Energy and Technology Labs (the
original inventors of the catalyst), the University of West Virginia and the
University of Louisville. Collectively, the team?s objective is to create a
clear understanding of the physical and chemical attributes of the spray
pyrolysis process so that it can be scaled to demonstration and ultimately
commercial capacities.