* 1417208
* STTR Phase I:  A Non-invasive ImageÂ­&amp;#8208;based Skeletal Muscle Analytics Tool
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Silvia Blemker, Springbok, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to provide a new tool revealing important
information regarding skeletal muscle strength and health. Muscle weakness is a
pervasive problem across our society, including people with joint disease, aging
people, obese people, and people with neuromuscular disorders. All these
problems affect muscles across the body in different and non--?]intuitive ways;
however, to date there has not been marketed technology that allows for
quantitative measurement of muscle size on a muscle--?]by--?]muscle basis. The
initial targeted customers are athlete organizations, with the goal of using the
technology to both inform training of athletes to improve performance as well as
to provide more quantitative metrics for predicting injury susceptibility and
make return--?]to--?]sport decisions. However, following penetration into the
athlete sector, the ultimate goal is to advance the technology to the point
where it can more broadly to used clinically as a diagnostic tool to be used in
the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of health conditions related to
musculoskeletal disease and mobility, which will have wide spanning overall
societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide a major
advancement in image--?]based modeling tools in order to allow
high--?]throughput imaging and segmentation of muscles of the entire lower limb
of athletes. Currently, physical therapists, athletic trainers and strength and
conditioning couches only have very blunt tools to assess each individual?fs
strength. Therefore, training and rehabilitative approaches are developed via
experience and trial and error. Similarly, because the tools have been very
blunt, it is currently unknown what the optimal muscle characteristics of an
athlete would be. The technology proposed here solves these problems by making
using of an image--?]to--?]model pipeline to quantify muscle size across in the
entire lower extremity. Preliminary evidence demonstrates that these new
measurements provide entirely new metrics for phenotyping athletes, identifying
which muscle profiles result in maximal performance (e.g., speed, jump height,
agility). The current technology developed in the academic environment is
limited in its potential to market translation because: (i) it requires a very
specialized magnetic resonance imaging protocol, and (ii) segmentation time is
prohibitive for commercial viability. The proposed activities have high
intellectual merit in developing innovative approaches to solve both problems,
ultimately transforming this from a research tool to a commercially viable
service.