* 1417707
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A research study of local economies and decision making in Kamchatka, Russia.
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* David Koester, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2018
* USD 29,994.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project that investigates
the social and cultural effects of Post Soviet economic policies on indigenous
communities in Kamchatka Russia. By comparing traditional modes of
transportation (the dog sled) with the Soviet subsidized mode of transportation
(the snow machine) the researcher will examine how policies made in Moscow and
enforced in Kamchatka had an effect on contemporary local decision-making and
the economies of indigenous communities. The project has the potential to
increase our understanding of how 20th Century federal economic and social
policies affect the trajectory of 21st Century local decision-making in a
rapidly changing and globalizing economy. In addition, this project will
contribute to the training of the next generation of social scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will compare the social, cultural, economic,
and environmental implications of the choice between 'dogs vs. snow-machines' in
subsistence and travel strategies by indigenous people. Combining local
histories with larger global impacts to identify the meaning and decision making
processes that led to a decline in the use of sled dogs as a mode of
transportation concurrent with the rise in snow machine use in rural communities
and to their return as fossil fuel costs rise. This project focuses on the
socio-cultural and environmental implications of the choice between 'dogs vs.
snow-machines' in subsistence and travel strategies in Kamchatka. The layers of
social significance attached to these decisions is further emphasized by the
fact that salmon is the "fuel" that powers both of those technologies. Salmon
has two profoundly different uses in this regard: one as the protein/energy
source ingested by dogs and the other as a commodity, where salmon roe is used
to pay for fuel (often wasting the flesh). This project will increase knowledge
in the field of anthropology on northern communities and the political economy
of Post-Soviet era globalization. In addition, it will create a culture history
of dog sledding in the north.