* 1417433
* Where a river slows: investigating the oscillic freshwater zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* James McClelland, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 07/31/2018
* USD 514,791.00

As rivers approach the sea there is surprising, complex, and poorly understood
"oscillic freshwater zone" where the river flow may slow, stop, or even reverse
direction with the tide, but not an ounce of seawater is seen. This zone can
behave like a fast-flowing river or a slow-flowing lake or a mixture of the two,
at different times. Although these behaviors are poorly understood, any
variations will affect how fast the river transports freshwater and pollutants
to the sea. Pollutant runoff from rivers is an (inter)national problem that
significantly impacts the health of river and ocean ecosystems and fisheries.
Oscillic zones likely already remove some pollutants from rivers before they
harm the coast, by slowing their flow and enabling more natural chemical
mitigation along the way. The degree to which this is occurring, however, and
the specific processes involved are unknown. To ensure that these free, natural
benefits are not lost due to changes in river management, rainfall, or sea
level, we need to better understand how oscillic zones work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to define and investigate the
oscillic zone as an important section of a river that does not fit previous
fast-or-slow river classifications. This research will answer three questions:
1) What alternation of fast and slow flows defines an oscillic zone? 2) What
effect does this zone have on nitrogen pollutants reaching the coast? and 3) How
sensitive is this zone to changes in sea level, rainfall, and river management?
The project includes detailed field study of two Texas river' oscillic zones.
These real-world insights will be combined with computer models to better
understand dynamic physics-chemistry links and to predict how human and natural
influences affect freshwater and pollutant delivery to the coast.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be globally shared on a public web
portal hosting animated simulations of oscillic zone physics/chemistry. The
portal will illustrate the oscillic zones of all the US western Gulf Coast
rivers and their connections to the Gulf in real-time. The portal will also host
a more general tool enabling anyone to explore and test oscillic zone dynamics
for different types of rivers. To further connect to education and management,
the project will work with the local water quality committee relevant to the
field sites to seek to directly inform real river management policy and will
enhance elementary school-and-up educational materials on river-sea connections,
in partnership with a National Estuarine Research Reserve.