* 1417016
* Characteristics of the Summer Arctic Frontal Zone Atmospheric Feature and Its Projected Changes through the 21st Century
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Mark Serreze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2018
* USD 475,771.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the characteristics,
variability and environmental impacts of a little-studied arctic seasonal
atmospheric feature called the Summer Arctic Frontal Zone (AFZ), and how it may
change over the next century. Little is known about variability in the AFZ or
how it will change in the future. The feature is overlain by a high level jet-
like feature, and areas where the AFZ are most pronounced are regions of
frequent storm genesis, so understanding it is important to understand and
predict weather events. In linking the arctic atmosphere, ocean, land surface
and the hydrologic cycle, this study of the AFZ adopts a systems perspective,
and steeping the next generation of researchers in systems studies is important
for maintaining U.S. preeminence in environmental science, so the project is
strongly geared towards support of a graduate student. Results from this study
will be integrated into university classes and results will be featured in the
National Snow and Ice Data Center?s Monthly Highlights. To communicate climate
research to the general public, datasets created for this research will be
formatted for Science on a Sphere technology. A research team member and the
graduate student will present these data and their significance to the public as
a part of science outreach shows at the University of Colorado?s Fiske
Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
effort to take advantage of data from a suite of advanced atmospheric
reanalyses, satellite remote sensing and model experiments to address the
characteristics, variability and environmental impacts of the Summer Arctic
Frontal Zone (AFZ), and how this seasonal feature may change over the next
century. Most prior research concludes that the AFZ develops primarily in
response to summer heating contrasts between the Arctic Ocean and snow-free
land. The AFZ is best developed along the Eurasian and Alaskan coasts,
especially in Eastern Siberia and north of Alaska's Brooks Range, where it
appears that temperature gradients are sharpened by topographic trapping of cold
Arctic Ocean air. The AFZ at the surface is overlain by a jet-like feature at
the tropopause. Areas where the AFZ are best expressed are regions of frequent
cyclogenesis, and these cyclones have significant impacts on the summer
precipitation regime not only along the Arctic coast, but also over the central
Arctic Ocean, which is where many of the lows migrate into and decay. Migration
of cyclones into the central Arctic Ocean also likely influences the sea ice
state. This study will focus on: how seasonal development of the AFZ relates to
variations in the seasonal timing of snow-free conditions over land, the
location of the sea ice margin, surface temperatures, and topography; whether
there is support for persisting views of ecological controls on the AFZ; how
different patterns of atmospheric circulation influence the expression of AFZ;
how variability in the AFZ is expressed in terms of patterns of cyclogenesis and
summer precipitation; and how the AFZ will change through the 21st century in
response to changes in seasonal snow cover, sea ice conditions and potential
changes in atmospheric circulation patterns. The study will employ data from
three atmospheric reanalyses, sea ice extent from the satellite passive
microwave record, Reynolds sea surface temperature, satellite-derived
terrestrial snow cover extent, experiments with the Weather Research and
Forecasting regional model and output from coupled global models.