* 1417327
* EAGER:   Mantle Rheology and the Dynamics of Suboceanic Mantle: A Bottom-Up Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2017
* USD 205,583.00

The pattern of flow in the mantle cannot be observed directly but is informed by
implementing models of known physical behavior of Earth materials in computer
simulations. There are uncertainties associated with this approach and this
project targets one of them- the imperfect knowledge about how mantle minerals
deform. Laboratory studies provide constraints but both the direct measurements
and the inferred material flow laws have uncertainty. A quantitative description
of this uncertainty in microscopic behavior will, for the first time, be
included directly in the macro-scale mantle flow simulations. This will result
in a probabilistic description of the model spaces relevant for the Earth for a
range of likely constituent architectures. Local mineral deformation mechanism,
grain size, potential temperature, pressure, water, and melt are all known to
affect stress-strain relations in mantle rock. A previously developed Bayesian
method will be modified to allow various architectures to be included. A
graduate student will receive training at a forefront of numerical modeling in
geophysics and will gain insight to laboratory results- a cross disciplinary
background that is not typical in most departments. A website will be developed
for researchers to query for self-consistent descriptions of mantle flow law
specification.