* 1417254
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Bioprocess for Natural Gas Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Ka-yiu San, Technology Holding, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 224,848.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to produce an important platform chemical,
hexanoic acid. Currently, the 6-carbon compounds are difficult to attain since
crude petroleum contains just a small fraction in this carbon range as part of
light naphtha. Most of the 6-carbon compounds are produced via multiple steps
that constitute conversion of olefins derived from light naphtha. The various
6-carbon compounds include hexanol, hexene, caprolactam and hexa-easters. All of
these compounds are direct derivatives of hexanoic acid. The proposed technology
will manufacture hexanoic acid using a novel bioprocess, which will provide an
alternative source for this chemical at a reduced cost. Current direct market
uses of hexanoic acid include artificial flavors, rubber chemicals, varnish
driers, resins and pharmaceuticals. It can be converted to hexene, caprolactam
(nylon feedstock). These value added รก-olefins, polymers and premium lubricant
industry feedstocks, become excellent candidates for early commercialization. In
addition, hexanoic acid can be converted to decane, a jet fuel component via
decarboxylation and radical coupling chemistry. Thus, longer-term prospects
exist for using the proposed innovation to penetrate a &gt;$300 Billion jet fuel
market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a
novel microbial strain to convert methanol to hexanoic acid. The primary
objective of this project is to demonstrate techno-economic feasibility of
methanol conversion to hexanoic acid. The overall estimated carbon yield and
energy efficiency are significantly higher compared to state of the art. The
biological pathway consists of two elements added to an acetogenic host: (1)
Addition of methanol oxidation reactions to provide reductant; and (2) Extension
of the chain length of the acid formed. Methanol oxidation will use well-known
pathways from known organisms and reactions capable of operation without oxygen
in the utilization of methanol and H2/CO2. The chain length will be extended by
using the basic pathway of Clostridium and known enzymes to form hexanoic acid.
At the end of the project, a novel strain will be developed that can convert
methanol to hexanoic acid in a single step. A preliminary assessment of the
overall process will be performed and compared to the current commercial
manufacturing process.