* 1417109
* 2014 Summer Bioengineering Conference/World Congress of Biomechanics - Student Participation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Michele Grimm, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 04/30/2015
* USD 5,000.00

PI: Grimm, Michele J. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1417109&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Wayne State University &lt;br/&gt;Title: 2014 Summer Bioengineering
Conference/World Congress of Biomechanics - Student Participation; July 6-11,
Boston, MA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support for
students to attend the 2014 Summer Bioengineering Conference (SBC) sponsored by
the Bioengineering Division (BED) of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers (ASME). The conference will be held July 6-11, 2014, in Boston, MA.
This year, the SBC will be held in conjunction with the 7th World Congress of
Biomechanics (WCB). Both the Summer Bioengineering Conference and World Congress
of Biomechanics are highly regarded conferences with excellent technical content
and offering ample networking opportunities. Features of the conferences include
plenary lectures, student competitions, and cutting-edge presentations and
posters that are peer-reviewed. The Scientific Program Committee and the thus
far scheduled Keynote Speakers include nationally and internationally recognized
experts in the Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year, a Symposium Focused on Neural Functionality
Failure Analysis and Augmentation will be initiated. This Symposium will be
organized jointly by the ASME Design, Device, &amp; Rehabilitation and Tissue
&amp; Cellular Engineering Technical Groups, and it will address the challenges
posed through the Obama administration?s Brain Research through Advancing
Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) initiative. Funded students will be
specifically encouraged to attend this Symposium, which enhances the scientific
content of the conference and offers attendees, including students, the
opportunity to be exposed to this exciting and challenging area of research.
Conference attendees include engineers and scientists from various disciplines.
Thus, the conference enables exchange of ideas among scientists with different
backgrounds and serves an important cross-fertilization role. The conference
organizers pay special attention toward increasing participation of students and
young investigators, women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with
disabilities with targeted efforts.