* 1417043
* EAGER: Photovoltaic Sustained Electrochemical Synthesis of Hybrid Metal/CNT Nanowires
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Quanfang Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Chen&lt;br/&gt;1417043&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will investigate a
photovoltaic initiated and sustained electrochemical deposition process for
fabricating hybrid metal/CNT nanowires. It will also study the resultant
potential electric conductivity of these metal/CNT nanowires. Nanowires with
ultrahigh room temperature conductivities are important for advanced electronics
as well as for energy efficient conductors, however pure materials such as
metals are prone to electron scattering at the nanoscale. The objectives here
will be to investigate and develop a viable fabrication process in photovoltaic
assisted deposition of metals onto CNTs to obtain tight bonding and uniform
hybrid metal/CNT nanowires. The photovoltaic phenomena of CNTs has been
successfully used in solar energy harvesting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid metal/CNT will ensure both a large free electron
density (from the metal) &amp;#8232;and a large mean free path (from the CNT)
that will result in ultrahigh conductivity. Conventional fabrication methods,
which rely on catalysts may not only introduce impurities &amp;#8232;but also
result in non-uniform wires and Shottky barriers are inevitably formed. The PI's
fabrication method will result in a photovoltaic sustained electrochemical
deposition where no direct electrical connection nor any catalysts are required,
and a uniform but tightly bonded metal layer will&amp;#8232; be produced. The
experimental work will not only demonstrate the ultrahigh conductivity, but also
a significantly reduced size effect in the nanometer range. The experimental
work combined with quantum mechanical calculations will provide an understanding
of the conduction mechanism of the hybrid metal/CNT
nanowires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Materials at the
nanoscale with high conductivities are important for a broad range of
applications. For example, interconnects in nanoelectronics requires low
resistivity to increase the calculation speed, reduce the Joule heating and to
increase reliability. Electrodes for biomolecular and biomedical studies need
low resistivity for low or negligible effects due to the Joule heating. Metals
like copper and aluminum are common conductors for electricity but consume about
$300B per year due to Joule heating. If successful, this &amp;#8232;work will
develop a new material fabrication process and novel hybrid nanowires with
ultrahigh conductivity, that will be used as interconnects to reduce the RC
delay, and as building blocks to make bulk conductive materials via powder
metallurgy to replace copper as conductors in electric systems, including
motors, generators, transformers, and electromagnets. This could significantly
reduce the Joule heating and reduce the energy consumption and increase the
wire?s reliability, &amp;#8232;at the same time. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved in this integrated research and education program, and
existing courses will be amended to include results from this project.