* 1417137
* A Polymer-Based, Disease-Responsive, Nanoparticle-in-Microparticle System for Pulmonary Delivery of siRNA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/31/2013,08/31/2015
* Krishnendu Roy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 195,866.00

This award to University of Texas at Austin is funded jointly by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research, and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. This project is
to study the delivery of therapeutic agents through the pulmonary route that
could provide significant improvement in patient compliance and reduce drug-
related systemic toxicity for a variety of diseases. Traditional drugs for
inhalation suffer from low respirable fractions and high exhaled fractions,
clearance by alveolar macrophages, and target non-specificity. This project
proposes a unique nanoparticle-in-microparticle formulation comprising of
swellable, peptide-crosslinked microgel-carriers encapsulating polysaccharide-
small interfering RNA (siRNA) nanoparticles for efficient, intracellular
delivery of drugs through the pulmonary route. These inhalable carriers are
designed for: (i) efficient aerodynamic delivery to airway epithelial cells of
the deep lung; (ii) increased lung deposition and avoidance of phagocytosis by
alveolar macrophages due to in-situ swelling (large size) and stealth
properties; (iii) pathophysiologically-triggered release of drug-loaded
nanoparticles from microgels in the diseased tissue; and (iv) enhanced
intracellular delivery of therapeutic siRNA using polysaccharide-based
nanoparticles. There are significant scientific as well as educational impacts
of this project that reaches beyond the proposed aims. The knowledge gathered
would provide new insights on the feasibility of applying multi-stage,
nanoparticle-in-microparticle type delivery concepts for pulmonary therapies.
The project is inherently interdisciplinary and will provide a unique and
rewarding educational and training environment for graduate, undergraduate and
high school students, including those from under-represented groups in
engineering professions. The results and cutting-edge concepts developed by
these studies would also directly benefit several graduate and undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA-based drugs hold tremendous promise in
successfully treating a wide variety of complex diseases, including pulmonary
diseases, e.g. asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancers.
Although several highly promising drugs have been identified, none has
translated into clinical therapy primarily due to the inability to deliver these
drugs safely and efficiently to the target cells in the lungs. It is therefore
critical that significant research effort is vested on finding improved drug
carriers for pulmonary therapeutics that overcomes the limitations of current
delivery systems. The state-of-the-art concept to deliver such drugs uses
polymer or lipid-based nanoparticles. However, it is well understood that these
nanoparticles do not possess optimal aerodynamic properties for efficient
distribution deep into the lung. This leads to low therapeutic efficacy and
increased drug-associated side effects and toxicity. Here, we propose to develop
a novel delivery system comprising of nanoparticles entrapped inside degradable,
porous polymer microgels that would provide ideal properties for lung transport
as well as highly efficient, intra-cellular delivery of drugs to diseased
tissues. These carriers are also designed such that the drug is delivered only
when and where it is needed, thereby greatly reducing side-effects and enhancing
biological efficacy. The proposed research would provide new directions in
pulmonary drug delivery system that could eventually lead to the next generation
of inhaled therapeutics. The project also incorporates significant educational
components to train the next generation of scientists, including graduate and
undergraduate students as well as high school students especially those from
under-represented groups in engineering professions. As part of their
experience, graduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art and cutting
edge techniques as well as on mentoring undergraduate women engineers for a
research-based career. Research internship opportunities will also be offered to
high school students from the Austin, Texas area to foster interest and
encourage pursuit of STEM careers.