* 1417102
* 2014 Summer Bioengineering Conference/World Congress of Biomechanics - Rehabilitation Engineering in Boston, Massachusetts on July 6-11, 2014.
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Michele Grimm, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2015
* USD 28,760.00

PI: Grimm, Michele&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1417102&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks support for the 2014 Summer Bioengineering Conference (SBC)
sponsored by the Bioengineering Division (BED) of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers (ASME). This year, the SBC will be held in conjunction with
the 7th World Congress of Biomechanics (WCB) from July 6-11 in Boston, MA. The
budget request of $50,200 to the NSF ($28,760 to GARDE, $21,440 to BME and Nano
&amp; Biomechanics) has three primary purposes: to help increase student
attendance and participation at the conference by reducing student registration
fees and providing complimentary student registration to 36 Ph.D. finalists in
the Student Paper Competition; to provide a 4th year of support for the
successful Undergraduate Design Competition; and to support a special symposium
on neural functionality failure analysis and augmented repair. The conference
format will be 20 parallel sessions of oral presentations, 3 poster sessions,
and 11 plenary sessions. Student focused events will include a Student Paper
Competition, with both oral and poster presentations, and 2 design and
computation competitions. The finalists for the Ph.D. paper competition,
undergraduate design, and computation competition will present their work in
parallel oral sessions. All technical presentations will be supported by
400-word abstracts and compiled in a digital format for distribution to all
registrants. The primary purpose of the SBC and WCB have been, and continue to
be, to promote state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and scientific
discourse in the broad field of bioengineering with focus on biomechanical
engineering, encompassing molecular to tissue and organism-level approaches.
This conference highlights students, promotes advancement in their education and
furthers their careers towards becoming future leaders in
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit : The SBC and WCB are
extremely high quality and intellectually stimulating interdisciplinary
scientific meetings. They are, respectively, the premiere meetings for
biomechanical engineering in North America and internationally. In this combined
meeting, the BED has insured the inclusion of many of the traditional features
of the SBC. Two Challenges, the Undergraduate Design Competition and Grand
Challenge in Predicting Knee Loads, will highlight student achievements in
engineering design and modeling and will rapidly advance the field through
simultaneously encouraging competition and collaboration. The ASME-sponsored
Student Paper Competition will highlight the research of the next generation of
biomedical engineers. The winners of the BED?s Early, Mid, and Lifetime Career
Awards will make scientific presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
: In addition to the direct impact this conference will have on the mainstream
bioengineering community, it serves an important cross-fertilization role. In
attendance will be bioengineers, engineers from other disciplines, cell and
molecular biologists, biochemists, biophysicists, and other scientists. In that
manner, this conference will have a much broader impact than if it were to be
attended by just the biomechanics community. As importantly, 50% of the
attendees are expected to be students and postdoctoral fellows. This will have a
broad impact on bioengineering as future leaders are developed through the
student paper, design, and computational competitions as well as networking
opportunities. Through the digital proceedings and the conference web site,
information presented at the meeting will be available to multiple societies and
to the public at large.