* 1417967
* Collaborative Research: Revealing the Invisible: Data-Intensive Research Using Cognitive, Psychological, and Physiological Measures to Optimize STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2018
* USD 532,028.00

Virtual learning environments are an increasingly important component of
individualized learning in STEM domains. New technologies (including biometry
and neuro-imaging) provide new opportunities to unobtrusively measure student
engagement and learning. This project-developed in connection with an Ideas Lab
on Data-Intensive Research to Improve Teaching and Learning that NSF convened in
October 2014 -will utilize these technologies to provide foundational knowledge
of the ways in which measures of implicit learning might be linked to explicit
learning to develop educationally relevant games that are adaptive to diverse
learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators from TERC, Landmark College, and
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will collaborate to examine the
relationships among: (1) patterns of play in a digital game ("Impulse"); (2)
student attention (measured from eye- and head-tracking devices); and (3)
student learning about Newton's first and second law. The researchers will
collect measures of student engagement and learning outcomes embedded in the
game. Subjects will comprise a neurodiverse group of students including regular
undergraduates and those with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and/or
Autism Spectrum Disorder. The researchers will develop a model of visual
attention and patterns of play, examining the extent to which eye movements are
allocated strategically to objects of relevance to the current game state as a
student learns in the game. They will then link the initial model with measures
of student engagement and conceptual understanding of relevant physical science
constructs to refine the model. The refined model will be used to develop a
modified game based on the players' attention, and a prototype of the modified
game will be tested. The final phase of the research will be a within-subject
design with the adaptive version versus the normal version of the game across
learners with different profiles of disability.