* 1417323
* EAGER:CCF: Transient Architectures for Energy Efficient Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Hyesoon Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,998.00

To sustain performance scaling with the continued progression of Moore?s Law in
deep nanometer nodes, we must seek new and innovative advances in energy
efficient computing architectures. Such advances are central to the effective
operation of all modern processors in platforms ranging from mobile devices to
data centers and high-performance computing (HPC) machines that drive national
initiatives in key areas such as science, finance, and defense. The major
determinants of power consumption are voltage and frequency. The continuing need
to scale energy efficiency in the presence of time-varying application workloads
increases the number of fine grained power states as well as the frequency of
power state transitions in future processors. However, rapid and fine-grained
power state transitions increases the time spent in power state transitions as a
percentage of the execution time. Thus unchallenged, designers will soon be
faced with an impossible choice between energy efficiency (increasing frequency
of transitions) and performance loss (time spent in making transitions).
However, sustaining performance scaling will need concurrent advances in both.

Transient architectures developed in this proposal aim to address this
challenge. These are processor microarchitectures that can continue to perform
useful computation during power state transitions. The challenges lay in the
fact that during power state transitions the supply voltage received by a logic
circuit is not stable for a finite duration. Conventionally, a synchronous
digital circuit cannot operate correctly when the supply voltage is varying,
making execution unreliable during this unstable period. The transient
architectures aim to perform useful computation even under unstable supply
during these power state transitions by employing a unique combination of
innovative power regulation circuits, adaptive computational circuits, and
processor microarchitecture technologies. The key concepts enable computational
circuits to ramp up to full speed operation in concert with supply voltage
transition thereby performing useful computation during power state transitions.
The operational principles underlying transient architectures will be
demonstrated via silicon test chips and micro-architectural simulations.

This departure from conventional thinking can transform the state of the
practice in the design of power and energy efficient processor
microarchitectures leading to new ultra-low power designs with superior energy-
performance tradeoffs than the state of the practice.