* 1417261
* Refining a Model with Tools to Develop Math PD Leaders: An Implementation Study
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Hilda Borko, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2021
* USD 3,099,621.00

There is increased demand for K-12 teacher professional development that yields
improvements in student learning and achievement. This need is particularly high
given widespread adoption of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) in
mathematics which challenges teachers to incorporate mathematical thinking and
problem solving into their instruction. The professional development challenge
is exacerbated as our nation's demographics continue to shift, increasing the
number of English language learners in school districts throughout the U.S. To
meet this demand, the educational community must develop large-scale, system-
level professional development programs aligned with the CCSS that are scalable
and sustainable. The project team from Stanford University will work with middle
school mathematics teachers in San Francisco Unified School District to develop
their capacity to conduct professional development for the teachers in their
schools. A central goal of this project is to develop models and resources for
effective professional development and preparation of professional development
leaders in mathematics with special attention to students who are English
language learners. These models and resources will: provide school districts
with the tools to build local capacity and provide sustainable professional
development to all middle school mathematics teachers; improve the quality of
teaching and, in turn, make important progress toward ensuring that all students
in middle school can achieve the mathematical skills and understandings
identified in the new standards; and meet the needs of English language
learners. In addition, the Stanford team will contribute to the knowledge base
in mathematics education, professional development and English language
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work, the team developed two
interconnected models--the Problem-Solving Cycle (PSC) and the Mathematics
Leadership Preparation (MLP) models for preparing professional development
leaders. The PSC model consists of a series of interconnected workshops
organized around a problem that can be solved using multiple representations and
solutions and can be adapted for multiple grade levels. Each cycle focuses on a
different math problem. During the first cycle, teachers collaboratively solve
the focal math problem and develop plans for teaching it to their students.
Teachers then teach the lesson in their classes and the lessons are videotaped.
Subsequent workshops focus on participants' classroom experiences teaching the
problem. The goals of these workshops are to help teachers learn how to build on
student thinking and to explore a variety of instructional practices. They rely
heavily on video clips from the PSC lesson to foster productive conversations
and situate the conversations in teachers' classroom instruction. The MLP model
is designed to prepare Math Leaders to facilitate the PSC. The MLP prepares
teachers to lead professional development for their colleagues. These models
showed promise of effectiveness in improving middle school mathematics teachers'
knowledge and practice, developing math professional development leaders, and
improving student achievement. Investigators intend to refine and test the
design of the PSC and MLP models and develop resources that can be used by other
schools and districts, as well as conduct an evaluation of the work.