* 1417367
* Supersymmetry and Dark Matter in the Data Age
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Pearl Sandick, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 134,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Pearl Sandick at the
University of Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several compelling reasons to
expect that our current Standard Model of particle physics is incomplete, not
least of which is the puzzle of the nature of the dark matter in the Universe.
Professor Sandick's research involves theoretical investigations of
supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model of particle physics, in which
each Standard Model particle has an as-yet unobserved "superpartner" particle.
Even in the most minimal supersymmetric models, the lightest of these
superpartners provides a natural explanation for the dark matter. Currently,
experiments are becoming sensitive to interesting observable phenomena predicted
in many supersymmetric models. Taken together, experimental results from dark
matter searches and particle colliders provide insight about the fundamental
theory of particle physics that describes the world in which we live, but
conclusions about whether a particular theory is excluded or supported by data
rely on a robust understanding of its observable
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sandick aims to improve our
understanding of minimal supersymmetric parameter spaces by making explicit
connections between experimental signatures and the aspects of particle physics
models necessary to generate them. As part of this project, extensive studies of
the consequences of different types of model complexity will be performed,
highlighting the lessons we can learn about the characteristics of new models of
particle physics from dark matter experiments and particle colliders such as the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The main focus is on connecting collider signatures
to the signatures in dark matter detection as well as astrophysical signatures
from dark matter annihilation and/or decay. This work will advance the knowledge
of specialists, and also represents an opportunity to harness the broad public
enthusiasm for dark matter and particle physics to educate the public about
exciting advances and the future of the field and to recruit talented women and
minorities to the physical sciences. These broader impacts will be accomplished
through a suite of outreach and professional development programs in which the
PI is involved.