* 1417295
* New Probes of the Ultra-Light Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Surjeet Rajendran, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Surjeet Rajendran at the
University of California, Berkeley. Physical laws often lead to new particles
through which their effects are manifested on the natural world. For example, we
experience the electric force because of the existence of particles like the
electron and the proton that carry electric charge, with the force between them
carried by the photon. Searches for particles is thus a fruitful way to discover
new fundamental forces. It is important to search for such fundamental forces
since they have the potential to significantly enhance our understanding of the
origins of the laws of nature. They may also potentially enable us to interact
with the natural world in dramatically new ways, potentially permitting advances
as remarkable as the effects of electromagnetism on our daily lives. Many models
of fundamental physics predict the existence of particles that have very small
masses and also have very weak interactions with our world. In some cases, these
particles can also be the dark matter of the universe. Their weak interactions
can be overcome either with large systems or through precision technology. This
project develops methods that use large astrophysical objects such as
millisecond pulsars as well as precision laboratory techniques to significantly
expand our reach into the parameter space of such particles.

Professor Rajendran will develop new experimental approaches to detect ultra-
light particles that interact very weakly with the standard model such as axions
and dark photons. Such particles naturally emerge in many frameworks of physics
beyond the standard model, and may even be the dark matter of the universe. The
methods developed by Professor Rajendran include the use of the existence of the
super-radiant instability of rotating systems to argue that the existence of
certain kinds of light particles would cause the rapid spin-down of millisecond
pulsars. Observations of such pulsars can therefore constrain these particles.
Professor Rajendran will point out qualitatively new effects of dark photons
emerging from their longitudinal modes. These effects have been overlooked in
the literature and by incorporating them, he will show how existing experiments
can parametrically extend their reach into the parameter space of such models.
These gains also extend to the case where such dark photons constitute the dark
matter of the Universe and he will invent techniques tailored to detect such
dark matter. Professor Rajendran will also show how current experimental
methodologies that have been developed to search for fundamental sources of CPT
violation or a cosmologically preferred direction can also be used to search for
certain kinds of light dark matter. The dark matter signal can be qualitatively
different from the signals typically expected in these experiments and may
permit ways to overcome the systematic limitations of such experiments. With the
increasing costs of collider experiments, the future of particle physics may lie
as much in non-collider experiments that can probe such hidden sectors that lie
far in the ultra-violet.