* 1417769
* DR K-12: Teaching STEM with Robotics: Design, Development, and Testing of a Research-based Professional Development Program for Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Magued Iskander, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,545,955.00

Offering meaningful and motivating engineering contexts, such as robotics,
within science and math courses constitutes a compelling strategy to address the
Next Generation Science Standards and the Common Core State Standards for Math
while enhancing science and math learning for all students. Using design-based
research, with teachers as design partners, the project will create and refine
project-based, hands-on curricula such that science and math content inherent in
robotics and related engineering design practices are learned. To provide
teachers with effective models to capitalize on robotics for elucidating science
and math concepts, a design-based Professional Development program will be built
using principles of technological, pedagogical, and content knowledge (TPACK).
To ensure that teachers are well prepared, research-based practices and features
of effective Professional Development will be adopted. Experts in robotics,
engineering, education, curriculum design, and assessment--with experience in
K-12 education, training, and outreach--have formed an interdisciplinary team to
make robotics central to and sustainable in middle school science and math
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions addressed in this
project are qualitative in nature as appropriate for design research questions.
The methodologies include teacher needs assessment, teachers' perceptions of
robotics, pre and post testing, classroom observations, and surveys. Examples of
the research questions are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What characteristics of
robotics promote effective learning of middle school science and
math?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What elements of Professional Development engender
teachers' TPACK of robotics and link it with classroom science and
math?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are student prerequisites to effectively use
robotics in science and math learning? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the gains
in students' STEM engagement, interest, persistence, and career awareness?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robotics curriculum will include physical science used
in robot performance expectations and motion stability. Additionally the
curriculum will include the engineering design process consisting of problem
definition, solution development, and design improvement. Robotics provides
opportunities to support science and engineering practices of the Next
Generation Science Standards such as developing and using models, planning and
conducting investigations, designing solutions, and analyzing and interpreting
data. The project will be aimed at middle school students and will provide
substantial teacher professional development to implement the new curriculum
modules. The partner schools have student bodies drawn from a diverse student
population in New York City.