* 1417895
* Preparing Urban Middle Grades Mathematics Teachers to Teach Argumentation Throughout the School Year
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Harriette Stevens, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,999,737.00

The project is an important study that builds prior research to bring a
comprehensive implementation of reform mathematics instruction focused on
mathematical argumentation to an urban school district. The objective of this
full research and development project is to develop resources, models, and tools
(RMTs) that help inservice middle grades mathematics teachers support
mathematical argumentation throughout the school year. Mathematical
argumentation, the construction and critique of mathematical conjectures and
justifications, is a fundamental disciplinary practice in mathematics that
students often never master. Building on a proof of concept of the project's
approach in short curriculum units from two prior NSF-funded studies, this
project expands the model to help teachers support mathematical argumentation
all year. A coherent, portable, yearlong professional development program on
mathematical argumentation has the potential to increase access to mathematical
argumentation for students nationwide and, in particular, to address the needs
of teachers and students in urban areas. Demonstrating this program in the
nation's capital likely attracts broad interest and produces important knowledge
about how to implement mathematical practices in urban settings. Increasing
mathematical argumentation in schools has the potential for dramatic
contributions to students' achievement and participation in 21st century
workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical argumentation is rich discussion
in which students take on mathematical authority and co-construct conjectures
and justifications. For many teachers, supporting such discourse is challenging;
many are most comfortable with Initiate-Respond-Evaluate types of practices
and/or have insufficient content understanding. The professional development
trains teachers to be disciplined improvisers -- professionals with a toolkit of
tools, knowledge, and practices to be deployed creatively and responsively as
mathematical argumentation unfolds. This discipline includes establishing
classroom norms and planning lessons for argumentation. The model's theory of
action has four design principles: provide the toolkit, use simulations of the
classroom to practice improvising, support learning of key content, and provide
job-embedded, technology-enabled supports for using new practices all year.
Three yearlong studies will address design, feasibility, and promise. In Study 1
the team co-designs the RMTs with District of Columbia Public Schools staff.
Study 2 is a feasibility study to examine program implementation, identify
barriers and facilitators, and inform improvements. Study 3 is a quasi-
experimental pilot to test the promise for achieving intended outcomes:
expanding teachers' content knowledge and support of mathematical argumentation,
and increasing students' mathematical argumentation in the classroom and spoken
argumentation proficiency. The studies will result in a yearlong professional
development program with documentation of the theory of action, design
decisions, pilot data, and instrument technical qualities.