* 1417750
* Understanding Gene Regulatory Networks in Hypersaline-adapted Archaea: Toward Synthetic Biology for Industrial Applications
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Amy Schmid, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2018
* USD 699,998.00

The project seeks to understand how gene circuits function and evolve in
microorganisms living under extreme conditions. This knowledge will be used to
enable the construction of synthetic prototype strains that efficiently produce
biodegradable plastic from inexpensive feedstock. Synthetic biology has yet to
explore the use of archaeal genetic circuitry and metabolic pathways despite
their potential value for applications in industrial chemical and biofuel
production. Archaea are single-celled microbes that thrive at the limits of
life, found in deep-sea hydrothermal vents under high pressure and temperature,
saturated salt lakes, and polar icecaps. Survival in these environments requires
unique genetic and metabolic strategies, the natural chemical byproducts of
which are attractive to industry (biofuels, biodegradable plastics). Strategies
that engineer archaeal gene circuits or swap these circuits between archaeal
strains to boost chemical production are attractive for biomanufacturing of
fuels and chemicals. The NSF funded research will also contribute to education,
training, and outreach at the high school and undergraduate levels.
Specifically, the PI will collaborate with teachers to continue offering
weeklong science immersion courses for high school students from North Carolina
School of Science and Math. This public high school in Durham, NC, draws the top
students from each congressional district in the state, providing even
representation across cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds. The PI's ongoing
"Introduction to Systems Biology" will engage biology and engineering
undergraduates in collaborative active learning projects to build and analyze
gene networks from data generated through the research. Several interested
students from the class, together with HBCU summer students recruited through
established Duke programs, will engage in research projects in the PI's lab.
Through these activities, high school and undergraduate students will contribute
directly to generating and analyzing research data. This work will engage
students in research earlier in their careers and retain them in STEM fields.
These activities are expected to have lasting effects on the recruitment and
retention of researchers, especially from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Synthetic biology has yet to
explore the use of archaeal transcriptional systems and metabolic pathways
despite their potential value for applications in industry and biofuel
production. The hypersaline-adapted group of archaeal microbes, hereafter
referred to as halophiles, hold significant promise because they naturally
produce chemicals attractive to industry (isoprenoid lipids for fuels,
polyhydroxyalkanoate for biodegradable plastics). Strategies that engineer
halophile gene regulatory networks (GRNs) or swap gene circuits between
halophile strains are attractive for biofuel or other industrial applications.
However, before halophile networks can be customized and controlled, additional
basic understanding of GRNs and transcription factor (TF) function is required.
This plan has three objectives: (1) Characterize the topology, dynamics, and
phenotypic output of small-scale GRN motifs that regulate stress and metabolic
responses in halophiles. GRN motifs known to regulate important metabolic
pathways and extreme stress resistance across four related halophile species
using time course gene expression and TF-DNA binding measurements. (2) Build
predictive genome-scale statistical models for each halophile to quantify and
compare GRN motif architecture and dynamics. Data generated from objective 1
will be integrated into predictive models at two levels of detail: small-scale
dynamical models and genome-scale gene regulatory interaction network models.
Models will be compared across organisms. (3) Test model predictions in proof-
of-principle synthetic biology experiments. Model tests will include three
stages of molecular biology experiments: promoter-reporter fusions to test
predictions regarding TF-cis-regulatory sequence interactions, high-resolution
time course gene expression experiments, and building prototype synthetic
biology circuits for increasing production of polyhydroxyalkanoate in
halophiles. The products of this research will include predictive GRN models for
four related species and prototype synthetic circuits. These gene circuits will
test model predictions and increase the production of biodegradable plastic in
halophiles. In the long term, the PI aims to exploit halophile GRNs to extend
options for biotechnology and bioenergy.