* 1417672
* Access, Agency, and Allies in Mathematical Systems (A3IMS)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Beth Herbel-Eisenmann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,560,950.00

Given the role that mathematics plays as a gateway into STEM disciplines,
addressing achievement gaps for underrepresented students is essential. By
focusing on both equity and access, the project, funded in the Discovery
Research K-12 program, seeks to improve students' opportunities to learn by
focusing on helping middle grades teachers learn about and enact equitable
mathematics instruction and encourage students to have agency in their own
mathematics learning. The middle grades are a particularly important focus of
the project, as this is a time in students' education when achievement gaps
grow. The practice-based model of professional development focuses on creating
systemic reforms through collaborative communities in which mathematics teacher
educators, mathematics teachers, and students work together both to support the
fair distribution of opportunities to learn and to empower each in their roles
in supporting mathematics learning of all students. The project has promise for
supporting students, teachers, and teacher educators who work with middle grades
mathematics teachers with the potential to address mathematics achievement gaps
of students via a focus on equitable mathematics teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves designing, facilitating,
and studying professional development (PD) to support equitable mathematics
education. The PD will involve grades 4-8 mathematics teachers across three
sites to support the design of a two-week institute focused on enhancing access
and agency in relationship to important mathematical practices like
argumentation and justification, followed by ongoing interactions for the
mathematics teachers to engage in systematic inquiry of their practice over time
to facilitate equitable mathematics teaching and learning in their classrooms.
Field testing of the practice-based professional development in one urban
district which will include research conducted on the nature of students',
teachers', and teacher educators' opportunities to learn with respect to three
features of an equitable mathematical system and from the perspective of three
components of the system. The project studies the coherence and alignment of
these components from the perspective of classroom mathematics teachers. The
research addresses essential questions related to how to provide equitable
opportunity to learn for students, teachers, and teacher educators. In
particular it will generate models of PD, tools for assessing equity in
mathematics teaching and learning, and a theory of equitable mathematics
education systems that advances our understanding of the ways in which
approaches to teaching, learning, and studying mathematics support equitable
opportunities to learn.