* 1417308
* STTR Phase I:  True Presence Occupancy Detection Sensors (TruePODS)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Olga Boric-Lubecke, Adnoviv, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 254,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will extend to a number
of interdisciplinary areas in science and engineering. In particular the areas
of wireless sensors, wireless smart sensor network, transducer technology, and
signal processing will be the primary beneficiaries. The development of this new
technology for efficient indoor sensing, and development of new algorithms for
occupancy sensing techniques, will have immediate implications in the building
automation and home construction industries, where improved occupancy sensing is
necessary to achieve the promise of ?smart buildings? that adjust environmental
conditions such as lighting and temperature automatically to suit the needs of
the occupants. In addition to "smart building"/energy efficiency applications
there are also significant opportunities to apply these highly-reliable and
difficult-to-defeat sensors to facility security, military, law
enforcement/correctional facilities and in-home care monitoring. The team will
explore the potential commercialization of the technology, showing how these
unique sensors provide important new capabilities in each of these sizable and
rapidly growing markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Transfer
Research (STTR) Phase I project will develop True Presence Occupancy Detection
Sensors (TruePODS) for indoor spaces that employ Doppler radar technology to
detect true human presence, by adding passive nodes on off-the-shelf low-power
system-on-chip (SoC) platform. These low-cost, high-efficiency, and novel
occupancy sensors integrate the capabilities of sensing, processing and
communications in a single device, thus providing the key to small, low-cost,
and low-power wireless sensor unit for zero energy ?smart buildings? by reducing
the energy consumption and improving the energy efficiency. The work will
demonstrate how such sensor units can be used to detect and report the true
presence and activity of humans even while motions of appliances, such as
rotating fans, are present, which generally will falsely set off conventional
sensors, and subjects are motionless or sleeping, providing a highly-reliable
low-power occupancy sensor for indoor spaces. TruePODS integrate sensing,
processing, communications capabilities in a single low-cost device, providing
an ideal platform for ?Smart Building? applications.