* 1417354
* Higher-Order Corrections to Massive Particle Production at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Giovanni Ossola, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,997.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Andrea Ferroglia and
Giovanni Ossola at the New York City College of Technology of the City
University of New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected and analyzed by
the experimental collaborations at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) allowed
physicists to achieve the first main goal of the LHC scientific program, namely
the discovery of the Higgs boson. In the near future, the primary goals of the
LHC will be to study the properties of the new particle and to search for
signals of new phenomena which are not described by the current Standard Model
of particle physics. Theorists need to provide precise predictions for the
measured observables. Additional theoretical challenges are provided by
processes with several particles in the final state and by the presence of
massive particles, such as top quarks and Higgs bosons. The PIs are experts in
calculations of these complicated processes, which are necessary for fully
understanding the properties of the Higgs boson (and any other particles that
may be discovered in the next run of the LHC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to apply the most advanced technical tools for the calculation of
radiative corrections in QCD to processes involving real and/or virtual massive
particles, such as Higgs bosons, top-quark pairs, and pairs of colored
supersymmetric partners of quarks and gluons. For many observables, calculations
which go beyond the currently available accuracy are necessary. The PI's plan to
employ and further develop the GoSam framework for one-loop calculations,
effective field theory methods which allow them to carry out the resummation of
large logarithmic corrections directly in momentum space, and recently
introduced methods for the analytic or numerical calculation of multiloop and
multileg Feynman diagrams.