* 1417663
* Collaborative Research: New Pathways into Data Science: Extending the Scratch Programming Language to Enable Youth to Analyze and Visualize Their Own Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Benjamin Mako Hill, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 124,374.00

This REAL project arises from the 2013 solicitation on Data-intensive Research
to Improve Teaching and Learning. The intention of that effort is to bring
together researchers from across disciplines to foster novel, transformative,
multidisciplinary approaches to using the data in large education-related data
sets to create actionable knowledge for improving STEM teaching and learning
environments in the medium term and to revolutionize learning in the longer
term. This project addresses the issue of how to represent and communicate data
to young people so that they can track their learning and weaknesses and take
advantage of what they learn through that tracking. The project team aims to
address this challenge by giving young people (middle schoolers) the tools and
support to create, manipulate, analyze, and share representations of their own
understanding, capabilities, and participation within the Scratch environment.
Scratch is a programming language and online community in which youngsters
(mostly middle schoolers) engage in programming together, sometimes to make
scientific models and sometimes to express themselves artistically using
sophisticated computer algorithms. Scratch community participants are often
interested in keeping track of what they are learning, so this population is a
good one for exploring ways of helping young people make sense of data that
records their participation and learning. The team will extend the Scratch
programming language with facilities for manipulating, analyzing, and
representing such data, and Scratch participants will be challenged to make
sense of their learning and participation data and helped to use the new
facilities to do write programs to carry out such interpretation. Scratch
participants will become visualizers of their participation patterns and
learning trajectories; research will address how such data explorations
influence their learning trajectories. Scratch and its community are the place
for the proposed investigations, but what is learned will apply far more broadly
to construction of tools for allowing learners to understand their participation
and learning across a broad range of environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the sixth challenge in the program solicitation: how can
information extracted from large datasets be represented and communicated to
maximize its usefulness in real-time educational stings, and what delivery
mechanisms are right for that? The PIs go right to the learners; rather than
looking for delivery mechanisms for communicating the data representations, they
give young people tools and support to create manipulate, analyze, and share
those representations, bringing together approaches to quantitative evidence-
based learning analytics with the constructionist tradition of learning through
design experiences. In addition to helping us learn about how to help youngsters
analyze data about their perforance and self-assess, the PIs expect that their
endeavor will help us better learn how to help young people become data
analyzers, an important part of computational thinking. Learners will, in the
process of engaging with data representing their development and participation,
interact with visualizations, model and troubleshoot data sets, and search for
patterns in large data sets. In addition, the tools being developed as part of
this project will be applicable for analysis of other types of data sets. The
results that will transfer beyond Scratch and the Scratch community, are (1) the
kinds of tools that make such analysis possible for youngsters, (2) the kinds of
challenges that will get youngsters interested in doing such analyses, (3) the
kinds of data youngsters can handle, and (4) the kinds of scaffolding and
coaching youngsters need to make sense of that data.