* 1417149
* Determining the Source of Methane in Arctic Ocean Waters Adjacent to Subsea Permafrost
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* John Kessler, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 284,403.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that is present in large amounts in frozen
soils and marine sediments in the Arctic. Both natural and anthropogenic climate
change are influencing the methane dynamics in the Arctic Ocean, through thawing
of subsea permafrost as well as the decreasing sea-ice extent; several recent
investigations have documented seemingly elevated methane concentrations in
seawater and releases of methane to the atmosphere associated with both of these
processes. Release of stored methane can lead to further warming and then to
further methane releases in a reinforcing cycle. Both subsea permafrost thaw and
sea-ice melt can influence several methane reservoirs such as the stability of
ancient methane stored within and below sediments as well as the production of
methane by microorganisms both in the seafloor in recently deposited sediments
and thawed permafrost and in subsurface ocean waters associated with
phytoplankton blooms. Given the diverse sources of methane to ocean waters and
the atmosphere in the continental margins of the Arctic Ocean, it is currently
unknown which source is contributing most of the observed methane in Arctic
waters and thus how the magnitude of this methane source may change.
Measurements of the natural radiocarbon content of methane dissolved in ocean
waters and sediments can be used to identify its source. For example, methane
emitted from seeps and clathrate hydrates is radiocarbon-free, methane formed in
recently deposited anoxic sediments or in the subsurface ocean as a result of
phytoplankton blooms contains more modern levels of radiocarbon, and degrading
permafrost is of Pleistocene age (27,000-43,000 years old). The work proposed
here will aim to elucidate these sources through natural radiocarbon
measurements of methane dissolved in ocean waters and sediments collected during
transects across the continental margin of the Beaufort Sea. The major challenge
associated with measuring the natural radiocarbon content of methane dissolved
in seawater is collecting enough methane carbon for a quantitative Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry (AMS) analysis. Previously published procedures have recently
been modified enabling the extraction and collection of methane from
approximately 10,000 liters of seawater in less than two hours. These new
procedures will enable roughly 100 samples to be collected during a one week
oceanographic expedition. Measured horizontal and vertical distributions of the
natural radiocarbon content of methane dissolved in ocean waters will determine
how the source of methane changes from the coast to the open ocean and from the
seafloor to the sea surface. These methane isotopic distributions will also
provide a solid test of the hypothesis that the aerobic oxidation of methane
will provide a counterbalancing feedback removing the increased quantities of
methane leaving the seafloor before it reaches the atmosphere. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in the entire scientific process with
opportunities not only in their home lab, but also with visits to other
facilities. The investigators will leverage firmly established pathways with the
University of Rochester and the Rochester Museum and Science Center to promote
educational programs within the Rochester City School District to serve
underrepresented minority K-12 students.