* 1417741
* Contextual Influences on Ethnic/Racial Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Eleanor Seaton, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 06/30/2016
* USD 27,500.00

The ethnic and racial demography of the U.S. population has changed
tremendously. The U.S. Census reports that a majority of children in the United
States are now racial/ethnic minorities. By 2043, the general American
population is projected to include an ethnic minority-majority. Accordingly,
research on ethnic/racial identity has taken on critical significance.
Ethnic/racial identity is a central aspect of the development of ethnic minority
youth, especially during adolescence and young adulthood, and promotes positive
outcomes among youth who have been exposed to racial discrimination and other
stressors. In some cases, a strong ethnic/racial identity can buffer youth from
negative life events. One important issue for consideration is the unique
experiences of each ethnic/racial group versus commonalities across groups.
There has also been limited research on how biological, family, school,
neighborhood and societal contexts shape the development and content of
ethnic/racial identity over time. For example, how does ethnic/racial identity
develop differently for a Hispanic adolescent in the Southwest compared to the
Midwest or the Northeast? &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address the following
three goals: (a) to examine and discuss research on how contexts influence
ethnic/racial identity over time, (b) to identify how biological, family,
school, neighborhood and societal contexts influence the development and content
of ethnic/racial identity, and (c) to identity ways that prevailing theories of
ethnic/racial identity fail to account for the effects of context on
ethnic/racial identity. The workshop participants are an interdisciplinary group
including Psychology, Sociology, Education, Political Science, Public Health and
Genomics scholars. The workgroup represents diversity in developmental period
studied (i.e., childhood, adolescence, emerging adulthood, and young adulthood),
racial/ethnic population studied (i.e., African American, Latino, Asian American
and Native American), and methodological approach. The workgroup members are
also ethnically diverse themselves. The workshop will result in new
collaborations and significant new insights into understanding minority youth
development. &lt;br/&gt;