* 1417784
* Collaborative Research: Petermann Gletscher, Greenland - Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* John Andrews, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2018
* USD 392,400.00

This project will take a multi-disciplinary approach to understanding the
response of Petermann Glacier in northern Greenland to climate change in the
past. Petermann Glacier drains a significant fraction of the northern Greenland
ice sheet and terminates in a large floating ice shelf that is sensitive to ice-
ocean interactions. Ice retreat over the last decade opens access to the fjord
and presents an opportunity to understand sedimentation processes under the area
previously covered by ice shelf and to calibrate reconstructions of past ice
shelf variations. Using a variety of technologies and approaches on land, ice,
and at sea, the investigators will map the bottom of the fjord in front of and
under the ice shelf; reconstruct ocean conditions and their role in ice shelf
variations through time; reconstruct the past extent of the glacier on land and
the floating ice shelf; and reconstruct local relative sea level. Together these
efforts will create a comprehensive picture of the climate conditions and
response of the Petermann Glacier to these conditions over the last 10,000
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of key interest will be the timing, extent, rates of
change, and variability (on land and in the sea) during the early Holocene when
local relative sea level was over 100 meters higher than today (due to lagging
isostatic rebound of the crust in response to deglaciation), but the inland ice
sheet was still large relative to today. The investigators will address dynamic
responses to multiple interacting variables over a range of response times (from
tens to thousands of years) relevant to potential future impacts. Specific
research questions include: 1) How sensitive is Petermann ice shelf extent to
documented climate changes within the Holocene? 2) Is shelf response independent
of, or linked to, variations in the grounded Petermann Glacier, ocean thermal
conditions, or relative sea level (i.e., sill depth)? 3) What are the rates of
change and variability of these systems in response to early Holocene warming,
Neoglacial cooling, and recent warming? The project will support several young
investigators and will provide them with both ship and land-based training
experiences. The project includes significant international collaborations, with
substantial in-kind contributions from non-U.S. sources that add value to the
project. Planned outreach includes teacher participation in the field program
and meaningful classroom involvement at several levels.