* 1417115
* Annual Phenomenology Symposia will held May 5-7, 2014 at the University of Pittsburgh in Pittsburgh, PA.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Tao Han, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 02/28/2017
* USD 36,000.00

The PHENO conference series provides a unique forum for experimentalists and
theoretical physics to come together and discuss the latest developments in
high-energy particle physics and cosmology. The topics discussed include
emerging physics made possible by recent experiments at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics in Geneva,
Switzerland. Particle physicists will discuss connections between LHC
experimental results and results from other collider- and non-collider based
experiments in elementary particle physics. As such, PHENO will emphasize a
variety of current topics in particle physics phenomenology, collider physics,
neutrino physics, particle astrophysics, and cosmology, as well as new
theoretical and computational developments. The 2014, 2015 and 2016 PHENO
conferences will be held each May at the University of
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support for this conference is critical for
early-career physicists, students and postdocs, to attend the PHENO Symposia.
For many graduate students in particle physics, PHENO represents the first forum
where they showcase their research. Students and postdocs have the opportunity
to meet their peers, gain valuable research feedback, and develop contacts with
senior physicists. A series of parallel sessions provides the participants with
the opportunity to give brief accounts of their current research and start new
collaborations. To encourage young participants to attend, the tradition of the
PHENO conferences is that graduate students can attend the PHENO Conferences
free of charge, and postdocs have a reduced conference fee compared to more
senior participants.