* 1417605
* Linkages between soil and food quality in traditional plant systems
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Jessica Gigot, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,956.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research efforts of faculty at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about issues of
biological significance. The proposed research focuses on the production of
culturally relevant berry and root crops on agricultural land within a coastal
marine ecosystem. The goals are to: 1) establish and cultivate traditional berry
and roots crops on tribally owned land and link food quality to soil quality;
and 2) increase faculty research capacity and engage tribal college students in
soil ecology, plant biology, and ethnobiology. The connection of faculty to
research and thereby the students to culturally and geographically relevant
research is an important step in retaining students who are more likely to
pursue advanced degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty research project
tests hypotheses that state a) increased biological diversity increases the
level of phytonutrients in perrenial and annual traditional plants, and b) low
input, organic nitrogen applications will increase biological diversity and the
percentage of organic matter in soil, and reduce the amount of nitrate activity
in plant tissue. A cultivation system of traditional plants will be established
with fertility treatments applied and assessed over a two-year period. Plant
tissue will be examined for survival and growth, phytonutrients and nitrate
activity, and yield. Additionally, soil quality, biologic activity, and
biodiversity metagenomic analysis will be performed. The PI will collaborate
with partners at the Northwest Indian College Institute for Indigenous Foods and
Traditions and the Swinomish Tribal Community, as well as advisors at the
University of Victoria, USDA-ARS Horticultural Unit, and the Confederated Tribes
of the Umatilla Indian Reservation Department of Science, Engineering, and
Energy. This project will provide: 1) a venue for demonstrating and
investigating regionally significant best management practices (BMPs) for soil
management and restoration; 2) new methods for quantifying the nutritional value
and physiological response of traditional plants; and 3) culturally relevant
research and education opportunities for faculty and students.