* 1417410
* Research in Geometry, String Compactifications, and Mathematical String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Eric Sharpe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 10/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Eric Sharpe at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University. The goal of this project is to
further develop technical tools and methods used to help extract real-world
physics from string theory, the leading contender to unify general relativity
with quantum field theory, two of the most significant developments of
twentieth-century physics. The price one pays for that unification is a
prediction that the world has more than four spacetime dimensions. One standard
proposal to resolve that discrepancy is via a `compactification' of string
theory, in which the extra dimensions are rolled up on some small compact space.
It can be shown that the geometry and topology of that small compact space
determine low-energy four-dimensional physics. This project will further develop
tools and techniques for understanding compactifications of string theory and
the predictions of various compactifications for low-energy four-dimensional
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, Professor Sharpe will study `gauged
linear sigma models' (GLSM's), one of the most powerful tools used to study
string compactifications. These tools have undergone a striking series of
advances within the last few years. One part of that effort will revolve around
extending the technology of supersymmetric localization in two-dimensional
theories. As another part, Professor Sharpe will study dualities in nonabelian
(2,2) and (0,2) supersymmetric gauge theories in two dimensions. Professor
Sharpe will also continue developing quantum sheaf cohomology, a mathematical
generalization of ordinary quantum cohomology that determines stringy
nonperturbative corrections to charged matter couplings in heterotic string
compactifications, with a special focus on understanding quantum sheaf
cohomology in Grassmannians and other objects built via nonabelian GLSM's, as a
stepping-stone to computing quantum sheaf cohomology in compact Calabi-Yau
manifolds.