* 1417592
* Collaborative Research:   How do hydrology and biogeochemistry control  carbon flux from headwater streams to the atmosphere?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Daniele Tonina, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 94,118.00

It is known that streams collect, process, and release much of a basin's water.
It is less known that streams also collect, process, and release much of a
basin's carbon. Carbon is collected by streams in various forms, some of that
carbon is processed by microbes in the streambed into carbon dioxide (CO2), and
much of that CO2 is vented to the atmosphere during downstream flow. These
processes are particularly important in small, headwater streams. Since
headwater basins drain significant land surface, these coupled water-carbon
processes may be globally significant. This project will measure, model, and
understand this coupled water-carbon cycle via intensive study of the stream
carbon cycle within one headwater stream draining a 96-hectare basin in western
Oregon. By using the Watershed 1 of the HJ Andrews Experimental Forest, this
study will leverage a history of detailed data collection and a large number of
existing measurements. The project team will partner with the Audubon Society to
teach 1000 school children stream hydrology and ecology in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two main goals. The first is to
develop an integrated modeling framework to simulate carbon cycling in streams
that is widely transferable to model subsurface and surface processes of streams
in earth system models. The second is to test and present an integrated theory
of stream and groundwater hydrology, carbon biogeochemistry, and CO2 production
and efflux in a stream. These goals will be accomplished by developing an
integrated carbon model for headwater streams that simulates hydrologic
processes (e.g., transport, hyporheic exchange) and biogeochemical processes
(e.g., transformation between particulate and dissolved organic carbon, aerobic
respiration rates of these carbon "pools"). Modeling will be coupled with direct
measurements of groundwater delivery of soil-respired CO2, biological and
physical processes controlling carbon cycling, measurements of dissolved oxygen,
hydrology, and CO2 efflux from the stream to subcanopy respiration measured at a
flux tower above the stream. In situ hyporheic mesocosms will be used to
manipulate and monitor reactive transport along flow paths to parameterize
biogeochemical rate expressions for use in the integrated model. Finally, the
project will upscale the reach-scale processes to watershed scale to explain
carbon fluxes from river networks.