* 1417279
* STTR Phase I:   A novel Occlusion Balloon Microcatheter for Improved Delivery of Embolization Therapy to Tumors of the Liver
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Michael Allen, Embolx Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 269,927.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the improvement and expansion of tumor
embolization therapy, a highly targeted technique based on direct injection of
drug and agents that stop blood flow into the blood vessels of a tumor. Since
the anti-tumor agents are held within the tumor, the drug concentration is over
10 times higher than standard therapy and there are minimal toxic side-effects.
It is not surprising that this method has superior efficacy than standard
systemic chemotherapy for certain types of cancers. Presently, the delivery
dynamics associated with direction injection of anti-cancer agents into tumor
vasculature are largely unknown. The innovation of this NSF project will further
our understanding of this important technique. The initial application includes
primary and metastatic tumors in the liver where the market potential includes
500K cases per year in the US and 1M cases per year in the EU, a market
potential of $1.5B per year. This method promises to be a revolutionary
improvement in cancer therapy, most notably, cancers in the liver, lung, kidney,
bone and pancreas and result in longer survival and a better quality of life for
people living with cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
develop and test a trans-femoral catheter based delivery device for embolization
therapy in cancers of the liver that improves efficacy and reproducibility.
Current delivery catheters present significant shortcomings including:
subjective procedural endpoints, bypass of embolic agents to non-target sites
and incomplete filling of tumor vasculature with anti-cancer agents. These
problems result in a tumor response that is not reproducible and fails to reach
the efficacy potential of this technique. The objective of this project is to
develop a balloon microcatheter that creates a temporary occlusion in the
hepatic artery, stops all flow moving into the tumor from this source and causes
a significant pressure drop in the vascular space distal to the occlusion
balloon. It is believed that this situation will causes flow reversal of
arterial branches moving away from the tumor and thereby eliminate bypass. It is
further believed that the sharp reduction of blood flow into the tumor will
allow the tumor to absorb the flow as embolization progresses for a longer
period of time, thereby allowing more particles to enter the tumor. It is still
further believed that the isolation of the vasculature distal to the occlusion
will allow a pressure measurement through the catheter to signal a quantitative
endpoint. This hypothesis will be tested in a porcine animal model using
contrast, pressure and necropsy studies.