* 1417510
* Particle Physics Origin of Dark Matter and Cosmological History
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Rouzbeh Allahverdi, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,001.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Rouzbeh Allahverdi at the
University of New Mexico Department of Physics and Astronomy.

We know from observations that only 15% of the matter in the universe is
described by the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics, while 85% is made of
Dark Matter (DM). However, the nature and origin of DM remains as one of the
most profound problems at the interface of particle physics and cosmology. The
successful running of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) has put us on the verge of
discovering new physics beyond the SM. This, combined with a whole array of
direct and indirect detection experiments, will help us discover the DM and
establish its particle physics origin. The complementary information provided by
these experiments will also play a crucial role in shedding light on the
cosmological history of the early universe. The research funded by this award
will be to help establish the nature of Dark Matter by using complementary
signals from different experiments, and to determine its origin. It will also
study the reason for the numerical coincidence that the amount of visible matter
and dark matter are not too different, and will study possible interactions
between Dark Matter and neutrinos. The research funded by this award will also
have significant broader impacts. Professor Allahverdi will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in his research, and thereby provide critical training to
junior physicists beginning research in this field. The PI will additionally
outreach his results to a broader audience by giving public lectures and
visiting schools.

The research supported by this award has a three-fold goal. First, by using
complementary signals from different experiments to determine the thermal or
non-thermal origin of DM. In several extensions of the SM, the DM is produced
non-thermally. Second, to investigate models that can address the baryon-DM
coincidence puzzle, since in general the densities of baryons and DM can be
widely different (since they are produced at very different epochs). Third, to
probe possible connections between the DM and neutrinos, including possible
sensitivity to the Dirac or Majorana nature of neutrinos. To achieve these
objectives, Professor Allahverdi studies various particle physics models of DM
in light of data from indirect detection searches, and examines their testable
predictions for collider and direct detection experiments. These investigations
will help determine the deeper theoretical origin of the DM sector and its
embedding within a fundamental theory. They will also enable us to use DM as a
window to the thermal history of the universe when it was a tiny fraction of a
second old. This is far earlier than that provided by current observational
probes, namely the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) and the Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis (BBN).