* 1417352
* CTEQ Summer School Funding
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 01/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award will provide funding for the Coordinated Theoretical-Experimental
Project on QCD (CTEQ) Summer Schools for the next three years. CTEQ is a
collaboration dedicated to the effects of the strong interaction on
phenomenological processes at colliders. These effects are crucial in extracting
results from most collider experiments. For example, understanding the
properties of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) requires
understanding its production in proton-proton collisions, and that requires
understanding how quarks, antiquarks and gluons fit inside of protons. It is
this understanding that the CTEQ Collaboration provides. Understanding Higgs
decays to quarks also depends on this knowledge. The results of the CTEQ
Collaboration are essential in both experimental and theoretical particle
physics and are heavily used. The Summer Schools operated by CTEQ are a training
ground for numerous physicists to continue the Collaboration. They are truly
international - the 2014 School is in Beijing and the 2015 School is in
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 1000 physicists have attended the CTEQ
Schools, which consist of nine days of lectures and discussion. Each school has
50-100 students attending. The impact on the field is profound, and many
collaborations have been generated by this close interaction. Every year, many
students claim a financial hardship in attending, and receive fellowships. This
award will go to support students in attending the Schools. The funding will
fully support 10 students, or partially support many more.