* 1417447
* Collaborative Research: A new classification system for karst springs using storm hysteresis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Laura Toran, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 235,940.00

Karst aquifers are an important groundwater resource, but they are vulnerable to
contamination because of fast and complex flow paths arising from subsurface
caves and large fractures. The complexity of karst aquifers has for a long time
imposed challenges for researchers to characterize the groundwater flow system.
This project will develop a new classification method for karst springs that
will guide monitoring and pollution prevention strategies. Based on water
chemistry variability in response to storms, this classification will identify
different sources of water and improve water capture area delineation. The new
classification system will be tested by revisiting a well-known set of karst
springs that show variations in flow paths. Educational opportunities for
students and for the general public are incorporated into the project.

Classification will be based on the shape of hysteresis plots and changes in
hysteresis plots from storm to storm. Storm hysteresis, defined as the
difference in chemical trends at the beginning versus the end of a storm, offers
opportunities to identify changes over time in water movement and storage in
karst networks. The project will test two hypotheses. (1) During a storm,
hysteresis occurs as the water flows through the matrix and conduits, and (2)
from storm to storm, the hysteresis pattern changes as the water capture area
and storage zones change. For example, Mg:Ca ratios in spring water increase
with diffusive recharge but decrease with more focused recharge through
conduits, and hysteresis plots can show the timing of each type of recharge.
Automatic samplers and data loggers will be used during storms to provide data
for hysteresis plots. In addition to Mg:Ca ratios, Sr:Ca ratios, rare earth
elements, stable isotopes, and carbonate equilibria will be examined and
potential flow paths will be evaluated using groundwater models. The combination
of multiple natural tracers, modeling, and capture area calculations will help
quantify behavior of karst springs and karst aquifers. Ultimately, the new
classification system will improve understanding of contaminant transport in
karst systems.