* 1417059
* Robust Matter-Light Entanglement Generation and Distribution
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Alexander Kuzmich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 530,000.00

This work involves research and education on a set of topics in atomic physics
and quantum optics. The main objective of the project is to develop new methods
for the generation, storage, and distribution of quantum mechanical entanglement
utilizing photons and ultra-cold atoms. The approach employs interactions of
ultra-cold atoms excited into Rydberg states for entanglement generation while
ground atomic levels are used for information storage. The strength of the atom-
light interactions will be increased by placing the atoms between highly
polished mirrors of an optical cavity, while confining the atoms to laser-
generated optical lattices and cooling them to ultra-low temperatures. The
planned activity is expected to result in the development of a new generation of
capabilities for the creation, distribution and storage of entangled quantum
states and contribute to future implementations of distributed quantum
computing. Additionally, efficient production of massively entangled states will
advance quantum-enhanced technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
continue a program of investigating the generation, storage, and distribution of
quantum information, using individual photons and trapped ultra-cold atoms. The
entanglement of spin-wave hyperfine qubits to optical qubits encoded in the
polarization, spatial or frequency degrees of freedom of single photons, as well
as entanglement of two remote spin-wave qubits, and single-photon wavelength
conversion between the near-infrared and the telecom has been previously
demonstrated. Most recently, quantum memory times have been extended beyond 10
seconds, while strong interactions of atomic Rydberg levels have been employed
for the generation of single photons, many-body quantum states, and matter-light
entanglement. This opens a path toward functional quantum networking
architectures of superior scaling. The following set of goals will be explored:
(i) tight, three-dimensional, state-insensitive confinement of ground and
Rydberg atoms; (ii) Rydberg quantum gates between qubits encoded in Rubidium
isotopic mixtures; (iii) scalable multi-qubit atomic entangled states by
sequential generation of entangled qubit pairs and triples, photon interferences
and light-memory quantum state mappings; (iv) storage of multi-qubit entangled
quantum states with second-scale lifetimes. The planned activity will expedite
the development of a new generation of capabilities for the creation,
distribution and storage of multi-qubit entangled states and contributes to
future implementations of long-distance quantum repeaters and distributed
quantum computing. Moreover efficient production of multi-qubit entangled states
will impact fundamental physics investigations and advance quantum-enhanced
technologies.