* 1417838
* Knowledge Assets to Support the Science Instruction of Elementary Teachers (ASSET)
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Robert Esch, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2019
* USD 442,834.00

This project will address two obstacles that hinder elementary science
instruction: (1) a lack of content-specific teaching knowledge (e.g., research
on effective topic-specific instructional strategies); and (2) the knowledge
that does exist is often not organized for use by teachers in their lesson
planning and instruction. The problem is particularly acute at the elementary
level, where many teachers have limited science background and many have not
taught science before. The project will collect existing empirical literature
for two science topics and synthesize it with an often-overlooked resource --
practice-based knowledge. The resulting knowledge resources will be made
available to teachers on a website. The resource will support elementary
teachers as they plan for science instruction, and to enable them to
productively adapt their own science materials to improve student learning. The
project will work with teachers in high minority schools.

The project will contribute to a developing theory of Collective Pedagogical
Content Knowledge (C-PCK) which includes the research literature, practitioner
literature and collective wisdom of practice. The researchers will seek to
understand how C-PCK can be made more useful for teachers. The research
questions are: (1) What are the strengths and weaknesses of the knowledge
collection and synthesis method? (2) What factors must be taken into account in
applying the knowledge collection and synthesis method across science topics?
(3) What affordances and limitations does the web-based resource present for
teachers primarily, and for teacher educators and instructional materials
developers? (4) How does access to content-specific teaching knowledge affect
teachers' planning and instruction? Content-specific teaching knowledge will be
collected through literature reviews (for empirical knowledge) and a series of
iterative, on-line expert panels (to gather practice-based knowledge). The two
sources of knowledge will be synthesized for each of the science topics and
organized in a web-based resource for teachers. A group of pilot teachers will
use the resource as they plan for and teach a unit of instruction on the science
topics. Project researchers will observe their instruction and interview the
teachers to look for evidence of the resource facilitating their instruction. In
addition, researchers will administer assessments to teachers and their students
to gauge changes on content knowledge that might be attributable to the
resource. Teacher feedback will be used to modify the web-based resource and
maximize its usability.