* 1417313
* STTR Phase I:  Electromagnetic Suspension System for Prosthetic Limbs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Timothy Roe, Koa Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 244,792.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project: If successful, this
research will have immediate social, economic, and scientific impact. This
project will expand the field of prosthetics and create new research direction
in prosthetics. It will result in a better understanding of prosthetic
suspension and volume limb loss. This research will create a much needed
intelligent method for suspension of prosthetic limbs, and therefore improve the
daily lives and enable broader range of activity for amputees. The research will
directly result in a commercial product that will be disseminated locally in
Hawai?i and eventually throughout the nation. Hawai?i has a thriving network of
biotechnology industry, and this project will expand the network. The project
will support a graduate student and inevitably benefit the Native Hawaiian
community throughout the state of Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project sets a completely
new direction in the area of prosthetics and will advance the knowledge and
understanding of human-device interaction. Currently available vacuum systems
have problems including loss of seal, maintenance of mechanical or electrical
pump, reduced range of motion across joint, and potentially detrimental force
application to residual limb tissue if vacuum is not applied correctly. The
hypothesis is that an intelligent electromagnetic suspension system can be made
that improves the connection between the amputee and the prosthetic and reduces
limb volume loss. The research objective is to prove the concept of
electromagnetic suspension for prosthetic limbs. To accomplish this, a
suspension system with electromagnets embedded in the socket will be developed
and incorporated into existing prosthetic limb socket. A feedback loop will be
implemented to control the attractive force between the electromagnets and
magnetic material embedded in the liner. A microprocessor will be used to
control the electromagnets according to pressure sensor output from within the
socket. The prototype will undergo functional and mechanical testing; the
results of which will show the feasibility of the idea for magnetic attachment.