* 1417582
* Developing a Model of Solar Energy Performance
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Lisa Bosman, College of the Menominee Nation
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2017
* USD 197,128.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research efforts of faculty at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, using a design that will facilitate progression and advancement
of American Indian students by providing training in experimental field
research, data collection and analysis, general STEM-based concepts, technical
report writing, and presentation skills. It can prepare students for careers in
the competitive and growing field of sustainable energy production. Moreover,
the results from this research may advance knowledge and understanding within
the field of solar energy performance and reliability. It can have practical
applications for both manufacturers and consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the potentially transformative research is to explore
climatic factors that affect solar module performance and reliability, and
develop a framework for the performance, failure and reliability assessment of
solar energy systems. This project will be implemented in collaboration with
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), which has recently installed a state-of-the-
art solar energy comparative research facility, the first of its kind in the
Midwest. The objectives of this research include (1) Develop a framework to
model the efficiency and reliability of solar energy systems, to estimate the
system performance at any given point in time, for new and in particular, used
solar energy systems. (2) Develop a method to denoise and convert actual raw
continuous PV system and weather data (e.g. incoming solar irradiation,
temperature, generated DC electricity, inverter converted AC electricity) into
useful performance metrics. (3) Verify the accuracy of the solar energy system
performance model through comparison to real-time solar energy system
performance data.