* 1417983
* Teacher Professional Development for Technology-Enhanced Inquiry to Foster Students' 21st Century Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lei Bao, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,936.00

The goal of this Exploratory Design and Development Teaching project is to
develop and evaluate a module for use in a 7th grade classroom that promotes
student development of 21st Century skills with a particular focus on student
development of scientific reasoning. The technology-enhanced curriculum will be
designed to engage learners in deep and meaningful investigations to promote
student learning of content in parallel with 21st century skills. The module
will be designed using principles of inquiry-based learning as well as the
principles of universal design for learning (UDL). The motivation behind this
project is that it will directly contribute to the limited research on the
interventions that impact teachers' capacity to provide high quality 21st
century STEM education to all students, with a specific focus on
underrepresented minorities and those with disabilities. The classroom setting
for which the curriculum will be delivered is within an urban district which
includes a large number of minority students and over 20% students with specific
learning disabilities. The project will catalyze students' deep understanding of
content knowledge while developing 21st century skills in parallel; hence better
preparing students for sustainable learning experiences into high school and
beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A study will be conducted to determine the
effectiveness of the learning modules on classroom practices as well as student
learning. A mixed methods design involving multiple measures will provide
insights into changes in teachers' content knowledge, teaching practices that
include a focus on 21st century learning, and fidelity of use of the TI21
framework for implementation of the learning activities. Pre- and post-testing
of students using a scientific reasoning assessment and surveys on attitudes
towards STEM, along with validated and widely used concept inventories, will
provide further measures. As part of this exploratory project, the design and
validity of instruments for use with the targeted population, which includes
students with specific learning disabilities, will be further tested. This will
include administering some of the assessments through web-based apps to meet the
needs of these students. The learning modules, with embedded assessments and
web-based apps, will provide an innovative approach in which transferable 21st
century skills can be developed and measured. Outcomes of this project will be
disseminated throughout the urban school system and therefore have the ability
to impact thousands of other students (mostly minorities and many with
disabilities) and their science, math, and technology teachers. Project outcomes
will also inform the development of future science and/or modules for use in
similar urban classroom settings.