* 1417053
* Computational methods for materials science, high frequency wave propagation, and quantum mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Smadar Karni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 353,035.00

This project involves modeling, simulation, and efficient computation of
technologically important and intellectually interesting problems. In the area
of material science the research investigates two new off-lattice methods for
the computational modeling of the evolution of crystalline materials in which
the lattice structure may change. This is needed when defect formation is
important, for example. The project will also address the efficient computation
of high frequency wave propagation in nonhomogeneous materials. This classic
problem in computational science and applied mathematics has attracted much
attention because it is useful for problems in geophysics and optics and it is a
mathematically rich problem requiring insight into the behavior of wave
equation. The PI also plans to develop numerical methods for studying quantum
dynamics of molecules. The importance of quantum mechanics in understanding
chemical reactions cannot be overstated, and this research offers the potential
of providing detailed insight and predictive power for a variety of photo-
induced chemical reactions. The project also involves training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project involves developement of off-
lattice computation models for the evolution of crystalline materials. In one
case, the PI plans to formulate an off-lattice kinetic Monte Carlo method for
the simulation of epitaxial growth and in other an alternative to the phase
field crystal method is proposed. In both cases the underlying energy of the
system is a suitable intermolecular potential. In addition, in both cases one
will be computing on time scales orders of magnitude larger than molecular
dynamics. Another project involves the computation of high frequency solutions
of the wave equation. The goal is to exploit the asymptotic structure of high
frequency solutions to develop efficient numerical methods that do not have the
errors that result from asymptotic approximations that occur when one uses
methods that rely on geometrical optics or Gaussian beams. The PI also plans to
develop numerical methods for the studying quantum dynamics of molecules when
conical intersections play an important role. A full quantum mechanical
treatment would mean solving the Schroedinger equation in 20 to 30 dimensions
even for small molecules. Our plan is to identify the important modes by using
surface hopping methods as a probe of the energy landscape. A full quantum
treatment can then be accurately obtained just using this smaller set of modes.