* 1417276
* STTR Phase I:  High Quality Carbon Nanotubes for Radio Frequency Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Dawei Wang, Carbon Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I can be found across the semiconductor industry with a
very large first market in wireless communications. Due to their extraordinary
properties, more specifically, the linearity of these devices, the technologies
can find applications in low noise amplifiers, mixers, and power amplifiers in
wireless systems by replacing the transistors used in these parts. Such a
wireless market is estimated to be ten(s) billion dollars by 2020 driven by
mobile data. The high performance of the devices will also lead to radically
change of the current cost-performance paradigm allowing for billions of dollars
of savings in base stations for current service levels and likely accelerating
the displacement of wireline networks. As the technology matures, it will
displace most if not all moderate bandgap materials used in today's
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will develop electronic devices for radio frequency (RF)
application using carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The demanding for high speed wireless
communication requires electronic devices with high linearity. RF devices made
of silicon and compound semiconductors, such as gallium arsenide, have to
sacrifice power efficiency in order to reach certain linearity specification.
CNT is a one dimensional material with diameter in nanometer range. It has far
superior properties ranging from mobility to current carrying capability to
thermal stability. Calculations show CNT amplifiers will be inherently linear
with noise suppressed to the lowest possible quantum limit. These properties
allow for electronic devices that will performance better than the existing
technologies with high speed, low noise, and most importantly, high linearity.
With improved linearity, higher data rate and higher power efficiency (longer
battery time of the mobile device) can be achieved. As importantly, the cost for
making such devices will be dramatically lower because of the simple method for
material synthesis and device fabrication and the material's properties allow
for older, cheaper fabrication processes to be retained.