* 1417499
* Participation of Young Scientists to the Workshop LoopFest XIII, City Tech, New York, June 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Giovanni Ossola, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 07/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

LoopFest is a series of workshops begun in 2002 and held annually at various
universities across the US. This is a large meeting whose goal is to bring
participants up to speed on recent developments regarding high-precision strong
interaction effects at colliders. Although the conferences are all in the US,
speakers and participants come from all around the world. There are several core
members of the scientific organizing committee. These physicists are engaged in
a program to advance research in and understanding of quantum chromodynamics.
Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) governs the strong interactions of elementary
particles, and its study at high energies is increasingly shared by both
elementary particle and nuclear physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
LoopFest workshops is to coordinate activities focused on the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) and on high precision research at a future linear collider. The
LHC will be studying the Higgs boson extensively in the next few years, and
strong interaction effects provide the biggest uncertainties in this study.
There are many processes with a number of loops, virtual interactions that add
to the complexity of the process, with a large number of incoming and outgoing
gluons, particles that mediate the strong interaction. The workshops not only
study these, looking at new computational approaches, but also study how to best
interface the new results with event generators used by the experimenters. Thus,
although the LoopFest organizers are all theorists, there are a number of
experimental talks as well, in order to facilitate exchanges between the two
communities. The organizers also ensure that junior physicists in attendance
also have the opportunity to interact closely with the senior physicists about
their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for students
to travel to the 2014 LoopFest conference in June and for some of their
expenses.