* 1417908
* Collaborative Research:  Vegetation And Ecosystem Impacts On Permafrost Vulnerability
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Alexander Kholodov, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 275,601.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realistic representations of heat exchange in
permafrost ecosystems are necessary for accurate predictive understanding of the
permafrost carbon feedback under future climate scenarios. This project will
provide a quantitative pan-arctic assessment of the effects of vegetation and
landscape characteristics on permafrost thermal regimes. By working across
ecosystems, landscape characteristics, and regions, the research will identify
broad trends, and intensive energy balance sites will provide a mechanistic
study of ecosystem impacts on permafrost response to climate change. The impacts
of this study will be enhanced through integration of research results into
regional and site-specific permafrost models and synthesis activities that will
examine ecosystem impacts on energy balance and permafrost vulnerability to
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have broad impacts on the
scientific community and general public because it brings together important
issues in the global environment and raises awareness of the connection between
ecosystem dynamics and permafrost thaw. The proposed project will provide
training opportunities for undergraduate students through collaboration between
the researchers and an NSF funded field research experience for undergraduates.
The researchers will mentor several students as part of this proposed work and
will also teach two arctic system science courses at a predominantly
undergraduate institution. This project will enhance scientific understanding
through continued work with education centers, local communities and, in
particular, with teachers and outreach coordinators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant declines in
permafrost distribution are expected as the climate warms, but large
uncertainties remain in determining the fate of permafrost under future climate
scenarios. These uncertainties are driven, in large part, by vegetation and
ecosystem properties that modulate the effect of climate on permafrost
temperatures. Long-term monitoring of permafrost temperatures demonstrates the
importance of these local conditions, yet there has been no pan-arctic effort to
measure ecological and landscape variables in concert with permafrost
temperature monitoring. This project will use a combination of field and
remotely-sensed data to address the question of how vegetation and landscape
factors modulate permafrost temperature response to climate change. To address
this question the researchers will couple an extensive pan-arctic assessment of
vegetation-permafrost dynamics with an intensive study of shrub and tree canopy
cover effects on ecosystem energy balance. The first component of this research
will be conducted at long-term permafrost temperature monitoring sites in
Siberia and Alaska, and the second component, the vegetation-energy balance
sites that will be established as part of this proposal, will be conducted at a
shrub-tree canopy cover gradient in Siberia, where most permafrost regions are
located. These intensively studied energy balance sites will provide an improved
mechanistic understanding of the effects of ecosystem components, and
interactions among these components, on ecosystem energy balance and permafrost
vulnerability to climate change. This mechanistic knowledge will, in turn,
support interpretation of broad patterns observed through a pan-arctic sampling
of the permafrost temperature monitoring sites.