* 1417763
* Collaborative Research: Local Adaptation in a Dominant Arctic Tundra Sedge (Eriophorum Vaginatum) and its Effects on Ecosystem Response in a Changing Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jianwu Tang, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 433,037.00

Title: Local adaptation in a dominant arctic tundra sedge (Eriophorum vaginatum)
and its effects on ecosystem response in a changing
climate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eriophorum vaginatum is presently a dominant
component of moist tussock tundra, but is susceptible to competition from more
rapidly growing deciduous shrubs under warming conditions. The project has three
objectives: 1) to investigate the genetic factors that lead to local adaptation
in E. vaginatum; 2) to examine natural disturbance as a mechanism for genotypes
from warmer climates to establish in tussock tundra of northern regions; and 3)
to test the hypothesis that local adaptation and adaptational lag will have
important consequences for plant phenology, photosynthesis, primary
productivity, plant growth, and nutrient cycling. The findings of this project
may serve as an indicator of the potential effects of adaptational lag on plant
responses to climate change. Research results will be integrated into the manual
for the International Tundra Experiment, which has been a developing resource
for long term Arctic research. The project directly involves undergraduate
research experience for students at Wilkes, a largely undergraduate university,
and University of Texas at El Paso, a minority serving institution. Marine
Biological Laboratory also will involve students in the research directly
through their Semester in Environmental Sciences program, which will involve
students in analyzing data taken directly from the Arctic project. K-12 students
in Wilkes-Barre will be involved in Arctic research by studying plants shipped
from Alaska. K-12 students in El Paso will be exposed to Arctic research through
already established programs that engage graduate students with high school
students through presentations of research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will use approaches from molecular ecology and population
biology to investigate the causes of local adaptation in Eriophorum vaginatum.
It will use methods of ecosystem ecology to investigate the consequences of
local adaptation for the response of E. vaginatum to a rapidly warming climate.
Genetic markers will be used to determine patterns of genetic diversity and gene
flow for populations of E. vaginatum in northern Alaska. Uncovering the
underlying genetic structure and population genetic dynamics will provide
important insight into the ability for E. vaginatum to adapt to a changing
climate. A recent burn site will be seeded with E. vaginatum from different
populations with measures of seedling establishment and health followed by
identifying genotype success utilizing molecular markers. The processes will be
measured in gardens that include both transplants and plants exposed to warming
with open-top chambers to simulate the combined effects of northward migration
of southern ecotypes and climate warming.&lt;br/&gt;