* 1417444
* Collaborative Research: Determining the role of hydraulic redistribution regimes in the critical zone - an experimental and modeling synthesis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Praveen Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 228,421.00

Understanding and predicting interactions between aboveground and belowground
ecohydrologic processes is challenging. Roots play an important role in linking
aboveground plant ecophysiological processes, such as carbon, water, and energy
exchange with the atmosphere, and the belowground processes associated with soil
moisture and carbon, and microbial and nutrient dynamics. Interestingly, root
water movement is not always unidirectional; plants create pathways for
preferential water movement through a phenomenon called "hydraulic
redistribution", by which water moves downward through the roots during wet
periods but upward during drier periods. This project will study such hydraulic
redistribution. The study will both provide insights for dryland regions and
enable broader generalizations regarding the interaction between groundwater,
roots, and aboveground assemblages and their role in whole-ecosystem
performance. The salient aspect of this study is the coupling between field
research and modeling to enable hypotheses testing and provide an upscaling
framework from site-based studies. Given projections of a warmer climate, there
has been a rapid expansion in scientific interest in how ecosystems will respond
to periods of prolonged stress. This research will help address this critical
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of the project is to
systematically examine the role of hydraulic redistribution by roots as a
mechanism for facilitating aboveground-belowground linkages that drive water and
carbon dynamics, and the development of emergent spatial patterns of soil
moisture and vegetation distribution. Field-based activities will be conducted
at two sites in southern Arizona: a riparian site where precipitation inputs are
augmented with belowground water sources and an upland site that lacks this
secondary water pool. This research will advance the theory for understanding
the interaction of aboveground and belowground ecohydrological processes using a
model that mechanistically resolves the related processes. Coupled modeling and
field experimentation and monitoring of root and stem sap flux, soil, carbon,
whole-plant, and ecosystem-scale (via eddy covariance tower) water and carbon
fluxes will mutually inform each other to provide detailed insights at a range
of scales. Results from this study will be presented in kiosks on the tour route
of Biosphere 2 that sees over 100,000 visitors per year that include K-12
students to retirees.