* 1417964
* 5th ASM Conference on Beneficial Microbes; September 27-30, 2014, Washington, D.C.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Angela Douglas, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 04/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

The 2014 Beneficial Microbes Conference provides a forum for the exchange of the
latest conceptual and technological research advances on resident microorganisms
and their impact on the fitness of animals and plants. The meeting will bring
together US and international researchers from multiple disciplines
(microbiology, immunology, genomics, nutrition, ecology, systems biology,
evolutionary biology and clinical science), and comprises five sessions: (1)
Microbiota and the Gut-Brain Axis; (2) Evolutionary Dynamics of Host-Microbe
Interactions; (3) Nutrition and Immune Function: Cross-Species Perspectives; (4)
The Ecology of Host-Microbial Interactions; and (5) Beneficial Microbes in Human
Health and Disease. Each session will include two invited talks, four talks
selected from submitted abstracts and one further talk (invited or selected)
with a quantitative flavor, to disseminate best practice in analysis of large
datasets and facilitate discussion of outstanding barriers to computational
analysis and mathematical modeling of host-microbial interactions. The
conference will also include two poster sessions. Biologists are increasingly
recognizing that animals and plants are multi-organismal, i.e. invariably
associated with benign or beneficial microorganisms. The 2014 Beneficial
Microbes Conference will provide the opportunity to exchange ideas and
information on these interactions, and explore exciting new opportunities to
promote the health and vigor of animals/plants of economic and conservation
importance, including agricultural crops, pollinators, and pests. The conference
includes advertised opportunities for break-out groups to discuss specific
scientific topics and issues in professional development (e.g. careers). A
Conference Discussion on Future Directions in Beneficial Microbes Research will
be the foundation for a published commentary on research priorities to overcome
current barriers to advancement of the field. The conference will be
particularly useful to promote opportunities for early-career researchers, women
and minorities, through invitation and travel assistance, ensuring that these
participants are well-represented and their scientific career opportunities are
fully supported.