* 1417611
* Collaborative Research: Land Bridges, Ice-Free Corridors, and Biome Shifts: Impacts on the Evolution and Extinction of Horses in Ice-Age Beringia
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Daniel Mann, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 542,735.00

Title: Land Bridges, Ice-Free Corridors, and Biome Shifts: Impacts on the
Evolution and Extinction of Horses in Ice-Age Beringia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study asks: How important was connectivity among populations of large arctic
mammal species for maintaining genetic diversity, influencing evolutionary
change, and mitigating extinction risk? What types of barriers affected this
connectivity, and how permeable were these barriers to gene flow? The PIs will
study how caballine horses, that inhabited ice-age Beringia (the biogeographic
connector between Asia and North America), were affected by changes involving
three different biogeographic barriers/corridors (1. the Bering Strait/Bering
Land Bridge, which controlled dispersal and gene flow between Eurasia and
Alaska; 2. the Ice-Free Corridor, which controlled gene flow between the Yukon
and the Lower 48 States; and 3. biome shifts that periodically disrupted the
spatial continuity of the Mammoth-Steppe, the unique ecosystem that stretched
from France to the Yukon during the ice ages) during the last 30,000 years of
the ice age. This study will evaluate the effects that each of these putative
barriers to gene flow had on the abundance, distribution, and evolutionary
trajectories of ice-age horses in the Arctic using new paleogenomic and
paleoenvironmental data. The results will provide new insights into the roles
played by environmental change and population fragmentation in determining
extinction risk, and help predict how ongoing environmental changes will affect
arctic ecosystems. This project will lead to advances in the rapidly developing
field of paleogenetics and further the brand-new discipline of paleogenomic
ecology. The Broader Impacts plan focuses on: a) research and professional
development opportunities for graduate students, b) new training opportunities
for undergraduate students who aspire to become STEM high school teachers, c)
outreach to Native communities in rural Alaska, and d) outreach to K-12 students
in Fairbanks, AK. At the end of each summer, the pre-service teachers, graduate
students, and PIs will produce an inquiry activity module for grades 9-12 to be
shared with local schools. Finally, the PIs will engage in both professional and
public discourse, and use the results in media productions.&lt;br/&gt;