* 1417228
* STTR Phase I:  Ferrofluidic enclosures for enhanced control of thermal and magnetic fields in spin-stabilized atomic micro-devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Andrei Shkel, CoMMET, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is determined by new
consumer products and new industries which would flourish on portable and
reliable atomic clocks, gyroscopes, and magnetometers when they become
available. Proposed compact thermal and magnetic enclosure reduces the most
bulky part of such devices and provides an avenue for further miniaturization. A
chip-scale atomic clocks would dramatically increase GPS resolution and
relocking speed, computer clocks and broadband speed, better use of
electromagnetic spectrum for communication and networking devices. Examples of
inertia navigation applications with significant society impact include urban
conditions, underwater or mountain terrain, building interior or underground
facilities, areas with poor satellite reception or jammed signal. A typical
reference source for recalibration of inertia navigational systems is the
magnetometer measurements. In addition high resolution portable magnetometers
would be essential in cars/highway safety, in industrial applications for
material sorting and handling, quality control, and nondestructive defectoscopy.
Bio-magnetic studies such as magnetic orientation of vertebrates
(animal/birds/fish) and bacteria could bring many insights for human navigation
as well. Biomedical diagnosis often uses magnetic measurements: this includes
NMR scanning, study of brain electro-activity, blood cell counting, and DNA
markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project targets a micro-enclosure controlling temperature and magnetic
field in chip-scale Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) devices. Precise control of
the temperature and the magnetic field inside the camber containing vapor of
alkali-metal atoms is critical for performance of NMR devices; however, current
approaches depend on a bulky equipment which is far from being portable. A
novelty of the proposed design is linking MNR chamber, heating elements, thermal
sensor and solenoid coils by a ferrofluidic enclosure. High magnetic
permeability of ferrofluid reduces the number of coils and the current density,
required to produce the desired magnetic field and assists in providing highly
uniform and controllable magnetic field in the micro-enclosure; in addition,
ferrofluid operates as a heat reservoir keeping uniform and stable temperature
regime. Ferrofluid could also self-sense a temperature change in the chamber
without involving additional thermal sensors, thus simplifying the device
construction and reducing its cost. The proposed activity includes development,
prototyping and testing performance of the enclosure. Further development in
Phase II would include coupling of the enclosure with a portable NMR chamber.
Eventually, a similar approach will be applied for magnetic coupling with
microfluidic sampling and probing stations for bio-magnetic studies.