* 1417245
* Using ocean tidal load response to explore upper mantle density and elastic structure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Simons, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2017
* USD 212,972.00

Seismology has revolutionized our understanding of the Earth's interior, but is
also limited in its ability to distinguish between variations in different basic
characteristics inside the Earth such between elastic properties and density.
Constraining such properties is essential to the fundamental understanding of
the evolution of the earth, the structure of continents and the processes
driving plate tectonics. This project explores the use of a new observable that
can complement seismology as a probe of the earth?s interior. Using global
position system (GPS) estimates of ground movement, one can now detect the
impact of the periodic movement of water mass associated with daily tides as
they flex the surface of the earth due to the enormous weight of the moving
oceans. Since the amount of flexing is directly controlled by interior
properties of the solid earth, we can use these observations coupled with models
of the ocean tides to constrain spatial variations in interior properties. This
project focuses on both developing these new observation types and using them in
models of the structure of the Earth's upper mantle with a particular focus on
understanding the outermost 500 km of the Earth in the South American
continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth's ocean tidal load (OTL) response is
manifest as horizontal and vertical spatial displacements up to 5-10 cm in
amplitude and are regularly measured by GPS receivers with 1 mm accuracy at sub-
daily tidal periods. Investigations into OTL response provide a direct means of
testing scaling laws and assumptions commonly adopted in seismology to relate
seismic velocities to fundamental rock properties, as well as a means of
rejecting existing proposed models of the Earth that are inconsistent with the
geodetic observations. Furthermore, inferred density and elasticity models can
be used to address outstanding questions in geophysics, such as the long-term
stability of continental cratons against tectonic deformation. A byproduct of
this effort will be the development of computational infrastructure to invert
tidal observations in a Bayesian framework.