* 1417402
* Lattice Strong Dynamics at the Energy Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* George Fleming, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Senior Research Scientist George T.
Fleming of Yale University, who is co-spokesperson of the Lattice Strong
Dynamics (LSD) collaboration. In 2012, physicists from around the world working
on the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) announced the discovery of the long-sought
Higgs boson, for which the Nobel prize was awarded the following year. As
theoretical particle physicists applaud the discovery, they are also quite
confused that no new physics beyond the Standard Model (BSM) was discovered
along with the Higgs boson. So, it remains a mystery how the Higgs boson avoids
the effects of quantum gravity, which would make it much heavier than has been
observed. This mystery could be solved if the Higgs boson turned out to be a
composite particle in much the same way as protons and neutrons are composites
made of quarks and gluons, rendering it immune to the effects of quantum
gravity. There has been no direct evidence that such a composite scalar could
exist until recently, when the LatKMI group of the Kobayashi-Maskawa Institute
in Nagoya, Japan announced the first calculation of a light composite scalar
consistent with the Higgs boson. As leader of the LSD collaboration, Dr. Fleming
is working to confirm this scenario by repeating and improving upon the
calculation of the LatKMI group. Lattice gauge theory (LGT) calculations of many
physical observables essentially involve extracting exponentially decaying
signals from noisy time series data generated in Monte Carlo simulations. Many
other scientific fields, e.g. nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,
signals processing, share common challenges in data analysis of exponential time
series. Undergraduates often choose this research topic because the skills they
learn remain useful even if they don't continue to work on LGT later in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSD collaboration has begun generation of
SU(3) gauge configuration ensembles with eight flavors of Dirac fermions in the
fundamental representation. This strongly-coupled gauge theory has long been
proposed as a candidate for Walking Technicolor. The calculation of the LatKMI
group has shown that the theory contains a surprisingly light scalar particle
consistent with the Higgs boson. Calculating the mass of this scalar particle is
particularly challenging so the LatKMI result has rather large statistical
errors. The LSD collaboration, with access to the Vulcan BG/Q supercomputer at
Lawrence Livermore National Lab (LLNL), can improve upon the existing
calculation with improved statistics, larger physical volumes and smaller quark
masses. This improved calculation will be a stringent test of whether this light
scalar particle can be a viable composite Higgs candidate.