* 1417562
* RUI: Studies in Field Theory: Casimir Effect, Yang-Mills Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Dimitra Karabali, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 104,997.00

This award provides funding for an RUI research project carried out by Professor
Dimitra Karabali at the Lehman College campus of the City University of New York
(CUNY). The project addresses two topics. The first focuses on the Casimir
effect, a phenomenon where neutral objects in vacuum experience macroscopic
forces due to the quantum fluctuations of fields. These forces, although
negligible at large distances, become dominant and play an important role at
distance scales relevant in the design of nano-scale mechanical devices.
Accurate experimental observations of this phenomenon have motivated new
theoretical approaches in dealing with the effects of different geometries,
temperature, etc. As part of her research, Professor Karabali will continue her
studies of the Casimir forces and in particular contributions from diffraction
due to boundary edges in a variety of settings. The second topic focuses on the
understanding of nonperturbative phenomena in quantum Chromodynamics, the theory
describing the interactions between quarks and gluons, the fundamental
constituents of atomic nuclei. She will continue her work by building on
previously introduced techniques within the context of quantum wave equations
towards understanding confinement. This project is expected to have significant
broader impacts. Specifically, it will play an important role in fostering an
active, scientifically oriented research environment at Lehman College, CUNY, a
predominantly undergraduate institution with a large number of minority
students, designated as a Hispanic serving institution by the U.S. Department of
Education. It will also support collaboration between the high-energy theory
research groups at Lehman and at City College, CUNY.

The project addresses diffractive contributions in Casimir effect and
nonperturbative phenomena in (2+1) Yang-Mills theory. Accurate experimental
observations of the Casimir effect have motivated new theoretical approaches in
dealing with the effects of different geometries, temperature etc. The PI and
collaborators have developed a novel approach well-suited to studying
diffractive corrections to Casimir energy due to boundary edges and apertures
for different geometries, finite temperature and general boundary conditions.
This project will extend this method towards: the calculation of higher-point
functions important inner field imaging and transmission; the inclusion of
fields with spin with possible applications to the field of spectral geometry;
the dependence of the interaction energy between holes on conducting plates on
curvature (both extrinsic and intrinsic), spin and geometry. The understanding
of nonperturbative phenomena in Yang-Mills theories, such as confinement and
mass gap, is one of the outstanding problems in theoretical physics. In a series
of papers, the PI and collaborators have developed a Hamiltonian approach for
Yang-Mills theories in (2+1) dimensions, which has already produced a number of
interesting results, in good agreement with lattice calculations. Recently the
vacuum wave function obtained in the Hamiltonian formalism has been used to
derive an effective action, which, being covariant, renders certain questions
more amenable to analysis. This project will explore the properties of this
effective action and in particular the role of the Z_N vortices, present in a
sector of this action, in understanding screening versus confinement for
different representations as well as the spectrum of the excited states of the
theory and implications on glueball masses.