* 1417224
* Collaborative research:  Copepod life-history and lipid strategy in a changing Arctic - A new trait-based approach to data synthesis, modeling, and end-to-end integration
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Robert Campbell, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 25,996.00

Many people have argued that the diminishing summer Arctic sea ice extent will
result in enhanced growth of small aquatic plants and, consequently, the small
marine animals (zooplankton) that feed upon these plants. These animals are the
preferred prey of larger animals that are important sources of subsistence and
commercial harvest for local Arctic residents. This proposed project explores
the idea that the nutritional value of the zooplankton may be altered as their
numbers and total mass increase. Thus, predicting the impact of an increase in
zooplankton may not be as straightforward as previously
assumed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is motivated by the hypothesis that
the impact of future climate change on high-latitude planktivores, such as
seabirds, fish, and bowhead whales, will come as much through changes in their
prey quality (individual size and lipid content) as through changes in their
prey biomass?with decreases in quality often accompanying and outweighing
increases in biomass. To explore this hypothesis, the PIs will develop and apply
a new kind of model that links climate forcing to impacts on planktivores via
the life-history patterns of large zooplankton. A set of coordinated regional
and large-scale model applications will examine specific, local versions of the
central hypothesis as it applies to calanoid copepods and their predators, in
the process refining the model, ensuring its cross-region portability, and also
integrating a number of rich US and European zooplankton datasets for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will initiate and expand an array of
collaborations among researchers in the US and Denmark. These collaborations
include capacity-building and a postdoc exchange with the Centre for Ocean Life
at the Technical University of Denmark, the leading center of trait-based marine
research. Furthermore, using leveraged support from the IGERT Program on Ocean
Change at the University of Washington, the PI will visit the Greenland Climate
Research Centre (Nuuk) to work with M. Simon and other colleagues on formulating
a new, student-centered collaboration on indigenous seafood security and human
dimensions of climate change. This is also an opportunity to share early model
results with zooplankton, fisheries, and marine mammal researchers there, and
develop new applied research directions.