* 1417819
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: High-throughput Phenotyping on Electronic Health Records using Multi-Tensor Factorization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Abel Kho, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 152,406.00

As the adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) has grown, EHRs are now
composed of a diverse array of data, including structured information (e.g.,
diagnoses, medications, and lab results), molecular sequences, unstructured
clinical progress notes, and social network information. There is mounting
evidence that EHRs are a rich resource for clinical research, but they are
notoriously difficult to leverage because of their orientation to healthcare
business operations, heterogeneity across commercial systems, and high levels of
missing or erroneous entries. Moreover, the interactions among different data
sources within an EHR are challenging to model, hampering our ability to
leverage traditional analytic frameworks. In recognition of this problem,
various efforts have been undertaken to transform EHR data into concise and
meaningful concepts, or phenotypes. Yet, to date, these efforts have been ad hoc
and labor intensive, resulting in specific phenotypes for specific environments;
e.g., type 2 diabetes in the EHR system at Vanderbilt University Medical Center
(VUMC). There is an urgent need for scalable phenotyping methods, but several
major challenges must be addressed, including: a) patient representation, b)
high-throughput phenotype generation from EHRs, c) expert-guided phenotype
refinement, and d) phenotype adaptation across institutions. The goal of this
project is to address these challenges by developing a general computational
framework for transforming EHR data into meaningful phenotypes with only modest
levels of expert guidance. The PIs will develop novel courses on Healthcare
Analytics as a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) that covers cross-disciplinary
topics at the confluence of computer science and medical informatics, while
embellishing existing graduate courses on biomedical informatics. The PIs plan
to deliver tutorials and organize workshops at relevant computer science and
medical informatics conferences with the goal of sharing research results and
developing a community. The PIs will develop outreach modules that focus on
freshmen and under-represented students, as well as educational sessions for
clinical researchers who are currently performing phenotyping in academic
medical centers. Thus, the project has a significant component the integrates
research and education as well as providing for new scientific insights.

In support of this goal, the team plans to represent and analyze EHR data as
inter-connected high-order relations i.e. tensors (e.g. tuples of patient-
medication-diagnosis, patient-lab, and patient-symptoms). The proposed analytic
framework generalizes several existing data mining methodologies, including
dimensionality reduction, topic modeling and co-clustering, which all arise as
limited special cases of analyzing second order tensors. It will also enable
flexible refinement of candidates to adapt phenotypes from one healthcare
institution to another, and will incorporate feedback from domain experts. The
accompanying suite of algorithms and methods will enable the automation of high-
throughput phenotype generation, refinement, adaptation and applications, in a
broad range of health informatics settings and across multiple institutions.
This project will integrate biomedical informaticists, computer scientists, and
clinical experts. The significance of the resulting phenotypes in diverse
clinical applications, including: a) cohort construction, where case and control
patients are identified with respect to specific phenotype combinations; b)
genome wide association studies (GWAS), where target phenotypes of patients are
tested against DNA sequence variation for significant statistical associations;
and c) clinical predictive modeling, where a model is developed to predict
target phenotypes or diseases will be demonstrated. The framework will be
developed with public accessible data from MIMIC-II and CMS and validate in real
clinical environments at Northwestern Memorial Hospital and VUMC through several
high-impact disease targets (including hypertension, type 2 diabetes,
hypothyroidism, atrial fibrillation, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple
sclerosis). Additionally, the methodologies developed through this project will
be integrated into existing software platforms that support the representation
of EHR-derived phenotypes, but lack a data-driven component for the generation
and refinement of candidates. Overall, the proposed framework is expected to
have a major impact on translational clinical research including clinical trial
design, predictive modeling, epidemiology studies and clinical decision support.