* 1417856
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Statistical Validation and Uncertainty Quantification for Large Spatio-Temporal Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* C. Shane Reese, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 201,000.00

Computer simulations, satellites and various other technological advances have
paved the way into unprecedented scientific territory by generating volumes of
previously uncollectable datasets. Properly utilizing these new data products to
promote scientific discovery requires that they, first, be (i) validated and
(ii) paired with an appropriate measure of uncertainty. Validating a data
product entails comparing "synthetic" data (e.g., computer model simulations,
remote sensing measurements, or statistical predictions) with observational
counterparts to substantiate the digital data for its use in scientific
discovery. Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is a necessary component to
validation and entails accounting for and stating the uncertainties associated
with scientific conclusions derived from digital or observational data. The
purpose of this research is to promote scientific discovery using digital data
products by developing statistical methods to perform validation and uncertainty
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the strong need to perform, and the
substantial challenges facing, statistical validation and UQ, this research will
(i) develop new validation strategies for simulated and digital datasets based
on scientifically motivated features; (ii) develop multivariate spatio-temporal
statistical models that can be used to implement, and perform UQ for spatio-
temporal data products; and, (iii) develop scalable computation techniques for
fitting the developed spatio-temporal statistical models. This research will
implement these techniques on data products in atmospheric, agricultural and
environmental sciences to facilitate their use in scientific inquiry.