* 1417777
* Driven to Discover: Citizen Science Inspires Classroom Investigation
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Michele Koomen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,299,549.00

Driven to Discover: Citizen Science Inspires Classroom Investigation
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Citizen science refers to partnerships between volunteers
and scientists that answer real world questions. The target audiences in this
project are middle and high school teachers and their students in a broad range
of settings: two urban districts, an inner-ring suburb, and three rural
districts. The project utilizes existing citizen science programs as
springboards for professional development for teachers during an intensive
summer workshop. The project curriculum helps teachers use student participation
in citizen science to engage them in the full complement of science practices;
from asking questions, to conducting independent research, to sharing findings.
Through district professional learning communities (PLCs), teachers work with
district and project staff to support and demonstrate project implementation. As
students and their teachers engage in project activities, the project team is
addressing two key research questions: 1) What is the nature of instructional
practices that promote student engagement in the process of science?, and 2) How
does this engagement influence student learning, with special attention to the
benefits of engaging in research presentations in public, high profile venues?
Key contributions of the project are stronger connections between a) ecology-
based citizen science programs, STEM curriculum, and students' lives and b)
science learning and disciplinary literacy in reading, writing and
math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research design and analysis are focused on
understanding how professional development that involves citizen science and
independent investigations influences teachers' classroom practices and student
learning. The research utilizes existing instruments to investigate teachers'
classroom practices, and student engagement and cognitive activity: the
Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher Preparation and Classroom Observation
Protocol, and Inquiring into Science Instruction Observation Protocol. These
instruments are used in classroom observations of a stratified sample of classes
whose students represent the diversity of the participating districts.
Curriculum resources for each citizen science topic, cross-referenced to
disciplinary content and practices of the NGSS, include 1) a bibliography
(books, web links, relevant research articles); 2) lesson plans and student
science journals addressing relevant science content and background on the
project; and 3) short videos that help teachers introduce the projects and
anchor a digital library to facilitate dissemination. Impacts beyond both the
timeframe of the project and the approximately 160 teachers who will participate
are supported by curriculum units that address NGSS life science topics, and
wide dissemination of these materials in a variety of venues. The evaluation
focuses on outcomes of and satisfaction with the summer workshop, classroom
incorporation, PLCs, and student learning. It provides formative and summative
findings based on qualitative and quantitative instruments, which, like those
used for the research, have well-documented reliability and validity. These
include the Science Teaching Efficacy Belief Instrument to assess teacher
beliefs; the Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol to assess teacher practices;
the Standards Assessment Inventory to assess PLC quality; and the Scientific
Attitude Inventory to assess student attitudes towards science. Project
deliverables include 1) curriculum resources that will support engagement in
five existing citizen science projects that incorporate standards-based science
content; 2) venues for student research presentations that can be duplicated in
other settings; and 3) a compilation of teacher-adapted primary scientific
research articles that will provide a model for promoting disciplinary literacy.
The project engages 40 teachers per year and their students.