* 1417766
* Collaborative research:  Exploring the role of oceanic and atmospheric forcing on Arctic marine climate from newly developed annual shell based records in coastal Norway
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Alan Wanamaker, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 472,708.00

Oceanographers and paleoclimatologists use various proxies to study the past
history of ocean temperature and salinity. Many of these are recorded in the
marine sediments, but sedimentation rates are so small that the time series that
can be estimated from them only resolve changes that occur on decadal time
scales or longer. When clams and other bivalves grow, they incorporate, in their
shells, geochemical signatures from the water in which they live. They also lay
down growth rings, like tree rings, in their shells. By studying the chemistry
of adjacent rings in long-lived clam shells the principal investigators (PIs) of
this project expect to be able to reconstruct the annual temperature and
salinity variations of near surface waters in a region offshore of northern
Norway. They will focus their efforts on the Medieval Warm Period (1000 AD to
1200 AD), the Little Ice Age (1200 AD to 1850 AD), and the modern era (1850 AD
until the present). The resultant histories of temperature and salinity
variation will be useful for understanding how the ocean conditions changed
during these known periods of climate variation and for validating or
constraining climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs? immediate goal is to
reconstruct annual hydrographic variability during key climate intervals within
the last millennium along the strategically located Arctic islands of Ingoy and
Rolvsoy. They will hindcast changes in annual sea surface temperature (SST) and
sea surface salinity (SSS). They will also establish the baseline variability in
the marine radiocarbon reservoir effect. The modern near-surface oceanography
along the islands is influenced by the physical properties of the Norwegian
Coastal Current, while the relatively deep hydrographic conditions predominately
depend on Atlantic inflow. Pilot data from the study site demonstrate a strong
link between shell-based records and regional SST/SSS conditions. Hence, Ingoy
and Rolvsoy seem situated in an ideal location to study marine climate change
during the late Holocene. Hypotheses and objectives have been developed to test
the relative influence of dominant climate modes on the regional oceanography
near northern Norway during the last millennium.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Develop
near-surface annual shell-based records (master shell chronology and isotopes)
to reconstruct regional hydrographic variability (SST and SSS) along the
northernmost coast of Norway during intervals of the Medieval Climate Anomaly,
the Little Ice Age, and for Modern Climate.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Develop
relatively deep-water (200 m) annual shell-based records (master shell
chronology and isotopes) for the last 100 years to characterize the role of the
North Atlantic Current on hydrography at the site.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3:
Establish a decadal record of the surface marine radiocarbon reservoir effect
since AD 1600 to estimate changes in source water contributions at
Ingoy.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4: Estimate the relative influence of the winter
North Atlantic Oscillation, the surface Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation, and the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation on regional hydrography
(at Ingoy) and shell-based records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international
partnership for studying Arctic marine climate change will be developed with
colleagues from the Akvaplan-niva (Norway), Iowa State University (ISU) and
Bates College (Maine). Outreach, public engagement, and dissemination of the
results will be accomplished through engagement of two K-12 teachers in the
field work, through classroom interactions with K-12 students, through a K-12
teacher workshop, through citizen-based science (via interactions with native
Norwegians at Ingoy), and via a photo-journalist who will join the PIs for one
field season. At least one female PhD student and approximately five
undergraduate students will be supported by and involved with the project. The
PIs will use data and ideas developed in this project for several courses at ISU
and Bates College relating to climate change, paleoclimate and oceanography. PI
Wanamaker will facilitate a public lecture series on climate change at the Ames
Public library and continue to act as co-chair of Edwards Elementary Science
Night, which has impacted &gt; 1,000 students and community members since 2012.