* 1417987
* Collaborative Research: The Greenland Firn Aquifer Impacts on Ice Sheet Hydrology: Characterizing Volume, Flow, and Discharge
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* D. Kip Solomon, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 725,187.00

This project will follow up on the serendipitous recent discovery that liquid
water is present year-round within the firn layer of the southern Greenland Ice
Sheet. This discovery complicates understanding of the relationship of surface
melting on the ice sheet to sea level rise by revealing another pathway for
meltwater to take. Even the most fundamental questions about the firn aquifer
remain unanswered. This proposal will address three essential research
questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. What are the pathways and connections of the firn
aquifer with the broader Greenland hydrologic system and what is the aquifer's
effect on sea level rise?&lt;br/&gt;2. What is the mass/volume of the liquid
water stored in the Greenland firn aquifer?&lt;br/&gt;3. What are the rates and
patterns of water flow in the aquifer?&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be
addressed using standard groundwater sampling techniques, seismic sounding,
nuclear magnetic resonance, and ice core measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance knowledge of the Greenland firn aquifer guided by two end
member hypotheses that present possible pathways for this stored water to exit
the aquifer. 1: The aquifer is connected to a well-developed englacial
hydrologic network, including crevasses and moulins, that drain some portion of
the aquifer at a relatively constant rate (seasonally) to the bed, similar to
surface melt in western Greenland. or 2: The aquifer is primarily storing water
in available firn pore space and will not release water until the pore space is
completely saturated and/or a threshold is met leading to a release event. It is
likely that some proportion of each mechanism is relevant depending upon
location on the ice sheet. The proposed field studies along with local and
regional modeling studies focused along an elevation gradient of an ice flow
line into Helheim Glacier are aimed at determining the relative contribution of
each pathway. This knowledge is required to accurately measure and predict the
Greenland ice sheet?s present and future contribution to sea level rise.
Additionally this research verifies ground hydrology and seismic techniques for
measuring englacial water volume and flow providing new multi-disciplinary
techniques for future research. Broader impacts include 1) gaining further
understanding of a previously unknown storage of water in the Greenland Ice
Sheet; 2) training two postdoctoral researchers, in glaciology and firn
modeling; 3) involving graduate and undergraduate students; 4) Informing the
local community by presenting at the Kulusuk, Greenland School; 5) Informing the
broad public through established outreach programs.