* 1417767
* RCN: Facilitating Indigenous Research, Science and Technology (FIRST) in Alaska, Hawai'i, and the Continental U.S.
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2023
* Elizabeth Medicine Crow, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 557,304.00

Indigenous students are one of the most underrepresented groups in science. This
team of indigenous scholars and scientists will develop a network of indigenous
scholars, students and community members to study processes and practices that
foster indigenous knowledge and scholarship through community engagement. By
fostering a dialogue about the production of science that bridges both western
and indigenous world views, the network will engage indigenous communities in
science. In addition, they will identify research needs and priorities, develop
ethical research protocols to guide research with Native communities, mentor
young scholars, and recommend mechanisms to strengthen and sustain the network
beyond the length of the award. This project supports the White House 2020 goals
in higher education by assisting in the preparation of indigenous people for the
new economy through maintaining their engagement in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Coordination Network (RCN) for
Facilitating Indigenous Research, Science and Technology will develop a network
of indigenous scholars from the continental U.S., Alaska, and Hawaii for the
purpose of developing indigenous scientific epistemologies and investigating
their inclusion in scientific inquiry. Over the course of the RCN the project
will outline a methodology that fosters indigenous knowledge and scholarship in
scientific research, a process that is integral to the engagement of indigenous
communities in science. The training and development of indigenous students and
the inclusion of indigenous community members as collaborators is at the core of
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;