* 1417181
* STTR Phase I:  The Development and Evaluation of an Intelligent Diabetes Self-Management Tool
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Joshua Chuang, Caduceus Intelligence Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an intelligent self-management
tool for the 25 million diabetes patients in the US and the 200 million diabetes
patients in the world. The proposed study is consonant with the vision of
?learning health system? from the Institute of Medicine in which appropriate
interfaces should be provided to engage individuals in population health
monitoring and to optimize chronic disease care and control. The proposed
technology (Diabetes Self-Management Dashboard) will be applicable across
platforms (i.e., mobile devices and personal computers), and will incorporate
novel methods that mitigate the technical limitations of existing tools. The
proposed project covers the development and evaluation of the technology.
Although diabetes was chosen as the research case, the project is transferable
to other chronic conditions that may benefit from an intelligent self-management
application.

The proposed project accentuates the inter-relationship among intelligent health
IT interventions, theoretical psycho-behavioral determinants, and clinical
outcome from self-care. The proposition is that through this multifaceted
perspective, we may better delineate the essences in diabetes self-management,
and then offer optimized social-technical support accordingly. The team intends
to overcome several limitations of existing self-management tools: 1) ignoring
the potential of mobile devices in self-care, 2) failing to translate self-
monitoring data to patient-interpretable implications, and 3) lacking tailored
educational materials and actionable recommendations. The specific technical
innovations include: 1) health status monitoring and trend projection, 2)
assessment and prediction of risks for major events (e.g., stroke, heart attack,
and hospitalization), 3) recommendation of personalized educational materials,
and 4) several social functionalities. Along with the technical innovations, we
formulate comprehensive evaluation plans that critically assess the usability of
the technology (via System Usability Scale and semi-structured interviews), the
effectiveness of the technology (via within-subjects and between-groups design
of field experiments), and the proposed theoretical model and research
hypotheses (via structural equation modeling). The project is expected to result
into an advanced and commecializable system is expected t is powered by
scientific algorithms and motivated by relevant health behavioral theories, with
systematic assessment on its usability and effectiveness.