* 1417036
* Collaborative Research:  Land Bridges, Ice-Free Corridors, and Biome Shifts: Impacts on the Evolution and Extinction of Horses in Ice-Age Beringia
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Beth Shapiro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 423,035.00

Title: Land Bridges, Ice-Free Corridors, and Biome Shifts: Impacts on the
Evolution and Extinction of Horses in Ice-Age Beringia

This study asks: How important was connectivity among populations of large
arctic mammal species for maintaining genetic diversity, influencing
evolutionary change, and mitigating extinction risk? What types of barriers
affected this connectivity, and how permeable were these barriers to gene flow?
The PIs will study how caballine horses, that inhabited ice-age Beringia (the
biogeographic connector between Asia and North America), were affected by
changes involving three different biogeographic barriers/corridors (1. the
Bering Strait/Bering Land Bridge, which controlled dispersal and gene flow
between Eurasia and Alaska; 2. the Ice-Free Corridor, which controlled gene flow
between the Yukon and the Lower 48 States; and 3. biome shifts that periodically
disrupted the spatial continuity of the Mammoth-Steppe, the unique ecosystem
that stretched from France to the Yukon during the ice ages) during the last
30,000 years of the ice age. This study will evaluate the effects that each of
these putative barriers to gene flow had on the abundance, distribution, and
evolutionary trajectories of ice-age horses in the Arctic using new paleogenomic
and paleoenvironmental data. The results will provide new insights into the
roles played by environmental change and population fragmentation in determining
extinction risk, and help predict how ongoing environmental changes will affect
arctic ecosystems. This project will lead to advances in the rapidly developing
field of paleogenetics and further the brand-new discipline of paleogenomic
ecology. The Broader Impacts plan focuses on: a) research and professional
development opportunities for graduate students, b) new training opportunities
for undergraduate students who aspire to become STEM high school teachers, c)
outreach to Native communities in rural Alaska, and d) outreach to K-12 students
in Fairbanks, AK. At the end of each summer, the pre-service teachers, graduate
students, and PIs will produce an inquiry activity module for grades 9-12 to be
shared with local schools. Finally, the PIs will engage in both professional and
public discourse, and use the results in media productions.

This is an interdisciplinary study combining cutting-edge paleogenomic
techniques with newly synthesized paleoecological data to infer how arctic
species were affected by past changes in climate, vegetation, and population
connectivity. It builds on extensive previous work by the investigators,
including hundreds of previously 14C-dated horse bones from permafrost that
comprise a globally unique archive of ancient DNA.