* 1417031
* Development of a Magnetostrophic Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Roberts, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,861.00

A dynamo is a device that converts mechanical energy into electrical energy. It
does this by moving an electrical conductor across a magnetic field. This
induces an electrical current which creates its own induced magnetic field. The
dynamo becomes self-excited when the induced and inducing magnetic fields are
the same. A similar self-excited process creates Earth's magnetic field. The
associated electric currents flow in the Earth's core, a nearly spherical mass
of liquid iron, of radius 2,200 miles, surrounding the Earth's center. Because
of this conducting fluid's motion, the Earth's core is a gigantic electric
generator, called 'the geodynamo'. A dynamo also needs a power source to
maintain its motion and production of electricity despite heat losses through
electrical resistance. For the geodynamo the power source is thought to be due
to the buoyancy of density differences in the core. The power is expended not
only in maintaining the magnetic field but also in overcoming the frictional
forces opposing the fluid motion. Current numerical simulations assume that the
frictional energy losses are comparable with those from electrical resistance,
but it is generally agreed that in reality they are very much less. A dynamo
that ignores frictional losses is termed magnetostrophic, and the investigators
have recently revived an old idea of the plasma physicist, Bryan Taylor, that
has led them to a new numerical procedure through which they have already
derived two-dimensional solutions of the magnetostrophic equations. The
investigators believe that, when they have made the solutions three-dimensional
(a complicated step), they will become the new paradigm for future simulations
of magnetic field creation and lead to a better understanding of how the Earth
and other planets create their magnetism.

The north-seeking property of the magnetic compass needle shows that the
Coriolis force strongly influences core motion. This force is balanced primarily
by buoyancy and the Lorentz force, which is the force exerted on a current-
carrying conductor by the magnetic field. Taylor showed in 1953 how the
resulting simplified dynamical balance could be achieved, so determining the
fluid velocity as a functional of the magnetic field. To close the regenerative
loop, it is necessary to determine the magnetic field from the fluid velocity,
but that is the well-known and well-understood kinematic dynamo process. The way
ahead seemed simple in 1953 but all the determined attempts made since then to
implement Taylor's suggestion failed, prior to that of the investigating team
this year. The model was greatly simplified by assuming symmetry with respect to
the Earth's rotation axis. The well-known alpha-effect was invoked as the power
source. This also made Cowling's theorem, that otherwise would have ruled out
axisymmetric solutions, inapplicable. To convince the dynamo community that this
success is meaningful, the team plans to abandon axisymmetry, remove the alpha-
effect, and rely on buoyancy to supply the required power. The investigators
believe that their results will be an eye-opener for the dynamo community, and
will become the basis for models of naturally-occurring dynamos in planets and
stars that are more realistic than today's simulations which assume a viscous
friction that is very much too large.