* 1417659
* Analysis of Cirrus Clouds and Atmospheric Humidity with Cloud Resolving Numerical Model Calculations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Stephan Fueglistaler, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 443,075.00

Clouds pose a major challenge for global climate models, and uncertainties
remain from process level understanding of cloud formation to processes that
control the global cloud distribution. This project provides high-resolution
numerical model simulations that will advance our theoretical understanding of
the dominant factors controlling the genesis and global distribution of cirrus
clouds, their impact on atmospheric water vapor, and the radiative impact of the
combined cloud/vapor system. The role of cirrus clouds in dehydration of the
upper troposphere remains not well quantified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's focus is on the importance of the interaction between cirrus clouds
and the environment, and aims to bridge the gap in numerical modeling between
the detailed study of individual cirrus clouds and the full domain-wide
properties of the cloud field. The objectives of this project are (i) to
determine the relative importance of nucleation processes (traditionally a focus
of cirrus research) to post-nucleation processes (such as gravitational
redistribution of condensate) on the cloud's microphysical properties; (ii) to
quantify the impact of the cloud microphysical properties on the domain-wide
moisture field (which in turn may feed back onto cloud formation) and domain-
wide cloud field properties (such as occurrence frequency and ice water path);
and (iii) to put the results from (i) and (ii) in context with the dynamical
constraints on conditions favorable for cloud formation. The project focuses
specifically on the role of cirrus in the tropical tropopause layer (TTL).
Results from the project will contribute to improved understanding of the role
of cirrus clouds for the regulation of water vapor in the TTL and stratosphere
(with important consequences for the radiative forcing of climate, and
stratospheric chemistry). The TTL is also in several ways ideal to study cirrus
clouds and their interaction with the environment as both the dynamical
conditions favoring in-situ cirrus cloud formation, as well as the large-scale
structure of the TTL, can be reasonably well idealized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the project are addressed with a wide range of numerical
experiments with a cloud-resolving model that is scalable from very high
resolution simulations at cloud scale to simulations of the entire
tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights
from this project will help to improve parameterizations for general circulation
models, leading to improved climate predictions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;This project will help to reduce uncertainties in climate
predictions, providing policy makers with more accurate information on future
climate. The project will support a designated post-doctoral researcher with
excellent reputation and a graduate student, thus training the next generation
of cloud modeling specialists. Further, the PI will actively promote involvement
of undergraduate students (in the form of Junior and Senior Theses) at Princeton
University, thereby providing a first-hand experience and better understanding
of climate science to a body of students that frequently follows careers in
industry, finance and government.