* 1417667
* Modeled Export of Ancient, Thick Sea Ice from the Arctic, and its Role in Abrupt Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Raymond Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 595,992.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address fundamental
questions regarding both paleo-climate and paleo-circulation of the ocean by
identifying what may have triggered past abrupt climate change. In the late
nineteenth century, Sir George Nares came across 15-18 m thick, immobile, ice
extending 480 km off the northern Ellesmere coast. The characteristics of the
ice were very different from the 2-3 m thick ice now circulating the Arctic
Ocean. Similar accounts from other arctic explorers from this time provided
insight into what must surely have been a far thicker and more persistent ice
cover over the Arctic Ocean during full glacial conditions than we see today.
Indeed, low biological productivity and extremely low, or absent, sediment
deposition in the Arctic during glacial periods suggest that parts of the
central and western Arctic Ocean were covered by very thick, perennial ice. This
research will explore how such ice could have covered much of the Arctic Ocean
during glacial periods, how thick it could have been, and whether its eventual
mobilization and demise could have produced freshwater output to the North
Atlantic large enough to weaken the deep water formation and trigger abrupt
climate cooling. Using a suite of sophisticated, high-resolution, coupled
numerical model experiments, this group will address these questions and
highlight the connection between changes in the Arctic hydrological cycle and
global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each investigator has a serious commitment
to education and public outreach, and the project will support and train a
graduate student who will work with the investigators in all aspects of the
research. Each investigator has been involved with local primary and secondary
schools, either by making presentations, hiring students for the summer,
mentoring science fair projects, or contributing to curriculum development. They
will contribute to the on-going middle and high school science teacher training
activities by developing a web-based, interactive, sea ice-learning tool to
teach school children about the mechanisms behind sea ice formation and how ice
will change as the arctic climate warms. In addition, well-developed
relationships with local community organizations will help promote public
understanding of abrupt climate change. The idea of thick sea ice in the Arctic
has a remarkable ability to capture the public imagination in much the same way
as it did in the Victorian period when explorers returned from the Arctic with
tales of thick impenetrable ice, conveying the concept of the important role
that the Arctic plays in global
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project stems from its ability to establish a link
between the physical arctic system (circulation, sea ice, icebergs) and global
climate. Numerical models have recently shown that freshwater sourced from the
Arctic is twice as effective at disrupting climate than freshwater released from
more southerly sources, but to the present the subject of freshwater and abrupt
climate change has been dominated by discussion of meltwater floods emanating
from glacial lake outbursts. Determining whether the export of sea ice and
associated superimposed ice from the Arctic to the North Atlantic could supply
enough freshwater to the Nordic Seas to cause the Earth's climate to cool will
provide new insight into the mechanisms that trigger abrupt climate change. By
quantifying the sensitivity of Atlantic meridional overturning circulation to
arctic freshwater forcing the researchers will also be able to better examine
whether changes in the arctic hydrological cycle in the near future (from sea
ice melt and freshwater export from the Beaufort Gyre) pose a threat to the
stability of modern-day climate and human society. In addition, the numerical
model developed for this project will resolve ocean circulation, sea ice, and
iceberg transport at a resolution approx. 0.17 degrees (ca. 19 km), 5-10 times
higher than that of existing paleo-climate models, and have the capability of
simulating narrow coastal boundary currents, shelf-breaks, and frontal zones
important for freshwater transport along the continental margins, and other
features not captured by the current generation of paleo-climate models.