* 1417642
* Facilitating Arctic System Science using the Community Earth System Model
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Gent, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 696,670.00

Earth System Models are one of the key tools for understanding how Earth's
climate will change over the coming years and decades, but the complexity and
inaccessibility of existing earth system models are a barrier to their
widespread use. Unlike other efforts, the Community Earth System Model (CESM)
source code and output are freely available through supported public releases
and the broad science community is encouraged to participate in model
development, analysis, and experimental design. This project will facilitate
broad community involvement in CESM specifically for Arctic science applications
by providing support for a polar science liaison.

The proposed liaison activities target all types of scientists, including those
new to earth system model research that require one-on-one assistance. The
liaison activities supported under this project will have three primary foci: 1)
Engaging and expanding the CESM polar science research community through hosted
visits, focused meetings, and collaborative activities, 2) Providing direct
support to Arctic scientists in the use, analysis, and development of CESM, and
3) Supporting and making available Arctic science related applications of CESM.
The project will educate interested scientists in model specifics, the
configurations available to address particular research questions, and
information on CESM experimental design. Polar climate diagnostic tools will be
developed and made available to enable easy analysis of CESM integrations.
Experiments, designed by the community to address aspects of understanding
Arctic change, will be performed and made available through a web portal with
links to data and diagnostic plots. Outreach through interactions with the
general public, the media, and the NCAR Education and Outreach office will allow
the activities funded under this project to have a broad reach.