* 1417173
* STTR Phase I:  Sustainable Thermo-electric Conversion of Waste Heat
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Md Haque, Impulse Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will demonstrate and
evaluate a novel film-based proof-of-concept Thermoelectric Energy Conversion
(TEC) device. This research will advance the energy landscape through an
innovative technology with a superior combination of efficiency, power density,
and cost. TEC devices represent a zero emissions and zero operating cost
technology. About 60-70 quadrillion British thermal units (BTUs) of domestic
heat energy are wasted per year. Harvesting even 20% of this waste heat will
supply as much power as 10-20 new nuclear power plants. By scavenging waste heat
from residential and industrial sectors (such as chemicals, manufacturing, oil
and gas, refrigeration, transportation, and power plants), the technology will
have a resounding impact on the energy sector and the economy. Finally, this
effort will expand the current TEC market of $350 million to encompass a much
greater share of the total $4 billion energy harvesting market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to traditional thermoelectric devices, the
proposed design produces orders of magnitude higher temperature differentials
utilizing micron-scale films, with a highly scalable manufacturing process. This
is a transformative shift from the current design practice with bulk
(millimeter-scale) materials. Even with inferior values of ZT (0.15, compared to
the bulk figures of 0.5-1.0), the proposed design yields 9.8% efficiency at 200
degrees C, triple that of conventional designs. At 600 degrees C (the
temperature of typical engine exhausts), the efficiency (28%) becomes viable and
the power-to-weight performance is superior to competing devices. Unlike
conventional TEC devices, no forced cooling of the cold end is needed to
maintain the temperature differential. The most promising aspect is that this
innovation will replace today's serial and laborious manufacturing process with
a scalable and high-throughput method. This will increase power density and
lower product cost in a similar fashion as has occurred in the semiconductor
industry.