* 1417002
* STTR Phase I:  A Resorbable Luminal Barrier to Treat Peripheral Artery Disease
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Kate Stuart, Symic Biomedical Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2016
* USD 269,416.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project addresses the estimated 8 million people in the
US with peripheral artery disease (PAD). The population of PAD is increasing due
to the aging population, high prevalence of obesity and diabetes, and improved
diagnosis of the disease. Patients with PAD suffer from pain, ischemia, and
infection in their lower limbs, and cost the healthcare system an estimated
$6000 in direct spending per patient annually. The current and emerging
technologies to treat PAD are ineffective in patients with long, diffuse
lesions, calcified plaques, or patients with kidney disease. Further, the
standard practice of using cytostatic agents and antiplatelet drugs adds
additional risk to the patient and cost to the healthcare system. There is
therefore great need to develop new, effective, and safe therapies for use in
vascular interventions, including balloon angioplasty, stenting, or atherectomy.
New therapies should be robust enough to be effective in a wide range of
interventions and patient populations and address the specific injury that is
caused to the vessel during the intervention.

The proposed project examines the therapeutic use of a new material in vascular
interventions with robust application and that specifically targets the
initiating injury. This new material is delivered to the vessel wall at the site
of injury, where it binds and prevents the cascading inflammatory response that
leads to scarring of the vessel. Additionally, the new therapeutic is expected
to promote re-endothelialization of the vessel wall, so that the injury site is
rapidly healed. This proposal will examine how the therapeutic is delivered to
the vessel wall following injury, how long it remains on the vessel wall, and if
it can promote the vessel healing so that the neo-intimal hyperplasia does not
form. A rabbit animal will be used, and balloon angioplasty will be performed,
followed by delivery of the new therapeutic. Visualization of the therapeutic,
platelets, and endothelial cells will take place from 2 hours to 7 days to
determine the interaction of the components during the healing process. It is
expected that the therapeutic will remain at the site of injury and prevent
undesirable platelet binding until healing of the vessel occurs through re-
endothelialization. By protecting the injured site, it can be demonstrated that
vessel scarring is prevented.