* 1417326
* Global QCD Analysis and Precision Electroweak Physics in High Energy Collider Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jon Pumplin, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 720,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Jon Pumplin, Daniel Stump
and C.-P. Yuan at the Michigan State University
(MSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for this project will contribute to
understanding the fundamental nature of the physical universe--the particles
that comprise it and their interactions--as revealed by experiments in high
energy physics. Current understanding of high energy physics is embodied in the
Standard Model (SM). Protons and neutrons, and all other strongly interacting
particles, are composed of fundamental particles called partons (quarks and
gluons). Interactions between the partons are described by the theory of Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). The proposed research involves the interplay between QCD
theory and experimental data from many experiments, including recent experiments
at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). This global analysis of data is
necessary to deepen the understanding of QCD, and to determine the probability
distributions of the partons in the proton. By understanding these
distributions, it is possible to take interactions of protons with protons
(which is what happens at the LHC) and determine the underlying quark-quark,
quark-gluon and gluon-gluon interactions. This is essential for determining the
underlying physics of the process, and was necessary for extracting, for
example, the Higgs boson signal. These probability distributions are called
"CTEQ Parton Distribution Functions", where CTEQ means "Coordinated Theoretical-
Experiment Project of QCD". The project trains graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in theoretical high energy physics at MSU and at CTEQ
summer schools. It also provides opportunities for undergraduate students to
participate in forefront research through the REU program, and for high school
teachers and middle school students to experience physics through summer
programs sponsored by MSU and the State of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
noted, the resulting CTEQ Parton Distribution Functions have been essential to
the interpretation of experiments at the world's leading high energy collider
facilities: Fermilab (Batavia, IL), RHIC (Brookhaven, NY), DESY (Hamburg,
Germany), and CERN (Geneva, Switzerland). Although the colliders at Fermilab and
DESY have been turned off, data from those facilities are still important; in
particular, final data from HERA run II are still to be incorporated in the
present analysis when they become available. The proposed research will continue
the PIs' world-leading contributions to lepton-hadron and hadron-hadron collider
phenomenology. Complementary to the research on QCD, the group will also study
the Electroweak (EW) sector of the SM, which is extremely successful in
explaining and predicting experimental data spanning a range in energy from the
atomic scale to the Z boson and top quark masses. Measurements of W, Z, top
quark pair, single top quark and Higgs boson productions at the LHC, including
both inclusive rates and relevant kinematical distributions, will provide major
new input to the understanding of parton distributions during the next few
years. At the same time, refinements of the parton distributions are necessary
for progress in the EW sector, both for testing the SM in greater precision and
for probing New Physics effects in high energy colliders.