* 1417640
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  GreenTrACS:  a Greenland Traverse for Accumulation and Climate Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Sean Birkel, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 169,568.00

The stability of the Greenland Ice Sheet is of critical interest to scientists
and society&#8232;at large in the context of future sea-level rise. The extent
to which the Greenland Ice Sheet will lose mass and contribute to rising sea
level&#8232;in the coming decades depends on the discharge from glaciers at its
edges and on the surface mass balance, which is the balance between snow
accumulation and surface melt. Estimates of Greenland surface mass balance
increasingly utilize climate reanalyses and high-resolution regional climate
models to determine snow accumulation, surface melt and runoff/refreeze. These
models show significant, and model-dependent, biases (differences from
observations) along the steep edges of the Greenland Ice Sheet where the highest
and most variable (in space and time) rates of accumulation and surface melt are
observed. Thus, the edges of the Greenland Ice Sheet are in critical need of
updated accumulation&#8232;and melt data to validate models and improve mass
balance estimates. The investigators propose a traverse in the Western Greenland
percolation zone over two field seasons to develop continuous in-situ snow
accumulation and firn density records using ground-based radar and shallow firn
cores. The research objectives include: (1) determining the patterns, in time
and space, of snow accumulation in Western Greenland over the past 20-40 years;
(2) evaluating surface melt refreeze and englacial meltwater storage in the
Western Greenland percolation&#8232;zone over the past 20-40 years; and (3)
quantifying the accumulation and surface melt biases of the most recent climate
reanalysis models and their regional climate model counterparts.

This project will advance knowledge and understanding by providing in-situ
validation observations for both the mass gain (snow accumulation) and mass loss
(surface melt) components of Western Greenland surface mass balance. The western
edge of the Greenland Ice Sheet has been losing mass at an accelerating rate
since 2005, due mostly to decreasing surface mass balance. However, surface mass
balance trends derived from regional climate models differ by a factor of ~2.5
in this region. Western Greenland firn core accumulation records, required for
model validation, generally end in 1996-1998, before the most recent period of
accelerated mass loss. The investigators will develop continuous records of
Western Greenland snow accumulation over the last 20-40 years using ground-
penetrating radar validated by frequent snow pits and&#8232;firn cores (25-30 m)
analyzed for chemistry. They also propose to use a multi-offset radar method to
calculate continuous firn density&#8232;data, providing a means to assess past
surface melt, refreeze and current meltwater storage&#8232;in glacier aquifers.
Meltwater refreeze shows the largest variability in regional
climate&#8232;models among surface mass balance components, and thus validation
observations are critically needed. The traverse route will crisscross the
percolation zone, near-parallel to the steepest accumulation and surface melt
gradients, which will increase the value of the dataset for model validation.
The traverse will overlap previous traverse routes and reoccupy previously
sampled sites to update firn core accumulation records by 18-20 years. In
addition, the project will collect cores from new sites in data-poor regions at
lower elevations, where both accumulation and surface melt increase and regional
climate model validation is most needed. Surface mass balance validation of
several climate reanalysis models will lead to more accurate
assessments&#8232;of current and future Greenland Ice Sheet mass balance trends,
which is critical for accurately predicting&#8232;future sea-level rise. The
project will integrate research with student&#8232;learning at multiple levels,
with an emphasis on the participation of students from underrepresented groups.
The project will fund four graduate students, and incorporate numerous
undergraduate researchers recruited through successful programs like the
Dartmouth Women in Science Project and the Diversity in Undergraduate Geoscience
Alliance. K-12 students will be engaged in this project through inquiry-based,
web-hosted climate lessons incorporating the University of Maine Climate
Reanalyzer and Environmental Change Model, and through field-based programs in
the Boise Mountains focused on snow science. The PIs will continue their active
public outreach through established and successful programs like the monthly
Upper Valley Science Pub and the biannual Snow Day at the Discovery Center of
Idaho, in addition to their frequent public presentations and media interviews
through their respective Public Affairs offices.