* 1417294
* Travel Support for U.S. Participants Attending the IUTAM Symposium on Multiphase Flows with Phase Change: Challenges and Opportunities, December 8 - 11, 2014, Hyderabad, India
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2015
* USD 16,800.00

1417294&lt;br/&gt;Meiburg &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide partial
support for US scientists and engineers to participate in the International
Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) Symposium on Multiphase Flow
with Phase Change: Challenges and Opportunities. The symposium, which will be
held December 8 - 11, 2014, in Hyderabad, India, will bring together leading
experts in multiphase fluid dynamics from around the world. The symposium will
feature invited and contributed research presentations as well as several poster
sessions that will address important problems in multiphase systems that undergo
phase change. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Multiphase flows with phase change are
important in a broad range of biological, geological and industrial applications
such as cloud formation, absorption of atmospheric carbon dioxide by oceans,
food processing, spray combustion, and certain chemical processing operations.
The emphasis on phase changes that take place in these multiphase systems makes
the IUTAM symposium a unique technical conference. In addition to formal
research presentations, the meeting will include discussions of future research
directions, which makes participation by US scientists and engineers especially
important. The award will provide support for young scientists, including
students, to participate in the symposium, which will enhance the start of their
science and engineering careers.