* 1417175
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  COUPLED HYDROLOGICAL AND GEOCHEMICAL PROCESS EVOLUTION AT THE LANDSCAPE EVOLUTION OBSERVATORY
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Ciaran Harman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 01/31/2019
* USD 188,855.00

The physical, chemical and biological structures and processes controlling
biogeochemical reaction, flow and transport in natural landscapes interact at
multiple space and time scales and are difficult to quantify. The current
paradigm of hydrological and biogeochemical theory is that process descriptions
derived from observations at small scales can be applied to predict at much
larger scales, as long as some effective values of the scale dependent
parameters can be identified. However, this paradigm is known to be flawed and
increasingly frequent calls have been made for new theories that will better
link small-scale process understanding with large-scale predictions.
Furthermore, natural systems evolve in time in a way that is hard to observe in
short-run laboratory experiments or in natural landscapes with unknown initial
conditions and time-variant forcing. This project will use carefully designed
wetting and drying experiments using stable water isotope tracers at the
hillslope scale to determine the structure of flow paths, as well as to quantify
water transit time distributions along those flow paths. Chemical analysis of
pore waters and hillslope outflow will determine mineral weathering kinetics
during these wetting-drying cycles which will be related to observed water
transit times. Detailed numerical modeling with a coupled systems model will be
used to simulate the flow and reactive transport and the evolution of the porous
medium through data assimilation and inverse modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will observe the way water, rock and life
interact and create the organized structure of the soil. These observations will
be made at an unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution using the Landscape
Evolution Observatory (LEO) at Biosphere 2. LEO consists of three large
artificial landscapes built in a climate controlled environment that contain
over 1,800 sensors to measure how water flows through these landscapes and
interacts with the soil minerals and microbiological ecosystems. The research
outcome will contribute to a new generation of modeling tools for quantifying
contaminant transport in a changing environment. The result will reconcile the
discrepancies between observations of flow and transport phenomena at lab and
field scales. Two PhD students and several undergraduate students will be
trained in novel hydrologic-geochemical experimentation and Earth systems
modeling, and their research will be shared with the 100,000 people that visit
Biosphere 2 each year.