* 1417711
* Bioavailability of Arctic Soil Carbon:   Examining the Relationship Between Chemical Composition and Lability During the Holocene
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Lori Ziolkowski, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 336,872.00

Title: Bioavailability of Arctic Soil Carbon: Examining the Relationship Between
Chemical Composition and Lability During the
Holocene&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental manipulation studies clearly
demonstrate that temperature, nutrient input and moisture play key roles in
driving above ground biomass production and microbial respiration. However,
observed changes have yet to be linked to below ground processes of past
ecosystem productivity and specifically how natural variations in moisture and
temperature during the Holocene influenced microbial processing of soil organic
matter. This project is to explore the relationship between chemical composition
and bioavailability of Arctic soil carbon accumulated since the early Holocene.
The project will result in a potentially transformative parameterization of the
drivers of Arctic soil carbon usage that may be applicable globally. This
research is directly related to understanding processes affecting Arctic soil
carbon and will support an early career researcher. This study will provide
training opportunities for a graduate student (Ph.D. student in Earth Sciences
at the University of South Carolina) and several undergraduate students, who
will be trained through existing summer research programs (NSF funded REU in
Marine Biogeochemistry at USC). Strategies for outreach and information
dissemination include: 1) recruitment of minority undergraduate to participate
in summer research and present their findings, 2) inclusion of the Holocene
climate data in upper level undergraduate and graduate courses, 3) creation of a
project website to highlight the main findings of the project, 4) working with
journalists to share the research on an internationally distributed Podcast, and
5) communicating the findings with other scientists through publishing in top-
tier journals and through presentations at national or international
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capitalizing on the premise that microbial cell
membranes adopt the radiocarbon signature of their food sources, this work will
fingerprint in situ carbon usage as a function of soil chemical polarity,
contemporary moisture conditions and Holocene climate variability in a range of
soils from the Arctic Circle to the Canadian high Arctic. The working hypothesis
is that soil carbon bioavailability is strongly influenced by the chemical
polarity of organic matter. It is expected that moist conditions favor both the
production of more chemically polar compounds and increased microbial reworking
of organic matter, such that variations in Arctic Holocene moisture are coupled
to soil carbon bioavailability. Establishing a relationship between the soil
chemistry and bioavailability will enable more accurate representation of soil
carbon in Earth System models, which is especially critical in the Arctic.
&lt;br/&gt;