* 1417772
* Colonization and Christianity:  the development of Viking Age and medieval hierarchies in Skagafjordur, North Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Gudny Zoega, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 683,881.00

The institutionalization of Christianity in the Middle Ages is one of the
fundamental transformations in early European history. This research seeks to
understand the connections between the adoption of Christian practices and the
development of political power in Iceland between AD 870 and 1300. In about AD
870 the predominately pagan Norse started colonizing the previously uninhabited
volcanic island. In AD 1000 Christianity began to replace the widespread pagan
beliefs. By 1300, Iceland was dominated by centralized religious and political
institutions. Iceland has one of the richest collections of medieval texts and
excellent archaeological preservation of Viking Age farmsteads, churches, and
cemeteries. This makes research here central to understanding early European
history and has the potential to give us insights into the global effects of
Christianization in its contemporary context. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
employs geophysical surveying techniques already tested under a previous NSF
award, PLR-1242829, "EAGER: Assessing the Reliability of the Geophysical
identification of Early Christian Churchyards and Burials in Northern Iceland."
The further improvements this project makes in developing geophysical survey
protocols, including ground penetrating radar and electromagnetic conductivity,
provide for a more cost-effective alternative to traditional excavation and
thus, the project has broader applications to archaeological science, forensics,
historic preservation, and cultural resource
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging evidence indicates that the
Christianization of Iceland took place in two major phases: a popular adoption
in the absence of central religious authority, followed by an
institutionalization of church communities and hierarchies. Soon after the
Christian conversion many individual farmers established household churches and
accompanying cemeteries on their own farmsteads. In the 12th century, many of
the household churches and cemeteries appear to have been shut down and replaced
with new communal or parish churches. The researchers wish to understand if the
parish churches were located on prominent farms that were established early in
the colonization sequence or whether these church farms became important
political and economic centers only after the Christian conversion.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the relationship between the settlement
history and Christian practices at 13 farms in the Hegranes region of lowland
Skagafjordur, just south of the Arctic Circle. Buried farmsteads and Christian
cemeteries will be systematically surveyed using archaeological and geophysical
survey protocols. Data will be collected on farmstead location, order of
establishment, and changes in their size or organization throughout the 400-year
period of study. The project will also systematically investigate evidence of
Christian practices on these farms, including the presence and location of
cemeteries or churches, dates of burials, and abandonment of the cemeteries and
churches, including the use of churches after burials ceased. By comparing the
farmstead establishment date and size to the geography of the Christian
cemeteries, the team will determine the relationship between hierarchies that
developed during the early colonization and hierarchies that developed later
during the institutionalization of Christianity.