* 1417120
* STTR Phase I:  Customized Manufacture of Protective Headgear for Mitigation of Fall Related Injuries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2015
* James Ferguson, Alba-Technic, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 224,647.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the ability to
manufacture customized non-stigmatizing, attractive headgear containing advanced
materials to provide protection in older adults from head injury as a result
from a fall. Injury from falls is a severe and growing problem with the personal
consequence of potential severe injury and economic consequences to individuals,
families and the healthcare system. Initially targeted to older adults, this
product can be used by persons who seek to stay active without the fear of
injury from falling. The commercial product is an aesthetic design that relies
on custom fit eliminating unsightly chinstraps typically found in impact
resistant helmets. Manufacturing success will lead to development of other
protective devices such as hip protectors and then for other susceptible body
parts (wrists/elbows). Commercial success will be sales to individuals, active
retirement communities, nursing homes and hospitals. Further success can be
defined by the ability to license the technology and manufacturing process to
leaders in other industries such as active sports including football, hockey,
skiing and extreme sports. With this STTR, the manufacturing design methods will
also provide hands-on experience to engineering students that can be applied to
other projects in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will design a
customizable, small batch manufacturing system for protective headgear to
mitigate the impact from falls. The direct medical cost of falls is estimated at
$30.0 billion. Customized and automated manufacturing of the headgear will
alleviate the concerns highlighted in the previous compliance trials that
indicated goodness of fit is essential to a marketable headgear product. This
effort will solidify our ability to manufacture a non-stigmatizing headgear
design in a cost-effective manner. Research objectives include quantifying
parameters for a customized fit, designing and developing the automated
manufacturing system for a product tailored to the individual. The research plan
includes using state-of-the-art techniques in image capture and testing of the
automation/customization scheme. Automation of the process will control the
shape and material details of the product. Another task will evaluate the
inclusion of 3-D printing as its capability is quickly maturing and it has the
potential to create fully customized headgear. Phase I anticipated results
include an operational version of a CAD front end system to capture head piece
parameters and the design of a small batch manufacturing system to be built in
Phase II.