* 1417570
* Energy Futures of the High North: A New Approach to the Study of Experts, Institutions, and Forms of Knowledge that Guide Arctic Hydrocarbon Development
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Arthur Mason, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 769,635.00

This award supports a project that develops long-term and mutually beneficial
research cooperation with Europe and Russia for the study of energy consultants
who create Arctic energy futures. Arctic energy futures are detailed
expectations that attract attention from financial sponsors to stimulate agenda-
setting processes and play a powerful role in policing actors through their
appearance of authority. The prophesy dimensions of these futures raise concerns
about how consultants perceive resource management and the efficacy of
integrating Native knowledge systems with Western apparatuses. The investigators
hypothesize that consultants are intermediary experts with three practices for
visualizing Arctic energy futures that elevate the interests of industry into
actionable views: assembling, mobilizing, performing. Through four types of data
collection at four consulting firms and at twelve key networking events
researchers will investigate intermediary expertise with the objective of
identifying activities of consultants who shape Arctic energy futures: (a)
Ethnographic data gathered on the internal practices of firms to address how
experts assemble knowledge in order to formulate an empirical characterization
of intermediary knowledge; (b) Artefactual data gathered from firms and at
networking events to address how experts mobilize knowledge for industry in
order to develop a typology of conditions (facts, scenarios); (c) Observation
studies on the external practices of firms at networking events to address how
intermediary expertise is performed in order to develop a characterization of
enactment of expertise; (d) Semi-structured interviews to supplement data
gathered during (a) through (c) by focusing on ad hoc
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal employs cultural anthropology
and Science and Technology Studies approaches developed from the NSF EAGER
Assessing Coordination on Arctic Energy Development, with the goal of expanding
a Culture of Expertise framework for scholars involved in the anthropologies of
finance and expertise, linked to Science and Technology Studies-related
genealogies and builds on the work of energy geographers who study Arctic
potential oil and gas resources through political technologies. Energy
development is one of several industries reliant upon intermediary actors and
understanding the results of this reliance will shed light on a more general
phenomenon across society. The proposal will develop long-term and mutually
beneficial research cooperation among Arctic countries in the study of expertise
of Arctic energy futures, providing policy-making communities, early career
researchers, Indigenous populations, and students opportunities for networking
on similar topics in separate national contexts. The proposal combines
scientific publications and annual conference presentations, with international
outreach programs presenting research findings in broadly accessible formats
chronicling ethnographic practice including various authors as participants in
research. Further outreach includes participation in university and institute
courses, seminars, and events. The high likelihood of long-term collaborations
with partners after the end of the funding period will focus on building work
programs that contribute toward understanding environmental flows besides
energy, such as water and food security through multi-disciplinary perspectives.
The proposed research will increase knowledge of the Arctic on key topics
relevant to resource management and geopolitical issues in the Arctic that align
with key elements of the United States Arctic Research and Policy Act.