* 1417218
* Testing Stress Percolation as a Model for Stress Transmission in Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Pamela Burnley, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 342,667.00

This project will test stress percolation hypothesis and its utility for working
with geologic materials. Both scientists and engineers have assumed that when a
rock is loaded by either tectonic forces or within the context of engineering
projects, the load is borne evenly throughout the rock. The PI has developed an
alternative hypothesis that the stresses produced by external loads on a rock
are distributed throughout the rock according to a pattern that resembles the
pattern created by water flowing through otherwise dry sand. If the hypothesis
proves correct, then stress distribution in rocks will join a large class of
phenomena that exhibit 'percolation' behavior, including the patterns of stress
distribution observed in granular materials. Thus one implication of the
hypothesis is that there is a single unifying physical model for deformation of
all earth materials. The value in understanding the stress distribution in rocks
is that it will allow us to create better models of rock deformation and better
predict the mechanical behavior of rocks, which has implications for deepening
our understanding of a variety of Earth processes as well engineering
applications. The existence of stress percolation and a refined understanding of
how it operates in rocks has tremendous implications for many disciplines beyond
geophysics. Researchers in materials science, metallurgy, and shock physics, all
struggle with the so called 'polycrystalline problem' - like rocks, many solid
materials are composed of aggregates of crystalline grains with a variety of
properties. Understanding the response to loading of many of these materials has
presented challenges similar to those experienced by those working on rock
deformation. Thus, this research will contribute to a better understanding of
mechanical problems in all of these disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
finite element (FEM) simulations of a polycrystalline material the PI has
recently shown that local variations in stress and strain participate in large-
scale patterns, likely caused by stress percolation. The patterns are a function
of the heterogeneity and statistical distribution of elastic and plastic
properties across the population of mechanical components (grains and grain
boundaries) in the material. Greater degrees of heterogeneity lead to more
intense stress concentrations across a less dense pattern. Lower degrees of
elastic heterogeneity lead to a denser pattern of stress transmission that
carries smaller modulations. Paralleling the development of shear bands in
granular materials, the stress patterns lead directly to shear localization. The
proposed project will compare the stress and strain heterogeneity observed in
experimentally deformed mono-phase rocks with the stress and strain
heterogeneity observed in FE models tuned to simulate these rocks. Specifically,
the variation in the orientation of local stress tensor as predicted by FE
models will be compared with microstructures that are sensitive to the
compression direction such as twins and kinkbands and the distribution of the
magnitude of the local compressive stress predicted by the FE models will be
compared with local compressive stress distributions derived from synchrotron
x-ray diffraction data from in-situ deformation experiments. Model design
elements to be examined include the shapes of grains, grain boundary and grain
interior rheology, as well as model size and aspect ratio. The impact of using
2D vs 3D models will also be examined. Additional direct comparisons will be
made between the pattern of variation in microstrains observed on the surface of
experimentally deformed polycrystalline slabs and the results from FE models
built to match EBSD maps of the slab surfaces. These comparisons between models
and experimental data will provide a test of the stress percolation hypothesis
and provide a foundation for further investigations of stress percolation.