* 1417007
* WORKSHOP: ISMAR 2013 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Si Jung Kim, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2014
* USD 4,933.00

This is funding to support participation by 2 graduate students from U.S.
institutions in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) that was held in conjunction
with the 2013 International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR
2013), which took place October 1-4 in Adelaide, Australia, and which was
organized by the IEEE Computer Society with academic sponsorship from the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). For over a decade, ISMAR (and its
forerunner events IWAR/ISAR and ISMR) has been the premier international
conference on research into the science, technology, applications and uses of
Mixed Reality (MR) and Augmented Reality (AR). The proliferation of powerful
mobile hardware has opened up new avenues of research into MR and AR while
enabling corporate and consumer applications on a wide scale. Across this
spectrum fascinating new types of user interfaces, technologies, and concepts
are beginning to emerge. The field is highly interdisciplinary in nature,
bringing together technologists, educators, humanists, artists and social
scientists, among others. ISMAR is one of the largest meetings devoted to the
advancement of mixed reality, augmented reality, virtual reality, and human-
computer interaction with the physical world, and encourages six different
submission types: Papers and Posters, Workshops, Panels, Tutorials,
Demonstrations and Contests. Because of the diverse fields relevant to mixed and
augmented reality, ISMAR content is organized in two tracks: The Science &amp;
Technology (S&amp;T) program and The Arts, Media and Humanities (AMH) program.
The top papers are often extended, reviewed, and submitted for publication in
the prestigious IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. More
information about the conference may be found at http://ismar.vgtc.org/.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This was the second Doctoral Consortium held in
conjunction with an ISMAR symposium. A total of 7 graduate students participated
in the workshop, along with senior members of the community (faculty and
industry researchers) who served as mentors. The goal was to provide the
students with an opportunity at a critical time in their careers to present
their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of academic and
industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral research plan and
progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers within the ISMAR community.
To these ends participants were asked to prepare both a technical presentation
and a poster describing their work. A pre-event social dinner allowed the
attendees (students, mentors and organizers) to get to know each other. The
following day all attendees met for an informal breakfast at 8:00 AM, after
which each student participant had 50 minutes devoted to his/her research,
beginning with a presentation for approximately 30 minutes followed by about 20
minutes reserved for an extensive discussion with the other graduate student
participants and the senior researchers. The discussion was facilitated by the
Doctoral Consortium co-chairs and mentors, with the goal of addressing the
strengths and weaknesses of the research, challenges and issues, implications of
the results, potential suggestions for additional approaches or follow-on work,
and career guidance related to the student's work and area. The posters were on
display during the ISMAR conference poster sessions (in which the students were
expected to take part), and were marked as being part of the Doctoral
Consortium. All results from the Doctoral Consortium, including the procedures
followed, were archived in the ISMAR 2013 DC binder as a reference for next
year's conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The organizers took
steps proactively to achieve a diversity of research topics, disciplinary
backgrounds, methodological approaches, and home institutions among the
students, to ensure that they met people outside their own specific area. For
example, a maximum of one graduate student per institution was selected. Factors
such as gender and ethnicity were also taken into account, with an emphasis on
including underrepresented groups. Due in part to the remote location of this
year's conference, in the end most of the student participants were from foreign
universities; funding for the international students was secured from other
sources, with NSF funds being requested only to support the 2 students from U.S.
institutions of higher learning.