* 1417309
* STTR Phase I: Digital Immersive Gaming Infrastructure for Innovating Undergraduate STEM Courses via an Immersive Game-Based Approach to Teaching and Learning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Alan Dennis, WisdomTools Enterprises Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 254,999.00

This STTR Phase I project's broader/commercial impact is to produce a replicable
education platform that can be applied to many types of higher education
courses. The initial commercialization will focus on information
systems/information technology courses because it is a content area taught in
all major universities and colleges, often in multiple departments. The project
is to be designed to increase student interest, engagement, knowledge retention,
and content mastery, particularly for students with diverse educational needs.
The innovation will lead to increased pursuit of STEM-related careers, as well
as a larger number of STEM-literate individuals entering the workforce. The
higher education market is evolving, leading institutions of higher education to
seek new models to attract students to and retain them in STEM. As traditional
print textbooks disappear, they seek new business models for the
purchase/acquisition of course content. Students desire education that not only
prepares them for a competitive job market but is also meaningful to their
lives. Publishers are seeking new approaches that enable them to stay relevant
in an increasingly fragmented market. The overall market is interested in
analytics and this project provides a platform addressing the needs of all three
stakeholders.

The project proposes to design and develop a model and content
authoring/delivery platform for STEM courses using video games and stories. The
project provides experiential learning to increase interactivity and relevance
of traditional large lecture classes by providing novel learning resources for
students and classroom management tools for faculty. Specifically, the project
will: 1) use a video game, accessed both at home and in lab environments, to
provide the overarching framework for a college course; 2) embed meaningful
stories and case studies, providing students with context for personal
reflection and group work, as well as to ground core concepts; 3) provide lab
and homework activities reflecting the overarching game, content, and stories;
4) provide instructor support materials and management tools; and 5) construct
analytic tools for use by faculty, authors, and publishers. In Phase I, a
prototype module will be developed. As traditional textbooks disappear;
publishers and faculty are seeking new platforms to transform classrooms into
interactive, adaptive learning environments. This project integrates pervasive
technologies such as tablet computers/smartphones, collaboration/social media
tools, and video games with effective problem-centered teaching methods.