* 1417674
* Extreme-scale algorithms for geometric graphical data models in imaging, social and network science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Big data is important right now; and extreme scale hardware, programming models
and storage solutions are being developed. However the connection between
transformational algorithms and the big data sets needs to be addressed.
Researchers talk often about the upcoming "big data problem," yet skim over the
relevant algorithms that can truly attack the problems in a concrete fashion,
often because the traditional means of data analysis are not prevalent in the
high-performance computing (HPC) world, and in concert, the HPC expertise is not
prevalent in the data world. This project will solidify this connection, making
the "big data" problem real by attacking the issues through identifiable
concrete algorithmic research and by implementing the methods on the latest
hardware platforms. Recently the principal investigator has developed scalable
desktop algorithms that bridge that gap, leveraging fast spectral solvers to
compute solutions of sparse classification problems for big data. This project
will build on these scalable algorithms to implement them on several large-scale
platforms and will address important application areas, for which desktop
computing is insufficient. Examples of application areas for this project
include high dimensional hyperspectral video data for chemical and biological
agents, a problem of importance to homeland security, and statistical analysis
of spatio-temporal multimodal crime data, and large-scale social network
analysis.

This project focuses on a new class of data-clustering algorithms that are
designed to solve variants of the minimum cut problem on graphs for big data
applications such as hyperspectral video data analysis, statistical analysis of
spatio-temporal multimodal crime data, and large-scale social network analysis.
Semi-supervised and unsupervised machine learning problems are included in the
class of problems considered. The graph mincut problem is equivalent to total
variation minimization on a graph and is a popular model for machine learning
applications, except for its computational complexity. Building on ideas such as
diffuse interfaces and dynamic thresholding, originally developed for physical
sciences models and subsequently transferred to low dimensional image processing
applications, this project will develop methods to solve the true graph cut
problem by leveraging recent advances in scalable spectral graph algorithms. New
codes for these methods will be developed for large parallel architectures. The
research will advance both theoretical algorithmic issues and application areas.