* 1417028
* Phenomenology of Electroweak Symmetry Breaking, Supersymmetry, and the Frontiers of the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Stephen Martin, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Stephen P. Martin at
Northern Illinois University. These research activities will advance our
knowledge of how the basic building blocks of the universe interact. This
includes study of the known fundamental subatomic particles, including the
recently discovered Higgs boson. Martin will also investigate new theories that
go beyond the known sub-atomic particles, including a possibility known as
supersymmetry. The key prediction of supersymmetry is that for each of the known
fundamental particle types, there must be a another type with very similar
properties but much heavier particles than the presently known ones. Martin will
work on strategies for discovering these new particles in experiments. Martin
will mentor students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels on research
methods, participate in education and training of high school teachers, and
directly interact with pre-college students through local and regional science
fair judging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will study the
relations between observable quantities measured at colliders and the underlying
parameters of the Standard Model, by performing relevant calculations in a more
accurate and detailed approximation than ever before. These calculations,
together with more accurate data on the Higgs boson that will be obtained by the
Large Hadron Collider, will allow us to understand the dynamics of the Higgs
field, and test the consistency of the minimal Standard Model of particle
physics. Martin will study and improve formulas relating the Higgs boson mass to
its self-interaction strength and its interactions with other particles. Martin
will also continue to study supersymmetry, which now is significantly
constrained, but certainly not ruled out, by Large Hadron Collider data. Martin
will work on strategies for maximizing the experimental reach of the Large
Hadron Collider for supersymmetric particles, by investigating novel signatures
and areas of parameter space where discovery or exclusion will be particularly
difficult or subtle. He also plans to investigate variations of the minimal
supersymmetric theory that make distinctive predictions that can be
experimentally tested if supersymmetric particles are discovered. Martin will
develop more accurate calculations and tools that will aid in the interpretation
and understanding of a future discovery of supersymmetry, by relating the masses
and interactions of the new particles to the parameters of the underlying
theory. This research will affect the interpretation of experiments at the CERN
LHC proton-proton collider, and various dark matter detection experiments. These
experiments are major science infrastructures, and employ many researchers and
students at all levels in a variety of science and engineering fields.