* 1417337
* String Phenomenology and Geometry
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Lara Anderson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 95,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Lara B. Anderson at
Virginia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental particle physics is at a
critical moment in its development. New studies at the Large Hadron Collider,
the Planck satellite and other experiments will give new information on possible
physics beyond the Standard Model. This project is motivated by this goal. It is
focused on string theory, which hopes to unify gravity with the other
fundamental forces. String theory is only manifest at very high energy scales.
To connect with experiment, the project concentrates on the development of
"string phenomenology" - the aspect of string theory that attempts to bridge the
gap between the high-energy, extra-dimensional formalism of string theory, and
the low-energy, four-dimensional world of particles and forces. Despite the
importance of string theory as the only known consistent quantum theory of
gravity and its enormous power and flexibility for so-called "top down" model
building in high energy physics, it is only recently that explicit low-energy
limits of string theory have started to be developed to a level that makes
serious interdisciplinary contact between string and particle phenomenology
possible. Within string theory, the roles of physics and mathematics are
intrinsically intertwined, and progress in string phenomenology requires cutting
edge tools in modern mathematics. This project involves three of the primary
approaches to particle phenomenology in string theory and interlinked approaches
to string theory, algebraic geometry and high-speed mathematical computing. Now
is the time to attempt to answer the question: can string theory give a
description of the real world? And at last, with interdisciplinary mathematical
and physical approaches and expanding computational power, string phenomenology
is capable of doing just that. By exploring these new geometries, it may be
possible to find a view of string theory that looks profoundly similar to the
world we observe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In heterotic string theory, the PI will
generate a database of hundreds of billions of heterotic models (composed of
Calabi-Yau 3-folds and vector bundles defined over them) and the analytic and
algorithmic tools necessary to completely analyze the geometries and compute
their local and topological data. The PI will also use new approaches in
computational algebraic geometry to address long-standing phenomenological
challenges in heterotic theory such as moduli stabilization and the
determination of the full 4-dimensional, N=1 lagrangian (including the Kahler
potential and normalized Yukawa couplings). Using the same mathematical toolkit
outlined above, she will also study model building within global F-theory
constructions. Despite being one of the most promising stringy approaches to
particle phenomenology, F-theory is not fully understood. It is the goal to
contribute to a rigorous framework for F-theory model building by systematically
studying the geometry of Calabi-Yau 4-folds and the 2-dimensional cycles (or
holes) within them that 7-branes wrap. In addition, the PI will explore new
avenues of model building by introducing non-Abelian gauge field vacuum
expectation values (vector bundles) over 7-brane stacks. Finally, the PI will
study compact singular manifolds with G2 holonomy as backgrounds for M-theory
and will also investigate the special (singular) points in 7-dimensional spaces
of G2 holonomy (and their intersections), and derive the explicit 4-dimensional
effective field theory of a compactification of M-theory in the neighborhood of
these singularities. The PI hopes for the first time to produce globally defined
G2 compactifications of M-theory. A combination of these three approaches should
yield a new view of string phenomenology in string theory.