* 1417542
* Collaborative Research: Mapping Changes in the Active Stream Channel Network in Mesoscale Watersheds in order to Understand Distinct Signatures in Event Recession Curves
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* David Chandler, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 205,002.00

Water flow in watersheds is most often studied by either measuring stream flow
at the watershed outlet or by making point measurements in wells within the
watershed. Neither is adequate for gaining a complete picture of watershed
function because measurements at the outlet can be too broad and point
measurements too localized. This project seeks to fill the knowledge gap by
mapping the expansion and contraction of active stream channels throughout the
watershed and providing insights into which areas of a watershed are or are not
contributing flow to the watershed outlet. This will provide new knowledge for
better understanding how water, soil, and chemicals move through watersheds and
how stream discharge will change, particularly during periods of little
precipitation. As an education and outreach effort of this project, the project
will develop hands-on learning opportunities for middle and high school science
students and help train graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pairs of
observed rates of stream flow decline after rainfall ends (i.e. recession flow)
and the concurrent stream flow value have long been used in the hydrologic
sciences to infer aquifer properties at the watershed scale. However, new work
has shown that spatial variation in stream flow source areas across a catchment
may explain recession as well or better than aquifer property and hydraulics.
Thus, there is an emerging debate on what really controls recession. Resolving
this debate can provide fundamental insights into watershed function. To
investigate the controls on recession, this project will install high-density
sensor networks at up to six medium-sized watersheds at different locations
throughout the U.S. to map changes in the extent of the active stream channel
network. Sensor measurements of discharge will be supplemented with visual
mapping of the active stream network, thermal imaging of likely groundwater
inputs to streams, and soil moisture measurements. The project could have
broader implications for predicting discharge in ungauged basins and
understanding processes of solutes moving through watersheds.