* 1417757
* Learning Labs:  Using Videos, Exemplary STEM Instruction and Online Teacher Collaboration to Enhance K-2 Mathematics and Science Practice and Classroom Discourse
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Bruce Sherin, Teaching Channel
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,998,840.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. The investigators of this study propose to develop and study two sets
of instructional materials for K-2 teacher professional development in
mathematics and science that are aligned with the Common Core State Standards in
Mathematics (CCSS) and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). They will
develop two modules in each subject area and an introductory module that
prefaces and integrates the science and mathematics materials. Teachers will be
able to review the materials online, watch video of exemplary teaching practice,
and then upload their own examples and students' work to be critiqued by other
teachers enrolled in professional learning communities as well as expert
coaches. New instructional materials aligned with the standards are needed to
assist teachers in meeting the challenging instructional practices recommended.
To date, scant few resources of this type exist and, given many school districts
have limited resources, more cost-effective forms of development such as this
must be found. A particular strength of this project is that teachers will be
able to engage in the courses online, on an ongoing basis and integrate what
they have learned into their daily teaching practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose a program of design research to develop and improve the
modules. The central hypothesis is a test of the Teaching Channel model--that
the modules and professional learning communities result in significant changes
in the quality of instructional practice. Text analytics will be performed on
the online discussion to detect changes in group discourse over time. Changes in
instructional quality and vision will be measured by observing the videos posted
by teachers. Pre-post tests of student work will be performed. The findings of
the research will be disseminated through conference presentations,
publications, and the Teaching Channel website.