* 1417789
* Mapping and Quantifying Methane Seeps on the Eastern Siberian Shelf and Slope -- A Component of the Swedish Russian U.S. Climate-Cryosphere-Carbon Interactions (SWERUS-C3) Program
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Larry Mayer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 290,667.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that is present in large amounts in frozen
soils and marine sediments in the Arctic. In marine sediments, methane may be
present either in permafrost or in gas hydrates. Warming of the Arctic may lead
to the release of stored methane, leading to further warming and then to further
methane releases in a reinforcing cycle. The East Siberian Sea, in the Arctic
Ocean, is a large area with a great deal of undersea permafrost and, likely,
stored methane. Recent work has suggested large sources of methane from parts of
the East Siberian Sea, but the area needs to be mapped and studied in much
greater detail before either the amount of methane stored there or the amount
being released can be fully understood. In the summer of 2014, an international
program called the Swedish-Russian-US Arctic Ocean Investigation of Climate-
Cryosphere-Carbon Interactions (SWERUS-C3) will undertake a 90-day expedition to
map, and study the carbon cycle in, the East Siberian Sea. The principal
investigators of this proposal are leaders in ocean mapping and they have
recently pioneered techniques for acoustic imaging of methane plumes released
from the seafloor in the Gulf of Mexico. They have been invited by the leaders
of the SWERUS-C3 team to participate in one leg of the expedition. They propose
to use the multibeam sonar on board the ODEN to locate and characterize gas
seeps in the water column and then apply a newly developed wideband transceiver
to the split-beam echosounder on board the ODEN to constrain the size and fate
of gas bubbles rising to the surface. Together, these acoustic observations will
help the SWERUS-C3 team understand the flux of methane from the seafloor into
the water column and potentially into the atmosphere. If successful, these
techniques will allow the mapping of the gas flux in the Arctic over scales
never before possible. This proposal requests support for the participation of
the UNH team on this expedition and for post-cruise work-up of the data. The
project will support a full time graduate student at UNH. A UNH undergraduate
student will participate as well. The SWERUS-C3 program as a whole will support
over 15 postdoctoral researchers and graduate students, and has a broad suite of
outreach activities planned. The UNH Center for Coastal Ocean Mapping will also
incorporate this work into ongoing outreach and education activities.