* 1417820
* Experimental and Theoretical Analyses of Tree Distance Distributions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Sean Cleary, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

Large data sets arise in a wide range of settings across scientific and
engineering disciplines. Organizing such large data sets into forms where they
can be effectively searched or understood can be very difficult. A common method
is based upon the "divide and conquer" approach, in which successive division of
large data sets leads, after some steps, to the amount of data in each piece
being much more tractable. For example, after successively halving a data set
with a trillion entries 20 times, there would be about a thousand entries in
each remaining piece. Such successive division processes can be represented
naturally by a branching structure known as a binary tree. It is important for
efficiency that each step divides the pieces roughly in half; otherwise not all
of the pieces will shrink to more manageable sizes. Trees also are a fundamental
structure showing hierarchical relationships in a broad range of settings, from
the data storage and searching technique just described to modeling evolutionary
processes in biology. Tree distances measure how different two trees are and are
important in assessing the degree to which two possible trees agree or disagree.
There a number of different tree distances, which vary in what aspects of tree
commonality they measure, their importance in different applications, and in
their difficulty of calculation. This project seeks to better understand the
distribution of multiple measures of distance on
trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies both ordered trees, used in
computational settings such as data and disk storage techniques, and unordered
trees, arising in biological and other scientific studies. The statistical
properties of the distribution, including averages, variance and asymptotic
properties, present difficult challenges and will be approached both
experimentally and via exact and asymptotic combinatorial methods. The project
also works on new approaches to compute tree distances that are both important
for phylogenetic applications and computationally feasible. Greater
understanding of rotation operations used in tree balancing may lead to improved
algorithms for trees used in broad classes of computation, underlying the
efficiency of many large database structures. The project develops understanding
of how to scale tree distances by understanding the distribution of distances,
giving scientists studying biological questions better understanding for
interpreting results of tree reconstruction efforts. The project involves
undergraduate researchers in cutting-edge research projects, both in the
development of large-scale computational experiments and in developing the
theoretical foundations of the answers to these questions. This award by the
Computational Mathematics Program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences is
co-funded by the Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics Program in the DEB Division
of the BIO Directorate.