* 1417805
* Lattice Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* John Laiho, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 135,000.00

This proposal funds the research activities of Assistant Professor Jack Laiho at
Syracuse University. Laiho's research focuses on precision studies of the
interactions of quarks via the strong and weak nuclear forces. These forces are
a part of the enormously successful Standard Model of particle physics. In order
to compare the predictions of the Standard Model with experimental observations
large-scale supercomputer calculations are required to correctly account for the
effects of the strong nuclear force using an approach called Lattice Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). Theoretical predictions of the Standard Model are compared
with experimental results obtained from particle accelerator experiments, thus
testing our understanding of the laws of nature. So far, good agreement has been
found. While it is satisfying that the current framework describes matter and
its interactions so well, it is known from cosmology that there is physics not
accounted for within the Standard Model. The discovery of discrepancies between
the Standard Model predictions and experiments done at particle colliders would
be very exciting, as such results could lead to an understanding of the
mysteries that are not explained in the current framework, including why there
is as much matter in the universe as there is. A broader impact of this research
is that the Lattice QCD ensembles used by the PIs are made publicly available
and are used by other researchers studying quark interactions throughout the
world. Additionally, knowledge of computational methods and problem solving
skills needed to perform research in lattice field theory are useful assets for
graduate students, whether they continue in academic research positions or get
jobs in the private sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laiho's research focuses on
calculations using Lattice QCD that are needed to maximize the impact of high-
energy particle physics experiments. This includes lattice calculations of
heavy-light and light-light weak matrix elements, quantities where one needs to
control the effects of non-perturbative QCD. This work makes use of high
performance computing facilities throughout the US, and is used for calculations
of Standard Model predictions that are needed for comparisons with experimental
observations as part of the search for new physics. Laiho also has an interest
in applying lattice methods to the study of quantum gravity to try to determine
whether or not a quantum field theory of gravity is renormalizable when
formulated nonperturbatively. The Lattice QCD calculations funded by this grant
are essential to make best use of the existing and planned experimental
facilities including LHCb and Belle II. They can help to uncover new physics
beyond the Standard Model, and they provide insight into the workings of the
strong nuclear force and quark interactions. The research on gravity might lead
to an understanding of how to handle another nontrivial theory using lattice
methods in the non-perturbative regime.