* 1417876
* Quantitative and Genetic Approaches to Microbial Diversity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jared Leadbetter, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2017
* USD 145,000.00

The Microbial Diversity course at the Marine Biological Laboratory (Woods Hole,
MA) provides a unique training experience in which students from diverse
backgrounds learn how to cultivate, isolate and critically study microorganisms
from a wide range of environments. It has launched numerous scientists into
successful careers spanning academia, industry and government. This proposal
seeks to take the course in an important new direction to make it better able to
provide the type of training needed to utlize microbes to solve important
societal problems (food, energy, environment, health) in the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. Microbes lie at the heart of some
of the most exciting scientific questions and opportunities in science today.
They offer tractable systems for quantitative systems biology; the chemistry
they catalyze is relevant for a wide-range of important problems (from water
splitting to nitrogen fixation to pharmaceutical development); they are vital to
the proper functioning of numerous ecosystems (from the human body to the
oceans); and lastly, microbes have co-evolved with the Earth for billions of
years, and thus any effort to understand the history of life or that of the
planet necessitates a careful evaluation of their contributions and potential
biosignatures. The Microbial Diversity course at the Marine Biological
Laboratory (Woods Hole, MA) provides a unique training experience in which
students from diverse backgrounds learn how to cultivate, isolate and critically
study microorganisms from a wide range of environments. Students are taught both
classical and state-of-the-art techniques that provide them with a foundation
for discovery in wide range of disciplines. Our goal is to bring a quantitative
and mechanistic focus to the course by exposing students to systems/synthetic
biology approaches, statistical methods, and classical bacterial genetics. This
new emphasis is particularly timely given the large accumulation of sequence
information in the microbiological sciences resulting from technological
innovation in sequencing methodologies. For microbial systems to best be applied
to the solution of major societal challenges in the 21st century concerning
food, energy, environment and health, the next generation of investigators will
need training in how to access the rich diversity of solutions that can be found
in the microbial world and apply them in a rigorous, predictive fashion.