* 1417316
* String Theory, Geometry and Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* James Gray, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2017
* USD 110,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor James Gray at the Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two theories
underlie our understanding of modern physics: quantum mechanics and Einstein's
theory of gravity. Electrons experience gravity, however light they may be, and
as such these quantum mechanical objects must fit within a gravitational theory.
However, if one applies the usual rules of quantum mechanics to theories
containing gravity, one gets nonsense. For example, the probability of certain
events occurring, that is calculated in this way, turns out to be infinite. Many
theories have been proposed to try and solve this problem. To date, by far the
most successful is a theory called string theory. The idea is that instead of
the fundamental building blocks of nature being particles, they are tiny, one
dimensional, pieces of string. The troublesome probabilities mentioned above can
be calculated to be proportional to one divided by the length of these strings.
Thus one sees that, as one shrinks the length to zero and recovers a point like
particle, one finds division by zero - an infinite answer. If the string length
does not vanish, however, the theory can make sense. String theory comes with a
very big catch. Mathematically, the theory only makes sense if the strings live
in more than just three spatial dimensions. If some of the dimensions are
wrapped up in some very small shape, we would not necessarily see them. Think of
a piece of paper. This is clearly a two dimensional sheet. Now wrap the paper up
into a cylinder and imagine furling it up more and more to make a smaller and
smaller tube. If you could keep doing this (and if the paper was thin enough)
then eventually the sheet would simply look like a line - a one dimensional
object. The shape that the extra dimensions of string theory take determines the
physics that someone living in the resulting three-dimensional universe would
see. As an example, the volume of the shape determines the strength of gravity,
as governed by Newton's constant. More subtle geometrical properties of the
extra dimensions determine all of the rest of the physics of the resulting
three-dimensional universe - for example, whether electrons exist and whether
they carry electric charge. Given this, an obvious question arises. Is there a
shape, which if used to hide the extra dimensions of string theory, gives rise
to a three dimensional universe like our own? The answer to the question is
still unknown. The proposed research is to use computers to study hundreds of
millions of different possible shapes for the extra dimensions of string theory.
In this way the PI will obtain a comprehensive survey of which three dimensional
universes can be described by string theory. The PI will search this database to
see if any of the shapes give rise to physics which is like that we see around
us. The broader impact of this project will largely be through the technical
training of graduate students, undergraduate researchers and a postdoctoral
research assistant. Funding for six months of a postdoctoral researcher's tenure
is included, with the other years and personnel involved being provided by
resources from Virginia Tech. The PI plans to host an interdisciplinary workshop
on computational algebraic geometry and string compactification at his home
institution, to help develop links between these two different
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to study compactifications of
F-theory and heterotic string theory, which are currently the most promising
candidates for reproducing known particle physics. Using modern formal methods
of computational algebraic geometry, the PI will study large numbers of Calabi-
Yau four- and three-fold compactifications of these theories in very fine
detail. In addition, the PI will develop formalism to describe the moduli space
and matter content of non-Kahler compactifications of heterotic theories. This
work will try to answer two questions. First, can one find compactifications of
string theory that reproduce not only the gauge group and particle content of
the standard model, but also a realistic set of soft supersymmetry breaking
terms? Second, if such compactifications can indeed be found, what are their
common predictions for experimental observables that are yet to be measured?
This research has the potential to advance mankind's knowledge of nature
directly. It could help us understand whether string theory is simply a
technical tool for studying some areas of mathematics and quantum field theory,
or whether it is a fundamental physical theory of our universe. The work
proposed will develop our understanding of string compactification on Calabi-Yau
and non-Kahler manifolds in situations where the supergravity approximation is
valid. The work on Calabi-Yau threefolds is designed to push the theory as close
as possible to confrontation with experiment. The research on non-Kahler
compactifications will lay the groundwork for more ambitious approaches to
obtaining particle physics models from string theory in the future.