* 1417446
* Using Dark Matter Microhalos to Probe the Universe's First Second
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Adrienne Erickcek, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 143,994.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Adrienne Erickcek at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution
of the Universe during its first second is unknown. While there is strong
evidence that the Universe's first second included a period of accelerated
expansion called inflation, we do know why inflation happened or why it ended.
We also do not know how the Universe transitioned to a hot, radiation-dominated
state after inflation. Furthermore, our ignorance of the dynamics of the early
Universe severely limits our understanding of the origins of dark matter, which
is a poorly understood source of mass that currently makes up about 25% of the
Universe's energy density. Many proposed explanations for dark matter postulate
that dark matter originated from the hot plasma that filled the Universe during
its first second. Consequently, the evolution of the Universe during that time
affects the relationship between the properties of the dark matter particle and
amount of dark matter in the Universe. This project will enhance our
understanding of inflation, the onset of radiation domination, and the origins
of dark matter by using gamma-ray observations to constrain the abundance of the
smallest gravitationally bound structures of dark matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will engage undergraduate students, high school
students, and the general public in the proposed investigation of dark matter
microhalos. Undergraduate students will analyze simulations of microhalo
formation, thereby learning data analysis techniques and scientific programming.
They will also gain first-hand research experience, which will expose them to
the excitement of STEM careers. A module on dark matter will be developed for
high school students to give them the opportunity to analyze publically
available kinematic data for dwarf spheroidal and spiral galaxies. The PI will
then lead four professional development workshops at teacher conferences to
train high school teachers to use this module in their physics courses. Finally,
the PI will present her research at Morehead?s monthly Carolina Science Cafe,
which provides the general public the opportunity to interact with a scientific
researcher in an informal setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These small dark matter
structures, called microhalos, grow from density perturbations that were
generated during inflation on scales that are inaccessible by other cosmological
observations. They also began to evolve during the Universe's first second,
prior to the onset of nucleosynthesis. This project will extend the PI's earlier
analyses of microhalos' capacity to probe the evolution of the early Universe to
a wider range of dark matter particles and will use N-body simulations of small
volumes at high redshifts to test these analytical predictions for the microhalo
abundance. These simulations will also determine how the properties of the
small-scale density perturbations affect the microhalos' internal structures.
The PI will then calculate the expected gamma-ray emission from dark matter
annihilation within these microhalos. The resulting constraints on the small-
scale primordial density fluctuations and the onset of radiation domination will
determine which inflationary models are compatible with thermal-relic dark
matter and may break the degeneracy between the relic density of dark matter and
the evolution of the early Universe.