* 1417914
* Collaborative Research:   Studies of Chlorine, Bromine and Iodine Chemistry in the Arctic, and its Impacts
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 170,651.00

This project aims to improve our quantitative understanding of the impact of
halogen (chlorine, bromine, and iodine) chemistry in the Arctic, so that model
simulations of the impact of future changes in sea ice and snowpack conditions
on atmospheric composition can be more reliably conducted. While in non-polar
regions of the planet the atmosphere cleans itself through photochemistry that
involves ozone, the atmosphere above sea-ice covered regions cleans itself at
least in part through chemistry involving halogen atoms - chlorine, bromine and
iodine. This halogen chemistry sometimes manifests itself through the very rapid
(and very unusual, compared to the rest of the atmosphere) consumption of ozone
and elemental mercury, to near-zero levels, in the lower atmosphere. Ozone is a
critically important atmospheric constituent that is a powerful cleaning agent,
but it is also toxic to plants and to the human respiratory system, and is a
regulated air pollutant. Elemental mercury, when oxidized, can be converted to
highly toxic forms, e.g. methyl mercury. Since this polar halogen chemistry is
unique, it needs to be understood in terms of its global impact, and in the
context of the rapid environmental change occurring in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant would fund a collaborative team to
conduct measurements of fluxes (i.e. rates of emission) of Cl2, Br2, and I2,
from the saline snowpack at Barrow, Alaska. The controlling environmental
variables (e.g. sunlight, presence of ozone, pH, salt concentrations, snow
composition) that determine the fluxes will be studied using a snow chamber,
using a variety of snow and ice samples collected at Barrow, and through direct
measurements of the emission from the snowpack near Barrow. The team will then
use the measured halogen fluxes and vertical mixing information to constrain a
one-dimensional (vertical scale) numerical model to investigate the vertical
scale impact of the surface fluxes, and to examine how this might change as the
nature of the surface changes with climate change. A significant part of the
discovery component of the effort will focus on molecular iodine and iodine
chemistry, which has been little-explored in the Arctic to date. The broader
impacts are oriented toward the goal of understanding the Arctic in order to
inform better prediction of the impacts of change in the Arctic, and of the
impact of Arctic change on other parts of the Earth system. A focus of this
project will be the education and inspiration of the next generation of
scholars, teachers, and researchers about science and the changing planet. Each
of the three lead investigators will mentor both undergraduate and graduate
students in the course of this project. Students who participate in the field
effort at Barrow benefit from a unique experience in conducting experiments in
harsh environments, managing science logistics in remote locations, and engaging
in science and education partnerships with Arctic people. In partnership with
this project an adventure and nature writer, Peter Lourie, will write a new book
about sea ice, how scientists study it, why it is important to humans and to the
planet, and how it is changing. He will also produce on-line educational
material about sea ice and science in the Arctic, aimed at middle-school
education. All of the participating scientists will be engaged in a range of
outreach activities, including presentations at schools, involvement with
"Portal to the Public" - a nationwide network of informal science education
efforts - and with the active recruitment of underrepresented groups to pursue
careers in science and education.