* 1417758
* Does E. Vaginatum Take up Organic N?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 06/30/2020
* USD 704,320.00

TITLE: Does the Arctic plant Eriophorum vaginatum take up organic
N?&lt;br/&gt;Chapin et al. (1993) showed that Eriophorum vaginatum, the plant
species that dominates arctic tussock tundra, not only can use organic
N-sources, but actually grows better with amino acids as a sole N-source than
with inorganic N salts. A challenge of this shifting view is that no one has
actually quantified, for any plant species growing in the wild, and how much of
E. vaginatum?s total N demand is met by organic N-sources! This project would
quantify the forms of N it uses, as well as assessing organic nutrient dynamics
in several other tundra communities. More broadly, this project would develop
approaches for assessing organic nutrition more in other ecosystem types and so
test the developing organic nutrition theory of N-limited plants. This project
will support undergraduate education by integrating new material into classes at
University California Santa Barbara, and by offering research experiences to a
University California Santa Barbara undergraduate during year-1 and an Alaskan
student to help with the field season in year-2. It will coordinate with the
Toolik Long Term Ecosystem Research education program in creating a module on
"What Plants Eat." The participants will work with the Santa Barbara Natural
History Museum to develop a suite of activities that will engage the public to
target three goals: 1. A better appreciation of the role of soil in our lives
and ecosystems, 2. To understand the Arctic as a component of the Earth System,
and 3. To better appreciate how science and scientists work and
think.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge to answering the question "Do plants
really use organic N?" has been methodological. This project would use a
combination of methods integrated through simulation modeling. The key novel
method is microdialysis, in which a probe the size of a root is inserted into
the soil, a carrier solution flows through it, and small molecules diffuse into
it. Microdialysis will be coupled with intact root uptake kinetic studies,
isotope partitioning, and analyzing diffusion and transport of amino acids, NH4+
and NO3- through soil to parameterize a root uptake model that will be used to
synthesize and integrate the results. The first phase of the work will be done
under controlled conditions in the greenhouse; then having refined the methods
and assessed model parameters, the study will be moved into the field to assess
seasonal patterns of N uptake and how it is affected by environmental
manipulations.&lt;br/&gt;