* 1417966
* Metaphor-Based Learning of Physics Concepts Through Whole-Body Interaction in a Mixed Reality Science Center Exhibit
* EHR,DRL
* 10/24/2013,02/28/2017
* Guy Garnett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 02/28/2017
* USD 764,208.00

This research project, from The University of Central Florida, and the Museum of
Science and Industry, investigates a three-cycle research and development
process where middle school student learners will be immersed in a mixed reality
environment while interacting with functional metaphors to determine the effects
of conceptual change, motivation and scientific habits of mind while engaged in
learning physics content. The project is guided by the following research
questions: How does the opportunity to embody elements of an immersive
simulation affect a learner's propensity to experience conceptual change and
develop scientific habits of mind? What design features of missed reality
environments best support metaphors? What metrics are most effective for
assessing learning through body-based metaphors? What are the practical
considerations to creating immersive metaphor-based learning experiences in ISE
institutions such as a Science Center?

The investigators will use a between subjects mixed method approach with middle
school students (N = 360) involving three research cycles that are performed in
controlled conditions. The multiple iterations will allow modifications to the
study's design to dig deeper into the data and afford more careful analysis,
revisions and modifications to simulation content, protocol and data collection
instruments and the technology installation.

Middle school students will be recruited from local schools and the Museum of
Science and Industry visitors. The evaluation plan includes the assessment of
perceived values of using whole-body metaphors within mixed reality environments
to learn physics. Professional audiences, educators and ISE practitioners will
assess the impact, design and content associated with research on learning,
mixed reality design, science and physics education.

Research on understanding the process of using whole-body interactions in a
mixed reality environments will help educational researchers and practitioners
in the field understand the effectiveness of metaphor based learning of
scientific concepts with whole body interactions. This project contributes
knowledge about how people learn within informal settings. This theory-driven
design approach has the potential for broad implementation in both formal and
informal environments.