* 1417044
* STTR Phase I:  Investigating Self-powered Health Monitoring of Orthopedic Implants and Data Retrieval Using Diagnostic Ultrasound
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Yang Liu, Piezonix LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 224,896.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be a significant transformation-changing
reactive orthopedic surgery into proactive, preventive and cost-effective
surgery. The project will have a direct positive impact on the quality of
orthopedic surgery practice while reducing significant social costs. According
to 2013 national survey, 25% of the patients who underwent orthopedic surgery
reported dissatisfaction with their orthopedic surgical outcomes. Even worse,
patients suffered great pain if the orthopedic implants experienced catastrophic
failures and extensive costs have been spent on the recall of the defective
implants and complex revision surgeries. The lack of a data- driven, decision-
making tool available to surgeons during and after orthopedic surgery is created
by the current inability to continuously monitor ?physical health? of orthopedic
implants. Creation of this missing tool will empower surgeons to make reasonable
judgment as to when trauma fixation devices can be optimally removed or when
revision surgery can be optimally timed. The key impacts of the project will be:
1. Reduction of patients discomfort; 2. Reduction of orthopedic healthcare
costs; 3. Reduction of social costs due to delayed revision surgery and endured
long hospital stays; 4. Improvement of post orthopedic surgery rehabilitation.

The proposed project will develop a health monitoring sensing system for
orthopedic implants using a patented self-powered piezo-floating-gate (PFG)
sensing technology. This proposal tackles a long-standing technical challenge in
orthopedic surgery to create a proactive and preventive orthopedic surgery
experience. A key question often asked of surgeons after trauma surgery is an
inquiry on the patients bone healing progress - a common question that is nearly
unknowable today. X-rays generally do not give surgeons a full, accurate and
continuous assessment of the extent of healing of bone fractures. A key feature
of the PFG sensor is the use of floating-gate sensing circuits that compute and
store cumulative statistics of the strain- rates and stresses while achieving
operational power limits not possible with any competing health and usage
sensing technologies. The sensor requires less than one microwatt of power that
can be easily harvested from a miniature piezoelectric transducer operating in
strain-mode (not vibration-mode). This will enable batteryless, self-powered PFG
sensors to be implanted inside the body or attached to orthopedic implants. This
PFG sensor would empower trauma surgeons with quantitative information to enable
actionable decisions regarding bone-healing progress, and to plan timely
revision surgery if needed.