* 1417726
* On Type-4 Pilus Genetics and the Motor ATPase PilB
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Florian Schubot, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2019
* USD 320,826.00

The protein filament known as a pilus protrudes from and extends beyond a
bacterial cell. One end of the pilus is anchored to the bacterium and the other
end is free to attach to living or inanimate surfaces. Such attachments are
important for the survival and proliferation of bacteria in the environment
where they frequently form microbial assemblages or biofilms. The presence and
the biological activities of bacterial biofilms drastically alter (in
advantageous or deleterious ways) the biological as well as the physical and
chemical properties of their surroundings. One type of bacterial pilus, the
type-4 pilus, is able to retract at its base once its distal end is attached to
a suitable adhesion point on a solid surface. Many bacteria use type-4 pilus
retraction as a motor to move themselves and to reach new resources and colonize
new surfaces. This research will investigate the type-4 pilus motor including
the molecular mechanisms of its conversion of chemical energy to mechanical work
and can lead to new design principles for nanoscale motors. This project will
provide interdisciplinary research and educational training at the intersection
of biology, physics, and engineering to students (including members of groups
underrepresented in science) at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The retractable type-4 pilus in gram-negative bacteria is
the strongest biological motor currently known, capable of generating a stall
force of 150 piconewtons. Yet the inner workings of the type-4 pilus remain
largely an enigma. This project employs a multidisciplinary approach to study
the type-4 pilus motor and its motor ATPase PilB. The genetics of type-4 pilus
assembly and disassembly will be investigated using well-defined mutations in
Myxococcus xanthus; the structure of PilB will be determined (by X-ray
crystallography) at an atomic resolution. Completion of this project will
clarify the genetics of T4P extension and retraction and elucidate the mechanism
of type-4 pilus assembly catalyzed by the PilB ATPase.