* 1417202
* Collaborative Research: The Climate lab: An innovative partnership between climate research and middle-school practice
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Gillian Puttick, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2019
* USD 302,198.00

This project will develop and test an education partnership model focusing on
climate change (The Climate Lab) that features inquiry-oriented and place-based
learning. Curriculum development will begin with a prototype program pioneered
by the Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences, and a design-based
implementation research (DBIR) approach will be used to develop a curriculum
that is aligned with key elements of the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS). The project partnership includes scientists at three research centers,
education researchers, and middle school teachers. The completed curriculum will
provide opportunities for middle school students and teachers to compare their
locally collected data with historic data to create unique and powerful learning
opportunities. The collaboration between scientists and schools introduces
middle school students to local, community citizen science endeavors with
multiple stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative in linking
direct exploration of current, local conditions with archived data to examine
long-term changes in natural phenomena that cannot be directly perceived.
Components of the model being developed will include: a) a standards-aligned
curriculum; b) field and lab activities that engage students in collecting and
analyzing data on local biotic and abiotic indicators of climate change; c)
integration with a current climate science research program; d) support
materials for teachers and scientists (print and electronic) and a digital
teacher professional development program; and e) a project Website. During
development of these curricular components, barriers to implementation of this
learning strategy will be identified and studied. The findings of this project
have the potential to broadly impact middle school science education practices
by introducing a curricular model that links direct data collection with
analysis of archived data to study long-term environmental changes that are not
directly perceived.