* 1417062
* STTR Phase I:  Extended Analog Computer Development as a Digitally Configurable, High Speed, High Order, and Low Power Analog Matched Filter
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Gregory Mattes, Analog Computing Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 252,036.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the ability of
the Extended Analog Computer (EAC) to perform filtering operations not possible
with current technology. The low power, near instantaneous filtering of complex
analog signals, differentiates the EAC technology from DSP products currently in
the marketplace. The development of prosthetics with advanced control
characteristics is reaching a computational limit due to the need for
neuromuscular waveform recognition and classification in the context of real-
time, low power, small form factor computation. EACs promise to surmount these
challenges, improving functionality of prosthetics and the quality of life for
amputees. In 2010, the global prosthetics market was $3 billion and is expected
to reach $4.5 billion by 2017, with myoelectric prosthetics representing a
small, but growing fraction of this market. While the myoelectric prosthetics
industry represents an initial customer base, this generic computing
technology's financial upside can best be estimated by segmenting the multi-
billion dollar market for digital signal processing and analog computing
devices. The intent is to solve computing problems in niche markets within this
broad potential marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project is focused on the development of the
Extended Analog Computer (EAC) for application to myoelectric prosthetics. New
myoelectric interface techniques, such as targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR)
are simplifying the use of advanced multi-degree of freedom prosthetics by
amputees. However, the dramatic increase in the number and density of electrode
sites, and need to implant multi-electrode structures into targeted muscles will
increase the signal processing requirements beyond the capacity of traditional
mobile digital signal processing (DSP). The EAC is a radical departure from the
digital computer, deriving its computational power by taking advantage of the
intrinsic solutions to partial differential equations represented as an analog
voltage manifold in space. The proposed research aims to implement automatic
machine learning/training methods to automatically configure networks of EAC
sheets in a radial basis function network (RBFN). The research also explores the
effect of the geometry of the input and output points on the sheet to optimize
them for the TMR application. Finally, a physical instantiation enabling stand-
alone, real-time operation of an EAC-RBFN will be developed. Using recorded data
from intramuscular electrode arrays, the performance of the EAC will be tested
against standard DSP techniques.