* 1417148
* Experiments in the three meter diameter geodynamo model
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This research team builds and studies models of the earth's core with a focus on
generating magnetic fields. The research team uses a twenty-ton, rapidly
rotating model of the Earth's core to examine questions about the turbulence
within the core and observed changes in the Earth's field. Despite the known
central importance of the Earth's magnetic field in limiting dangerous radiation
from the sun, we do not now have the ability to predict changes in the field.
The data the PI and his team will collect will be used in a way that will allow
building predictive tools. The project also serves to educate a new generation
of scholars in geophysics experiments, including undergraduate mentoring and
graduate student training. As well, the public appreciation of science is a
critical component of ensuring our nation's strength in science and technology.
In support of public appreciation of science the research team offers lab tours
to a very broad range of audiences: middle school girls (annual), high school
groups, undergraduate clubs, prospective undergraduate and graduate students,
visiting faculty, visiting families of faculty and staff, visiting government
staff, and science journalists. In addition the team offers short pedagogical
videos, posted on the research group YouTube channel
(www.youtube.com/user/n3umh).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this
research is to use laboratory experiments to better understand the dynamics of
the Earth's magnetic field. The research team uses a twenty-ton, rapidly
rotating model of the Earth's core to examine the generation of magnetic fields
in a planetary context. There are many unknowns in the earth due to the
turbulent dynamics present, and due to our limited understanding of those
dynamics. Despite the known central importance of the Earth's magnetic field in
limiting dangerous radiation from the sun, that field changes dynamically in a
way that we cannot, for now, forecast. The PI team has developed a world-unique
experimental device to model our planetary core, which allows them to explore
how rapidly rotating turbulent flows induce magnetic fields. The parameter
values to be explored have not been studied previously, as the device is built
to run at exceptional magnetic Reynolds numbers, designed to match those of the
Earth. The data they will collect can be used in a way that will allow
challenges to numerical theory predictions. Understanding the dynamics and
prediction limits for the geomagnetic field are central goals for this
experimental project.