* 1417234
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Freefall Precipitation Camera for Weather Monitoring Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Timothy Garrett, Fallgatter Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will develop a new
Present Weather Sensor (PWS). The impact of this project will be felt in the
transportation sector where, annually, 1.4 million traffic accidents are caused
by weather at an estimated cost to the nation of $42 billion. Knowing whether
freezing rain or snow is present greatly influences how Departments of
Transportation approach anti-icing, plowing, and road closure operations. State
budgets for road weather safety run in the tens of millions and an estimated ten
dollars is saved for every dollar spent on improving weather systems. There is a
federal push for improvements to the 2499 Roadside Weather Information Systems
(RWISs) nationwide. Unfortunately, no existing Present Weather Sensor has the
capacity to accurately assess precipitation type. The new PWS will offer a
highly sophisticated and flexible instrument for determination of hydrometeor
form that offers broad utility for improving transportation safety. Assuming
widespread implementation of the new PWS in the RWIS network, the anticipated
domestic market size is in excess of $10 million.

Present Weather Sensor devices are widely deployed by weather networks used by
the scientific, weather monitoring, agricultural, communications, and
transportation safety communities. A key capacity of any PWS is an ability to
automatically distinguish hydrometeor types, including snow, rain, sleet, and
hail. However, PWS sensors are known to be unreliable, particularly around the
freezing point where precipitation related damages tend to be greatest. Current
PWS instruments only measure the attenuation of one or two radiation beams; in
this case, questionable and fallible assumptions are required to obtain
hydrometeor phase and form. For this Phase I project, new high-speed
photographic imaging techniques will be used to quantitatively diagnose the
quantity of liquid in hydrometeors, working on the basis that the presence of
liquid is characterized by surface smoothness and differential visible/near-IR
absorption. The result of this study will be a prototype PWS that can achieve
on-the-fly diagnoses of hydrometeor size, shape, and phase.