* 1417347
* Workshop on Disaster Research: Taking Stock and Taking Action: Disaster Research and the Challenges Ahead; Newark, Delaware; May 1-2, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* James Kendra, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2015
* USD 75,000.00

This project is an interdisciplinary workshop focused on establishing a disaster
research agenda for the systematic development of knowledge and solutions aimed
at reducing the risk of environmental and technological disasters in the United
States. Over 150 of the leading disaster experts from engineering, social
science, and geoscience from the United States and from around the globe will
probe existing knowledge in light of increasing societal vulnerability and
suggest how what we know and what we need to know can help the society confront
the persistence of hazard. The workshop participants will focus upon the
relationship between scientific research findings on disaster risk reduction and
disaster policy adoption and implementation. Societal benefits include enhanced
utilization of scientific knowledge by disaster and emergency officials that
should increase the resilience of communities to
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day workshop is organized around two
plenary and four working group sessions. It will for the first time include the
multidisciplinary integration of hazard and disaster researchers with
researchers from implementation science. The workshop will point to an entirely
new way of looking at hazards by collecting commentary and data from
participants before they arrive, throughout the workshop in multiple settings,
and after as well. This process will achieve the most complete assessment of the
views of a large number of influential disaster scientists, from all areas, than
has heretofore been attempted. The workshop's goal is to provoke discussion on
the present state of hazard knowledge and to percolate fresh thinking about
hazard that takes the community away from standard research topics and to
looking about how that research can inform policy in ways that make sense and
are implementable at multiple scales of activity. The workshop should therefore
incite new research projects, initiate fresh collaborations amongst scientists,
generate new ideas for engaging officials, and stimulate the imaginations of
newer scholars and experienced veterans.