* 1417705
* Working with Middle School Science Teachers to Design and Implement an Interactive Data Dashboard
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Virginia Snodgrass Rangel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 12/31/2014
* USD 24,240.00

The William Marsh Rice University project will work with middle school science
teachers to design, field-test, refine, and evaluate a set of data management
tools that will be embedded in a web-based science curriculum. The project helps
middle school science teachers monitor their students' progress, plan lessons,
and reflect on their lessons. The project consists of three primary phases:
first, the researchers will work with teachers to develop an initial set of data
tools; second, teachers will test these tools in their classroom to verify that
they are feasible and usable; and third, a pilot study will be conducted to
examine how the tools are implemented in the classroom and an external
evaluation will determine the early impact of the tools. As part of this study,
the research team will work with 125 middle school science teachers across three
different school districts. Ultimately, the findings from this project will
identify characteristics of data management tools that are more likely to be
used effectively by teachers and have a positive impact on science teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is employing a mixed methods design.
Through design-based research, this project will help fill the need for
research-based and teacher-driven design of online student management systems.
During the first two years of the study, work will alternate between
design/development and data collection, allowing the research team to collect
and then incorporate teacher feedback into the tools' design. During these first
two years, data will be collected through teacher surveys, interviews, and
observations. The culmination of the project will be a one-year pilot, which
will allow the research team to study the implementation of the final tools, and
an independent evaluator from the University of Houston to evaluate the early
impact of the tools on teaching practices and student achievement. The
development and research proposed in this project will benefit teachers and
students throughout the United States by improving what data teachers see about
their students' progress in science and their own use of the curriculum.