* 1417405
* Mountain top mining effects on watershed hydrology and biogeochemistry: Learning from manipulation of  the critical zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Emily Bernhardt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 578,934.00

The watershed landscape in Central Appalachia is rapidly changing as a result of
mountain top mining of coal with valley fill (MTMVF). During MTMVF operations,
mountain ridges are removed with explosives to expose seams of coal too shallow
to require underground mining. The waste rocks generated from these ridges are
then deposited in adjacent stream valleys, filling the valleys beneath tens to
hundreds of meters of this overburden. The landscapes left behind are
dramatically altered and present both a significant challenge and opportunity to
explore how the human restructuring of a watershed alters the timing and
chemistry of stream flows. Through comparative analyses of mined and unmined
watersheds, this project will provide much needed knowledge about how water
availability, water quality, and flood risks are being altered by MTMVF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little prior knowledge exists for predicting hydrologic
response to this extreme landscape disturbance that penetrates hundreds of
meters into bedrock and leaves behind a reconfigured topography overlying a
reorganized subsurface. MTMVF must drastically alter watershed hydrology and
solute transport dynamics. Yet basic hydrologic theory and experimental
manipulations of vegetation and surficial soils are insufficient to predict how
MTMVF will change the magnitude and timing of water and solute transport in
watersheds. This project will combine high resolution terrain analyses,
intensive field measurement campaigns, and cutting edge modeling tools to
examine and predict how hydro-biogeochemical responses to precipitation differ
between mined and unmined landscapes from headwater to river basin scales. This
research will also provide insight into how land surface and subsurface
structures interact to influence hydrological and geochemical dynamics,
improving our understanding of watershed hydrology in both natural and disturbed
landscapes.