* 1417939
* DIMEs: Immersing Teachers and Students in Virtual Engineering Internships
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jacqueline Barber, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,478,972.00

The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) outline the science competencies
students should demonstrate through their K-12 years and represent a commitment
to integrate engineering design into the structure of science education.
However, achieving this new ideal of teaching and learning will require new
curricular and pedagogical supports for teachers as well as new and time-
efficient assessment methods. This project will provide such curricular and
pedagogical support by developing and evaluating teacher-ready curricular
Digital Internship Modules for Engineering (DIMEs). DIMES will be designed to
support middle school science teachers in providing students with experiences
that require students to use engineering design practices and science
understanding to solve a real-world problem, thereby promoting a robust
understanding of science and engineering, and motivating students to increased
interest in science and engineering. The modules will also assess students'
ability to apply their science knowledge in solving the engineering problem,
thereby providing teachers with actionable data about the depth of their
students' science and engineering understanding. The DIMEs will be environments
where students work as interns at a simulated engineering firm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Digital Internship Modules for Engineering will
provide immersive experiences that simultaneously serve as learning and
assessment opportunities. DIMEs will assess not only whether students understand
NGSS science and engineering concepts, but also whether they can use them in the
context of real-world problem solving. Teachers will orchestrate DIMEs using a
custom-designed teacher interface that will show student work, auto-generated
assessments, and reports on each student's learning progress. This project will
build on prior work on NSF-funded computer-based STEM learning environments
called epistemic games. Epistemic games are computer role-playing games that
have been successfully used in both undergraduate engineering courses and
informal settings for K-12 populations to teach students to think like STEM
professionals, thereby preparing them to solve 21st century problems. The
project will create six ten-day activities, two each in Physical Science, Life
Science and Earth Science units that are typically taught in middle school. An
iterative research and design process is used to conduct pilot tests of the six
DIMEs in local classrooms, field test a beta version of each DIME with 15
teachers and up to 1500 students in national classrooms, and then implement
final versions of each DIME in research trials with 30 teachers and up to 3000
students in national classrooms. By bringing cutting-edge developments in
learning science and undergraduate engineering education to middle school STEM
education, the project aims to improve educational practice, and enhance
assessment of learning outcomes in middle school science classroom settings.