* 1417395
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Geochemical Signatures in Greenland Ice of a Possible Extraterrestrial Impact During the Younger Dryas Climate Event
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Erich Osterberg, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,581.00

The primary objective of the proposed research is to obtain records of platinum,
iridium, and osmium concentrations and osmium isotope ratios in the GISP2
Greenland ice core in order to investigate the hypothesis that there was a
meteorite or comet impact at the onset of the Younger Dryas abrupt climate event
12,900 years ago. These analyses will be combined with high-resolution
measurements of climate proxies obtained on the same samples. Osmium isotopes
have the potential not only to conclusively confirm or refute the presence of an
extraterrestrial impact, but also to provide information about the size and type
of the impactor, should one be confirmed. High-resolution analyses of the
atmospheric circulation proxies sodium, calcium, and iron represent a leap in
ice core analysis resolution from one sample per three years to over 100 samples
per year. The proposed research activities would contribute towards an
understanding of what happened at the Younger Dryas, which will be of broad
interest to geologists, geochemists, climatologists, archeologists, astronomers,
and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following recent reports of a
large anomaly in platinum concentration in the GISP2 ice core, four
investigators propose a series of collaborative analyses at Dartmouth College
and the University of Maine on GISP2 ice core samples of Younger Dryas age to:
(1) evaluate the platinum spike at the Younger Dryas onset for potential
contamination and contributions from volcanic and terrestrial sources, (2)
measure osmium concentration and isotope composition to evaluate whether an
impact occurred at the Younger Dryas onset and assess the nature of any
impactor, and (3) assess the environmental change across this critical climate
transition by measuring iron, sodium and calcium at storm-scale resolution using
a new laser ablation mass-spectrometry system. The proposed research will
provide students with opportunities for engaged learning in order to increase
their interest and knowledge of how geochemical investigations provide insights
to climate change affecting the Arctic. In particular, this study will
constitute a major portion of a Ph.D. thesis and an undergraduate Senior Thesis.
It will expose graduate and undergraduate students to cutting-edge geochemical
and mass spectrometric techniques.