* 1417900
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Secondary Students in Building External Models
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Joseph Krajcik, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 07/31/2020
* USD 918,359.00

The Concord Consortium and Michigan State University will collaborate to: (1)
develop and test a modeling tool and accompanying instructional materials, (2)
explore how to support students in building and using models to explain and
predict phenomena across a range of disciplines, and (3) document the
sophistication of understanding of disciplinary core ideas that students develop
when building and using models in grades 6-12. By iteratively designing,
developing and testing a modeling tool and instructional materials that
facilitate the building of dynamic models, the project will result in exemplary
middle and high school materials that use a model-based approach as well as an
understanding of the potential of this approach in supporting student
development of explanatory frameworks and modeling capabilities. A key goal of
the project is to increase students' learning of science through modeling and to
study student engagement with modeling as a scientific practice.

The project provides the nation with middle and high school resources that
support students in developing and using models to explain and predict
phenomena, a central scientific and engineering practice. Because the research
and development work will be carried out in schools in which students typically
do not succeed in science, the products will also help produce a population of
citizens capable of continuing further STEM learning and who can participate
knowledgeably in public decision making. The goals of the project are to (1)
develop and test a modeling tool and accompanying instructional materials, (2)
explore how to support students in building, using, and revising models to
explain and predict phenomena across a range of disciplines, and (3) document
the sophistication of understanding of disciplinary core ideas that students
develop when building and using models in grades 6-12. Using a design-based
research methodology, the research and development efforts will involve multiple
cycles of designing, developing, testing, and refining the systems modeling tool
and the instructional materials to help students meet important learning goals
related to constructing dynamic models that align with the Next Generation
Science Standards. The learning research will study the effect of working with
external models on student construction of robust explanatory conceptual
understanding. Additionally, it will develop a set of professional development
resources and teacher scaffolds to help the expanding community of teachers not
directly involved in the project take advantage of the materials and strategies
for maximizing the impact of the curricular materials.