* 1417731
* SURVEY OF U.S. MIDDLE SCHOOL MATHEMATICS TEACHERS AND TEACHING
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Heather Hill, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,277,895.00

For the past 25 years, three major goals have animated U.S. educational policy:
developing more knowledgeable teachers, implementing more challenging curricula,
and fostering more ambitious instruction in classrooms. Yet despite volumes of
policy guidance, on-the-ground effort, and research over the past decades, few
comprehensive and representative portraits of teacher and teaching quality in
U.S. classrooms exist. Instead, most research into these topics has been
conducted with small or nonrepresentative samples, with the result that it is
difficult to ascertain what, if any, progress has been made toward the three
goals. Unlike student achievement, which the National Assessment of Educational
Progress has tracked for almost 50 years, the classroom experiences of the
typical U.S. student remain obscure.

To address this issue, the 4-year descriptive study will begin by systematically
tracking key instructional indicators in middle school mathematics classrooms,
specifically, teachers' mathematical knowledge, the curriculum in place, and the
nature of mathematics instruction offered to students. To initiate this line of
research, the research team will collect data in 2015 from a national
representative sample of 600 U.S. middle school mathematics teachers. A written
survey will build on one conducted in 2005-06, allowing for the comparison over
time of teachers' curriculum use and mathematical knowledge. The research team
will also record and score videos of instruction from a subset of these
teachers, enabling both a description of current instruction and a comparison to
lessons captured during the 1999 TIMSS video study. Both the survey and video
datasets can serve as referents for future studies of instruction, for instance,
studies investigating whether student participation in the development of
mathematical ideas has changed over time. The research team will use both old
and new technologies to complete the study. The mail survey will consist of
existing items that tap teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching, or the
professional knowledge teachers draw upon in providing mathematics instruction
to children. To conduct the video study, they will mail tablets for teachers to
record their own instruction, and guidance on taping will be provided via
YouTube video. The lessons that result will be scored using the Mathematical
Quality of Instruction (MQI) instrument. The MQI measures key dimensions of
mathematics classrooms, including the proportion of class time spent on
mathematical tasks, the mathematical integrity of lesson content, and the nature
of student participation in the development of mathematical ideas. Video and
data from the survey will be made available to other researchers for scoring
with other methods and observation instruments. Teachers, parents and students
will be asked to consent to their classroom videos being made available. The
study is largely descriptive, as are many others of its kind. However,
describing the range of U.S. instruction can have a profound effect on the
field, much as the TIMSS video studies did over a decade ago. Establishing
methodologies for studying teachers and teaching at scale will contribute to
efforts to evaluate and monitor progress toward broad-reaching national goals.