* 1417128
* Collaborative Research:  Year-round autonomous sampling of methane in Arctic lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Laura Lapham, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 103,242.00

The investigators propose to measure methane concentrations in frozen lakes
continuously throughout the Arctic winter using autonomous sampling devices, to
more thoroughly address the variability in the methane flux from Arctic lakes to
the atmosphere. Methane is a potent greenhouse gas, the release of which from
Arctic sources is poised to increase with climate warming. This project will
expand upon a successful pilot study that included the initial testing of
autonomous continuous fluid sampler and sensor systems. The proposed expansion
will involve additional capabilities and the deployment of a sampling unit in
each of six small lakes along a north-south gradient in the Mackenzie River
delta in the Canadian Arctic for a nine-month period, spanning the winter
season. With these data the investigators aim to characterize the physical,
chemical, and microbial conditions in the water column to elucidate hydrologic,
microbial, and weathering processes during the winter season, when methane
builds in lake water under the ice cover. The investigators hypothesize that
sudden (week, days, or even hours) releases of methane, following spring
flooding and ice cover breakup, produce a distinct atmospheric flux from Arctic
lakes that would otherwise be missed, since most logistically reasonable
sampling occurs in the summer months when methane concentrations in these lakes
are low or below detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of methane flux to
the Arctic atmosphere is estimated to come from soils and small lakes, although
these estimates are based on few direct observations with large uncertainties.
This proposed study, using in situ samplers and sensors, will allow an extensive
microbial, gas and ion analytical program coupled with a network of physical and
chemical sensor data to assess temporal conditions during winter months; to
confirm fundamental processes and rates; to determine the interplay among
microbial, geochemical and physical processes; and to develop a plan for a more
inclusive study that takes advantage of low cost proxies for significant
processes that best characterize temporal aspects of lake conditions. The
project will enhance infrastructure for future research in the Arctic through
the development of novel in situ sampling. The project will support several
undergraduate and graduate students, providing valuable lab-based experience for
students from non-research-intensive institutions. The investigators also will
conduct two informal outreach activities to communicate the importance of Arctic
climate change to primary school students while also teaching them about design
and engineering. They also intend to work closely with Aurora College and Aurora
Research Institute based in Inuvik, Canada, to engage First Nations youth.