* 1417124
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Ionization Process for Materials Characterization using Mass Spectrometry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Charles McEwen, MSTM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to provide a new and improved molecular
characterization tool to be used with mass spectrometers for applications in
biotechnology, pharmaceutical, forensic, clinical, environmental, food, and
material sciences. Disruptive discoveries of new ionization technology for mass
spectrometry in the 1980's had a major impact on the advancement of science and
fueled new business opportunities. In this proposal, new ionization technology
for characterization of material using mass spectrometry is being
commercialized. The ionization process converts molecules, regardless of size or
volatility, to gas-phase ions without the need for high voltage or lasers used
in current methods. Only the vacuum inherent with all mass spectrometers, and an
appropriate small molecule matrix compound, is needed for ionization. This
technology is potentially transformative providing ease-of-use, reduced cost,
and reliability with high potential for advancing science through improved
measurement technologies. These attributes are expected to have the greatest
impact in clinical laboratories, field portable mass spectrometers, and bio-
threat detection. The high sensitivity, simplicity, ease-of-use, low-cost, high-
throughput capabilities and unique applications suggest high commercial
potential in the $4 billion per year mass spectrometer market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to deliver a prototype
ion source for mass spectrometry based a novel ionization technology that
transfers small or macromolecules from solution or solid phases to gas-phase
ions using only heat and/or sub-atmospheric pressure. When combined with mass
spectrometry, this technology provides a simple yet powerful means of
characterizing materials directly from surfaces, such as biological tissue or
polymeric films, in a manner that was previously not possible. Certain small
molecule compounds when mixed with minute quantities of analyte and exposed to
the vacuum inherent with any mass spectrometer spontaneously produces gas-phase
ions of the analyte. The knowledge achieved in fundamental studies will be
applied to design, construct, and assemble a first generation multifunctional
ionization platform to reproducibly introduce samples and materials to the
vacuum environment for manual or high throughput analyses. Means to rapidly
characterize micron size surface defects/changes in biological materials (e.g.,
tissue, ansd microbial communities) will be developed without a laser. The
products of this endeavor will provide new methods for materials
characterization which, like other new ionization technology for mass
spectrometry, will result in discoveries that advance knowledge in widely
divergent areas of science.