* 1417032
* STTR Phase I:  Multi-sine six-degree of freedom interferometry for precision stage metrology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Jonathan Ellis, INSITUTEC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will demonstrate a novel
laser interferometer to provide fast and portable calibrations for ultra-precise
motion control devices. This system will provide customers with a portable
system that will perform nanometer-level calibrations in a fraction of the time
as compared to competitive products. A system that can provide this unique
capability to measure a functional point will lower measurement uncertainty and
reduce calibration time. The chip manufacturing market alone was $311 billion in
2011 with an estimated 112 plants worldwide in packaging and chip production.
Based on dialogue with a leading chip manufacturer, the need for periodic
calibration using a fast portable tool has been confirmed for each plant in this
industry. Additionally, the portable interferometer has market opportunity
beyond chip manufacturing, ranging from large-scale measuring machines to
precision robotics. The technology would be a game-changer in many industries to
facilitate fast calibration times and minimize loss of manufacturing production
time.

Many high precision manufacturing processes require routine calibrations to
verify that process equipment meets specific inspection and manufacturing
specifications. The current state-of-the-art portable interferometers on the
market require multiple calibration setups for each rotation and translation
axis to be measured. Higher-end interferometer products can measure multiple
degrees of freedom at the same time, but are extremely expensive, not portable,
and have large measurement targets leading to altered stage dynamics during
calibration. This work addresses a novel laser calibration system that can
simultaneously measure all six degrees of freedom (3 linear and 3 rotational)
from a single laser beam transmitted from a small portable module. The goal is
to achieve a resolution of better than 100 nanoradians in all three rotational
axes and 1 nanometer in the linear axes.