* 1417090
* STTR Phase I:  Self-Inflating bubble provides comfortable, effective hearing protection with directionality
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Stephen Ambrose, Asius Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 194,967.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to improve HPD
use-rates among workers in loud noise environments, reduce permanent hearing
loss rates and usher in the field of sealed-ear bio-acoustical studies. This HPD
is expected to provide greater comfort and fit than custom earplugs yet have a
cost similar to the annual expense of the foam type. The use-rate with this HPD
is expected to compete with and likely exceed that of the custom earplugs and be
the new hearing protection device of choice for both markets. The anticipated
hearing protection device use-rate increase in loud workplaces will have the
effect of improving workers? health and stabilizing their productivity rates,
positions and wages. The presence of this HPD with its novel approach to hearing
protection on the market will enhance appreciation for hearing health and
further popularize biophysics solutions to everyday issues. The underlying
research will open up interest in sealed-ear bio-acoustical phenomena. Once the
performance results of this HPD and the associated tympanic membrane response
study reaches the mainstream audiological and acoustic research communities, the
desire to evaluate the health effects of a range of in-ear audio devices and
associated ear canal acoustics will become widespread.

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project
addresses the need for a hearing protection device (HPD) that is comfortable to
wear, effectively blocks harmful sounds and yet enables communication. HPDs go
unused or misused in loud workplace environments due to discomfort and
insufficient utility with regards to situational awareness leading to the single
most extensive non-fatal labor-based sickness of permanent hearing loss in the
United States and in particular, among members of the armed forces. A prototype
HPD is under development with a soft, ?disappears from perception? inflatable
ear-coupler that fully seals and isolates the ear from exterior sound and with
variability to adjust for differing loudness situations. Tests will measure
sound isolation, speech recognition, occlusion effect, and perceived comfort,
occlusion and stress on the tympanic membrane compared to the most common
earplug style hearing protection devices on the market today. Standard
audiometric methods such as Real Ear Attenuation at Threshold, Microphone In
Real Ear, tympanometry, and reflectance will be used to perform tests. Expected
results include improved sound isolation, clearer speech recognition,
significantly less to no occlusion effect, greatly preferred comfort levels and
reduced stress on the tympanic membrane compared to the common hearing
protection devices.