* 1417835
* EarSketch:  An Authentic, Studio-Based STEAM Approach to High School Computing Education
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Brian Magerko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 3,019,084.00

This project will study the influence on positive student achievement and
engagement (particularly among populations traditionally under-represented in
computer science) of an intervention that integrates a computational music
remixing tool -EarSketch- with the Computer Science Principles, a view of
computing literacy that is emerging as a new standard for Advanced Placement and
other high school computer science courses. The project is grounded on the
premise that EarSketch, a STEM + Art (STEAM) learning environment, embodies
authenticity (i.e., its cultural and industry relevance in both arts and STEM
domains), along with a context that facilitates communication and collaboration
among students (i.e., through a studio-based learning approach). These elements
are critical to achieving successful outcomes across diverse student
populations. Using agent-based modeling, the research team will investigate what
factors enhance or impede implementation of authentic STEAM tools in different
school settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will be engaged in a
multi-stage process to develop: a) an implementation-ready, web-based EarSketch
learning environment that integrates programming, digital audio workstation,
curriculum, audio loop library, and social sharing features, along with studio-
based learning functionality to support student presentation, critique,
discussion, and collaboration; and b) an online professional learning course for
teachers adopting EarSketch in Computer Science Principles courses. Using these
resources, the team will conduct a quasi-experimental study of EarSketch in
Computer Science Principles high school courses across the state of Georgia;
measure student learning and engagement across multiple demographic categories;
and determine to what extent an EarSketch-based CS Principles course promotes
student achievement and engagement across different student populations. The
project will include measures of student performance, creativity, collaboration,
and communication in student programming tasks to determine the extent to which
studio-based learning in EarSketch promotes success in these important areas. An
agent-based modeling framework in multiple school settings will be developed to
determine what factors enhance or impede implementation of EarSketch under
conditions of routine practice.