* 1417132
* Microlensing and Gravitational Backreaction for Superstring Loops
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* David Chernoff, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 133,752.00

This award funds the research of Prof. David Chernoff at Cornell University.
Substantial theoretical and observational evidence supports the occurrence of
inflation at very early times, a brief interval of extremely rapid expansion of
the Universe shortly after birth. The mechanism is a profound problem for
cosmology and fundamental physics. String theory, the best-developed tool to
explore this epoch, suggests that today our Universe may contain relics of that
early, energetic phase. The relics are loops of string stretched from
microscopic scales to macroscopic scales by the rapid expansion. The proposed
research investigates the physics of string loops and possibilities for
detecting them. Astronomical detection would be a revolutionary development for
string theory and cosmology. Such a discovery would provide a direct glimpse of
otherwise inaccessible elements of the underlying physical theory. It would help
elucidate the mechanism for inflation while extending our study of the universe
to the earliest moments of the big bang itself.

At the very beginning, the universe is believed to have grown exponentially in
size via the mechanism of inflation. The almost scale-invariant density
perturbation spectrum predicted by inflation is strongly supported by recent
observational data. Subsequent evolution, the traditional purview of big bang
cosmology, can be accurately modeled with tried-and-true physics. However, the
precise inflationary mechanism remains a profound problem for cosmology and for
fundamental physics. Intellectual Merit: String theory, the best-developed tool
to explore this epoch, suggests the inevitable birth and survival of one-
dimensional structures of cosmological sizes, namely, cosmic superstrings. Long,
horizon-crossing strings fragment to give loops which fall into growing matter
perturbations. The local density of these fossil remnant loops within the galaxy
is enhanced over the universe's mean density of loops by many orders of
magnitude and numerous loops exist within the galaxy. The PI will investigate
how these relics can be sought by optical lensing of background stars and
studied in detail through gravitational wave emission. These objects will
provide some of the best experimental means to learn about string theory and the
birth of our universe. Broader Impacts: As part of this proposal (1) The PI will
help train postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates in
theoretical physics and cosmology. (2) The PI is committed to publicizing the
big questions of theoretical physics and cosmology that motivate the work. The
PI will speak in local science museums and help bring the research to life for
general audiences.