* 1417664
* Collaborative Research: Adaptability of a Key Arctic Freshwater Species to Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Linda Deegan, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 644,181.00

TITLE: Adaptability of a key Arctic freshwater fish to climate
change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly changing climates uniquely challenge Arctic
fish that rely on interconnected, seasonally available habitat. The Arctic
grayling migrates annually between breeding sites in streams and unfrozen
overwintering habitat. Their movement is restricted to a small number of
interconnecting waterways. Warmer climates are creating dry streambeds when fish
need to migrate to winter habitat. Warmer streams could challenge fish adapted
to cooler water. Substantial movement, plasticity, or adaptive genetic variation
might allow for resilience to these stressors. This study proposes to study
populations from three representative Arctic streams that differ in temperature,
connectivity, and sensitivity to climate change. Pilot data indicate increasing
drying events that threaten the grayling?s return to overwintering sites as well
as substantial population structure among and within watersheds. Species can
respond to climate change through movement, phenotypic plasticity, or local
adaptive evolution. Most research fails to address one or more of these
fundamental strategies, and these gaps currently limit our ability to predict
future responses with accuracy. This study addresses all three strategies to
understand the persistence of a key Arctic species. The researchers will address
five broader impact areas: 1) expanding opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate study, including promoting opportunities for minority involvement of
native Alaskans; 2) building upon existing links between Arctic research field
crews and K-12 educators in the lower 48 states; 3) broadening scientific
understanding in Arctic minority communities, including residents in Barrow, AK
and initiating new outreach to Anaktuvuk, AK; 4) enhancing public education via
governmental outreach, media relations, and publicly accessible web resources;
and 5) expanding cooperation with state and federal agencies in developing
management recommendations for Arctic fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
1) assay movement at four time scales ranging from days to centuries; 2)
evaluate plasticity and adaptive differentiation among populations; 3) assess
populations for loci under selection; and 4) determine natural selection against
grayling subpopulations by integrating data on selected loci with the movement
of individually tagged fish. This study will test how watershed characteristics
influence movement patterns using individual tagging, otolith micro-chemistry,
and genomics. Individual tagging records fine-scale daily movement, otolith
micro-chemistry allows the reconstruction of lifetime movement patterns, and
genomic data reveals recent and historical movement across the landscape and
genes under selection. Lastly, this study will quantify genetic and
environmental contributions to performance of fish from divergent
environments.&lt;br/&gt;