* 1417095
* Ferromagnetic Resonance of Interacting Particles: A Theoretical Study (Renewal)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Andrew Newell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 71,389.00

In nearly any body of fresh or salt water, there is a depth at which bacteria
can be found that manufacture chains of magnets. Called magnetotactic bacteria,
they use the chains of magnets to orient themselves in the Earth's field, and
this helps them find the depth at which they can thrive. When they die, the
magnets remain as "magnetofossils"; they are one of the few groups of
microorganism to leave a permanent record. This record provides not only
information on the bacteria, but also the environmental conditions they
experienced; and in layers where the magnets are found, they provide a record of
the Earth's magnetic field around the time the bacteria died. Paleomagnetists
have attempted to develop magnetic methods that reliably identify magnetofossils
in sediments; but these methods cannot always discriminate between magnetic
minerals produced by bacteria and inorganic magnetic minerals.

A test developed by a group at Caltech shows promise. They use ferromagnetic
resonance (FMR), which involves exposing a sample to microwave-frequency
electromagnetic fields and measuring the magnetic response. This may be the only
test that can distinguish a chain of magnets from a single elongated magnet.
However, the existing theory for FMR cannot model more than one magnet if they
interact with each other through their magnetic fields. In this project, the PI
will develop software that implements a general theory of FMR for interacting
single-domain magnets (ones that act like dipoles). It will be general enough to
allow the sizes, shapes and orientations to vary. The software will be capable
not just of modeling the output of commercial electron spin resonance
spectrometers, which only measure power absorption in a single sample
orientation, but also instruments that can rotate the sample and obtain phase
information. The software will be used to calculate FMR spectra for chains of
magnets, as they are in live bacteria, and changes in the spectra as the chains
become disrupted and the magnets oxidized after the bacteria die. It will be
used to determine when FMR can be used to reliably identify magnetofossils.