* 1417480
* Quantifying Greenland Iceberg Melt Rates using Remotely-sensed Data
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Ellyn Enderlin, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 172,372.00

The investigators propose to implement a new remote sensing technique for
deriving iceberg volume changes&#8232;in order to estimate submarine melt rates
in key fjords around the Greenland Ice Sheet periphery. The fluxes of solid ice
and liquid freshwater from the Greenland Ice Sheet are important contributors to
sea level rise and ocean freshening. Solid fluxes come in the form of icebergs
calved from marine-terminating glacier margins. Freshwater fluxes are comprised
of surface meltwater runoff and submarine melting at calving margins. As
icebergs drift away from the margin, however, they are subject to submarine
melting and thus constitute an additional source of freshwater release to the
ocean. Variations in the magnitude and spatial distribution&#8232;of freshwater
fluxes in glacial fjords and adjacent ocean basins can impact the ocean?s
stratification, circulation, and ecological structure as well as ice-ocean
interactions that influence ice flow, so it is important that spatial and
temporal variations in melting are quantified.

Melt rates will be obtained near the margins of about 20 large outlet glaciers
using an extensive collection of ~0.5 m-resolution WorldView stereo satellite
images compiled by the Polar Geospatial Center. Digital elevation models (DEMs)
will be constructed from available stereo pairs using&#8232;the NASA Ames Stereo
Pipeline software implemented on the University of Maine supercomputing cluster.
Differencing the co-registered sequential DEMs acquired ~5-30 days apart yields
an estimate of the change in iceberg freeboard (i.e., surface elevation above
sea level) which&#8232;can be converted to an iceberg draft assuming hydrostatic
equilibrium. The PIs contend that after accounting for elevation change due to
surface melting and tides, the residual difference in iceberg freeboard between
the DEMs must be due to submarine melting. This work will provide new insights
for studies focused on ice-ocean interactions and freshwater input to high
latitude oceans. The project provides support for an early-career scientist and
for an undergraduate student. Mentoring the undergraduate research assistant
will give the early-career scientist valuable advising experience, and the
student will develop data-analysis and problem solving skills that are not
readily obtained by in-class instruction.