* 1417274
* Radiative Thermal Conductivity of Upper Mantle and Transition Zone Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Sylvia-Monique Thomas, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 141,121.00

The structure and dynamics of our planet's interior depend crucially upon heat
flow and thus upon the thermal conductivity of its constituents. Thermal
conductivities of Earth's mantle materials, such as olivine, majorite,
wadsleyite and ringwoodite, are important parameters for geodynamic models of
mantle convection. Differences in radiative thermal conductivities of these
minerals will affect models of lithospheric geotherms, subduction dynamics, and
the structure of lithospheric slabs. However, there is a lack of experimental
data about radiative thermal conductivities, especially at the high pressures
and temperatures that exist in the deep interior. This experimental study aims
to complement evolving theoretical frameworks, extend ongoing projects to all
major constituents of the Earth's mantle, and indirectly measure the
temperature-pressure variation of radiative thermal conductivity using in-situ
optical spectroscopy. A primary goal of the project is to further our
understanding of a major driving force of nature - heat flow within the Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on recent in-situ optical
measurements, in which two major transition zone phases, hydrous wadsleyite and
hydrous ringwoodite, were studied for the first time at simultaneous high
pressure and high temperature. The PI reported radiative thermal conductivities
of 1.5 Wm-1K-1 for hydrous wadsleyite and 1.2 Wm-1K-1 for hydrous ringwoodite at
transition zone conditions. For anhydrous wadsleyite and ringwoodite radiative
conductivities were analytically derived to be 40% and 33% higher, respectively.
The results indicate that the transition zone may contribute significantly to
heat transfer in the mantle and demonstrate the importance of radiative heat
transfer in controlling geodynamic processes. The current project is an
extension of those measurements to study olivine, majorite, akimotoite and phase
D. The effect of sample thickness and compositional changes (such as iron and
water concentrations) on thermal conductivity properties of majorite,
akimotoite, phase D and olivine and its high-pressure polymorphs ringwoodite and
wadsleyite will be systematically investigated. The experiments are very timely,
since theoretical models are in development and experimental data are needed to
support such models. This research is of highly collaborative nature, and will
take advantage of the expertise and facilities of laboratories across the
nation, as well as internationally. This work will illuminate a fundamentally
interdisciplinary topic of deep concern to a broad audience, including mineral
physicists, seismologists, geodynamicist, geochemists, and planetary scientists.
This study will provide a valuable learning experience for undergraduate
students, as well as important data, which will contribute to our knowledge of
heat transfer in the Earth and eventually lead to refined thermal models of the
Earth's interior.