* 1417925
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Arctic Marine Biogeochemical Response to Climate Change for Seasonal to Decadal Prediction Using Regional and Global Climate System Models
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Clara Deal, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 437,764.00

The Arctic Ocean is experiencing rapid and dramatic environmental changes
related to global warming. These changes affect the arctic marine carbon cycle
as part of complex and coupled system interactions between the ocean,
atmosphere, cryosphere and land surfaces, with important feedbacks to the global
Earth System, including altering the concentration of atmospheric greenhouse
gases. Previous and ongoing studies have laid the foundations for improving the
understanding of arctic carbon sinks and sources using observational studies,
regional ice-ocean modeling, and recent global carbon cycle simulations.
However, there remain large uncertainties in the understanding of variability
and change in the arctic marine carbon budget that are difficult to reconcile
with existing tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the Regional
Arctic System Model, comprised of marine biogeochemistry components in the eddy-
resolving ocean and sea ice models to advance understanding and prediction of
the arctic biogeochemical system, including shelf-basin and vertical nutrient
exchange, the subsurface chlorophyll maximum, ice edge and under ice blooms and
their role in ecosystem response to climate change. It builds on the recent and
ongoing research by the team of investigators, including the development and
evaluation of the marine biogeochemistry components for global sea ice/ocean
models and the high resolution Regional Arctic System Model. The model simulates
mass and energy exchange between sea ice, ocean, atmosphere and land on decadal
timescales, with regionally constrained variability using observationally based
atmospheric and oceanic datasets at lateral boundaries. The research will: (i)
evaluate and refine the established ocean marine biogeochemistry model, and (ii)
add a newly developed sea ice algal biogeochemistry component within the
existing model infrastructure. These model enhancements will help better
quantify variability, complexity, and change in arctic marine primary
production. The overarching goal of this study is to achieve a comprehensive
understanding of interactions between physical system components and the arctic
marine carbon cycle, and to advance arctic system prediction at seasonal to
centennial time scales with quantified uncertainty.