* 1417317
* Physics at the Frontier: Collider and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 560,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Stojkovic, Kinney, and
Wackeroth at the State University of New York, University at Buffalo. The goal
of this research project is to make important progress in providing answers to
key open questions at the frontier of of particle physics, cosmology and gravity
research, and in doing so to go significantly beyond the current state of the
art in the field. The PIs propose individual research programs with elements
which will be executed jointly. New particle accelerators such as the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) and envisioned successors are probing new physics at the
energy frontier and are capable of providing answers to important questions
about the structure and history of the universe. On the other hand, cosmology
provides a unique laboratory to study questions in physics inaccessible to
traditional particle physics methods, and forms a valuable complement to
accelerators. Our current understanding of the fundamental problems about the
origin, evolution and future of our universe is still in its infancy, and a
synthesis of many independent lines of evidence will be necessary to point the
way to explanations. This project reflects that synergy, and promises to make
significant progress in connecting high-precision cosmological and accelerator
data to fundamental questions such as the origin and evolution of the universe,
the unification of gravitation with quantum mechanics, the role of the vacuum in
the structure of space and time. In addition the PIs will continue with their
very active and successful presentation of the latest scientific results to a
wide public in the form of public talks and various outreach activities. These
will include The Science Exploration Day, Physics Open House, and Family Day.
Kinney (with active participation of Stojkovic and Wackeroth) will continue
organizing Science and Art Cabaret} - a unique mix of cutting-edge science and
technology with art, music, poetry, and performance, and the At UB Symposium, a
new interdisciplinary lecture series with a prototype event being held in
2013.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stojkovic's research will span topics
within his expertise from particle physics to cosmology. Part of his research
will be focused to the LHC physics, in particular on further development of a
comprehensive LHC event generator BlackMax which is extensively used by ATLAS
and CMS in search for exotic physics, and understanding implications of the
recent Higgs discovery on gravity and cosmology (in collaboration with
Wackeroth). Part of his research will be dedicated to cosmology, in particular
to studying predictions of a recently proposed class of inflationary models (in
collaboration with Kinney), as well as studying new puzzling patterns in quasar
light curves which seem to be closely related to the quasars' redshifts. The
main goal of Kinney's research is to make quantitative connections between new
observational data and detailed properties of the early universe to address
fundamental questions such as: What is the energy scale of cosmological
inflation? What is the form of the leading-order operator in the inflationary
potential? Is the inflationary Lagrangian consistent with a simple canonical
field theory? Is there evidence for quantum gravity effects, for example a
Planck-scale cutoff in quantum modes? Can we explain CMB anomalies, such as the
hemispherical asymmetry observed by Planck? Are there viable alternatives to
inflation? What properties do they have? Wackeroth will concentrate on the
precision electroweak (EW) physics, in particular on corrections to W and Z
boson production in hadronic collisions, improving predictions for H,W, Z
production in association with heavy quarks, and NLO EW corrections to triple EW
gauge boson production with non-standard couplings. This work will be directly
relevant to analysis of upcoming LHC data.