* 1417104
* STTR Phase I:  A Novel Abdominal Stimulator to Assist with Ventilator Weaning in Patients
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Angus Mclachlan, Liberate Medical LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 269,467.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project, in which a new device and approach to weaning
patients from mechanical ventilation is proposed, is a reduction in public
health care expenditure and a reduction in morbidity for the half a million
patients who have difficulty weaning from mechanical ventilation each year in
the US. This project promises to improve our scientific understanding of the
role of the expiratory muscles in weaning failure patients and improve our
technical understanding of non-invasive respiratory sensors for online
triggering of external systems. These patients suffer from an array of clinical
complications and cost the US health care system $16 billion annually. The
majority of these costs are borne by Medicare and Medicaid whose reimbursement
policies provide an incentive to reduce weaning time in this patient group.
Given the severe health consequences of prolonged mechanical ventilation, the
large and expanding number of treatable patients, and the favorable
reimbursement landscape, we reason that the device that will be developed in
this proposal will positively benefit society and will be commercially
valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a non-invasive
electrical stimulator that automatically applies stimulation to the respiratory
muscles in synchrony with a patient?s voluntary breathing pattern. Based on
previous research it is expected that this device will reduce the load placed on
the respiratory muscles while at the same time training them. Since the
imbalance between the strength of the respiratory muscles and the mechanical
load they face is a major factor contributing to weaning difficulty, it is
hypothesized that the proposed device will reduce the time, and improve the
probability, to wean from mechanical ventilation. In this phase one proposal the
device stimulation trigger will be developed and tested and combined with a
commercially available stimulator, the clinical effect of the developed device
on breathing when used acutely will be established, and the feasibility of using
the developed device in mechanically ventilated patients will be determined. The
successful completion of this phase one proposal will be followed by phase two
in which both the development of a stimulator with integrated trigger and a
fully powered clinical trial will be completed, ultimately allowing the device
to be submitted for FDA clearance.