* 1417366
* Research in String Theory and Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Vadim Kaplunovsky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Vadim Kaplunovsky at the
University of Texas at Austin. His work focuses on several aspects of string
theory -- which unifies gravity with the other fundamental forces of nature
(strong, weak, and electromagnetic). String theory has an unusual property - it
contains something called "holographic dualities", which relate theories in
many-body quantum systems (ranging from quark-gluon plasma to superconductors)
to theories of gravity in higher dimensional spaces. These dualities, since they
relate to very different systems, allow calculations in one system to give
results in the other. Professor Kaplunovsky studies the duality between forms of
super-dense nuclear matter and models with crystal-like structures, as well as
the duality between models of gravity in highly curved spaces with strongly
interacting particle physics models. He also studies string theories which are
dual to each other. All these projects are deeply connected to other aspects of
string theory as well as to particle physics, nuclear physics, and condensed
matter. To enhance the broader impact of his research, Professor Kaplunovsky
will give a series of talks to high-school students about hot issues of modern
physics (which alas are not even mentioned in a regular curriculum). The
subjects may involve fundamental particles, cosmology, or anything else the
students may be interested in. Prof. Kaplunovsky will also give a series of more
advanced lectures about theoretical physics to the undergraduate students at the
University of Texas and at other universities in the US and
overseas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Kaplunovsky's research focuses on several
issues of string theory and holographic QCD. One project is about infinite
crystals of YM instantons -- which 'live' in 4+1 dimensions (where they act as
particles) but may form lower-dimensional lattices in external potentials. There
are many types of such crystals, with different lattice geometries and/or
different patterns of instantons' isospin orientations. The project focuses on
surveying such crystals and the phase transitions between them, especially the
transitions which change the dimensionality of the lattice (3D-&gt;4D, or
2D-&gt;3D, or 1D-&gt;2D). Another project focuses on leading order (in alpha')
stringy corrections to the hadron spectra in high-curvature holographic QCD
models with O(1) 't Hooft couplings. A related issue concerns stringy
corrections to the short-distance nuclear forces in models where the dual
baryons looks like string stars rather than instantons. The third project is
about M theory duals of the heterotic orbifolds, which seem to give paradoxical
results, and he hopes to come up with a solution to these puzzles.