* 1417172
* EAGER: US Ignite: High School STEM Education Utilizing Gigabit HD Multipoint Connected Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Marvin Schwartz, OneCommunity
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 12/31/2015
* USD 299,877.00

This project will demonstrate and assesses the value of low-latency, high-
quality video and audio in an educational setting. Traditional teleconferencing
has not worked well in schools due to the unnatural communication style forced
by latency and difficulty in setting up the equipment. The project will develop
a system that substitutes SDN technology, network bandwidth, and end-host
manipulation of video and audio, as a replacement for a Multipoint Control Unit
(MCU) for bridging multiple users into a collaborative system. Combined with
minimal encoding of the audio and video data these features allow for very low
latency and a much more natural interaction style. The technology will be used
and assessed in educational environments. The project plans include the lesson
and evaluation plans that will enable the assessment of the utility of low-
latency, high-quality, easy-to-use technology.

This project will contribute to our understanding of the value of advanced
networking in support of high-quality, low-latency media to connect students to
skilled teachers and to other students. It will test the hypothesis that
connected collaboration provides an environment in which students can initiate
collaboration sessions with their peers, teachers and subject matter experts
enabling them to engage in challenging, authentic, real world, and just in time
problem solving. The student's "Connected Learning" is achieved through the
myriad of interaction configurations that the multi-point technology
facilitates, allowing students and teachers in the same classroom, in different
classrooms or even different schools to interact with each other and collaborate
with outside experts.