* 1417024
* Sound Wave Velocities and Elasticity of Hydrous Mantle Minerals at High Pressures and Temperatures.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,001.00

The deep interior of the Earth is not directly accessible to study. The most
instructive information about its structure is mainly from seismological studies
of earthquake waves. The speed at earth quake vibrations or waves travel is
different for different types of rocks and strongly depends on the elastic
properties of the rocks. The seismological data provides variations of
compressional (Vp) and shear (Vs) wave velocities as a function of depth, and
data taken for different regions of the Earth have revealed unusual rapid
increases in the compressional and shear wave velocities (also called velocity
discontinuities or velocity jumps) at depths of 410-km and 660- km in the Earth.
The data also show that both seismic velocities increase rapidly with depth in
the region between the two discontinuities, or the transition zone. Laboratory
petrological studies demonstrate that olivine [&amp;#945;-(Mg,Fe)2SiO4], an
iron-magnesium silicate and a major Earth mineral, transforms to denser phases
(different crystal structures), wadsleyite [&amp;#946;-(Mg,Fe)2SiO4] and
ringwoodite [&amp;#947;-(Mg,Fe)2SiO4 at high pressures. Moreover, the
seismically observed 410-km velocity jump has been ascribed to the change of
olivine to the wadsleyite crystal structure, and the transition of wadsleyite to
the ringwoodite crystal structure has been attributed to a minor velocity jump
at 520-km. Current laboratory velocity measurements on the mantle minerals have
mainly utilized dry or anhydrous samples to study and match the seismic data.
However, experimental and theoretical studies indicate that wadsleyite and
ringwoodite can incorporate up to 2-3 wt. % of H2O as hydroxyl (OH-) in their
crystal structures that affect their physical properties such as thermal and
electrical conductivities including the speed at which elastic waves travel
through the minerals. The proposed study is to fabricate synthetic rock samples
of wadsleyite and ringwoodite containing controlled structural water, and to
measure the elastic wave velocities of the hydrous specimens, as a function of
temperature and pressure similar to the conditions inside the Earth?s transition
zone. Data from the study will be compared with the seismic velocity profiles of
the Earth?s mantle, to address persistent questions related to the precise depth
and magnitude of the seismic velocity jumps, as well as the velocity gradients
between the discontinuities. Combined with petrological and geochemical data,
the results of the study could significantly enhance our knowledge of the
composition and structure of the Earth?s interior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is to conduct systematic measurements of the elastic wave velocities,
to constrain the elastic properties of polycrystalline specimens of hydrous
olivine (&amp;#945;-Mg2SiO4) and its high pressure polymorphs, wadsleyite
(&amp;#946;-Mg2SiO4) and ringwoodite (&amp;#947;- Mg2SiO4), as a function of the
content of structurally bound water (OH-) in the mineral, pressure (P) and
temperature (T), by acoustic ultrasonic interferometry techniques. Experimental
and theoretical studies indicate that wadsleyite, and ringwoodite can
incorporate up to 2-3 wt. % of H2O as hydroxyl (OH-) in their structures, and
thus affecting many physical properties of the phases, including their elastic
properties. However, despite their abundance in the Earth?s upper mantle and
transition zone (410?660 km depth), there are currently very few data on the
elasticity of the hydrated phases of the nominally anhydrous mantle minerals.
Two primary activities are proposed: (1.) Hot-pressing of optimum acoustic-
quality polycrystalline specimens characterized in detail by X-ray diffraction,
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM),
electron microprobe analysis, immersion density and bench-top acoustic velocity
measurements, and IR spectroscopy and SIMS for quantifying the water content
prior-to and after the high P and T ultrasonic studies. (2.) Initial measurement
of the elasticity of the materials at high pressure up to 10 GPa, and room T, in
a 1000-ton uniaxial split-cylinder apparatus (USCA-1000) of the Kawai-type, to
obtain accurate pressure dependences of the elastic bulk (K) and shear (G)
moduli for the hydrated phases, followed by measurement of the elastic
properties at simultaneous high-pressure to 15 GPa and moderate temperature to
650 K, in conjunction with X-ray diffraction analysis of the sample, at the 13ID
beam line of the Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory. It
is proposed to apply the elastic properties and their variations with pressure
(P) and temperature (T) for the Mg end-member hydrated mantle phases, to provide
tighter constraints on the depth and sharpness of the 410-km discontinuity, to
re-define the velocity jumps associated with the olivine to wadsleyite and the
wadsleyite to ringwoodite phase transitions associated with the 520-km
discontinuity in the transition zone, to assess the role of water in the lateral
inhomogeneity observed from seismic tomographic studies of the Earth?s mantle,
and in general to improve our understanding of the Earth?s mineralogical and
chemical composition.