* 1417609
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Detecting Epidemiologic Transitions in Pre-Contact Kodiak
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 11/30/2016
* USD 11,486.00

Research on the population growth dynamics of past hunter-gatherers has focused
mainly on the influence of food availability and scarcity on hunter-gatherer
health, fertility, and mortality. Over the last two decades, however,
demographic research among contemporary hunter-gatherers has revealed that
infectious diseases also influence their health and population
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the possibility that the
ancestral Alutiit inhabiting the Kodiak Archipelago in the Gulf of Alaska were
vulnerable to fish-borne and other gastrointestinal parasites as a result of
their heavy reliance on marine and freshwater fish as well as their food
preparation and community sanitation practices. As the dietary importance of
marine vs. freshwater fish changed over time, and as food preparation and
sanitation practices likewise changed, the Alutiit would have been exposed to
different parasitic diseases, entailing changes in health and population growth.
To evaluate these claims, the co-PI will recover and quantify changes in the
relative frequencies of parasite remains preserved in Kodiak archaeological
deposits, then compare these results against previous research on changes in
Alutiiq food-ways, settlement practices, and population growth
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will add to our growing knowledge
about hunter-gatherer disease experiences by exploring behavioral and ecological
influences on disease and its impact on population growth rates. The project
will also illustrate the potential of parasitological analysis to uncover long-
term changes in the prevalence of infectious diseases when pursued
systematically. Because the lifecycles of these parasites involve many host
species beside their human final hosts, this project will also shed further
light on the ecology and biogeography of these parasite taxa and their nonhuman
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Returning to traditional foods is a major component
of many indigenous efforts to revitalize ancestral culture across the
northeastern Pacific Rim, including among contemporary Kodiak Alutiit. While the
health benefits of this revitalization are proving effective in counteracting
degenerative disease epidemics such as diabetes among these communities,
traditional foods also pose their own health risks that must be understood so
that these can be avoided. This project will provide valuable knowledge about
the health importance of fish and food preparation practices in the contemporary
Alutiiq diet.