* 1418881
* Increased Research and Educational Opportunities at Shoals Marine Laboratory Through an Improved Communications Network
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Jonathan Pennock, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 186,323.00

Shoals Marine Laboratory (SML), http://www.sml.cornell.edu, operated by Cornell
University and the University of New Hampshire, is in its 48th year of programs
dedicated to marine research and education for undergraduates. Each summer,
approximately 175 undergraduate students from all over the world participate in
SML's credit courses and research internship programs and an additional 25
graduate students and researchers carry out thesis and long-term research on
Appledore Island, a 95-acre island approximately six miles southeast of
Portsmouth, NH in the Gulf of Maine. Appledore is an extraordinary physical
location for exploring questions in field marine and island science with easy
access to intertidal, subtidal, oceanic, and terrestrial habitats. It also
offers opportunities to study sustainable engineering and the integration of
power, water, and wastewater treatment systems at a scale that is approachable
by students. This project will support the upgrade and significant enhancement
of communications and information technology (IT) at SML to support the research
and educational mission of this field station. SML's current IT infrastructure
is nearly ten years old and is not able to support modern video-conferencing,
video-dependent research, and mobile computing platforms. The improvements fall
into three distinct communications categories including (1) the wide area
network (WAN), (2) the local area network (LAN), and (3) major communications
interfaces. The WAN improvements will establish a high-speed (50Mbps) symmetric
microwave channel between the mainland and the island that will provide a fifty-
fold increase in connectivity as compared to that in place on the island today.
This will make high bandwidth communications applications possible, including
videoconferencing, remote control of devices on the island from anywhere in the
world, and the movement of large amounts of research data to and from the
island. LAN improvements will significantly improve how researchers, students
and staff on the island implement their work by providing fiber optic cable and
high speed (100Mbps/1Gbps) LAN service across the island. The addition of major
communications platforms, specifically two outdoor remote IP cameras and two
Polycom video conferencing units, will provide direct support for research by
students and mentoring of students.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: SML's mission is
to support research, education, and conservation focused on undergraduates, and
we are dedicated to delivering it effectively. This project will provide for
additional research and educational opportunities that have not been possible in
the past. A confluence of ingredients foster SML's success: an unspoiled oceanic
environment, a spectacular cloistered island setting, a tight-knit community, a
talented and enthusiastic faculty and staff, and courses that foster critical
thinking and experiential education and research supported by a well-equipped
facility. SML internship programs linking undergraduate researchers, engineers,
and conservation biologists are a critical part of this success. SML students
have contributed data since 1973 to the Appledore Island Transect Study, one of
the most complete multi-decadal records of species diversity, distribution, and
abundance in rocky intertidal habitats in the Gulf of Maine. The Appledore
Island Banding Station has documented patterns of migratory birds in the spring
and fall for the past 20 years. Twelve ongoing major research and survey
programs attract ~40 investigators/year from ~10 universities. Graduate students
(~4/year) base their thesis or dissertation research at SML. UNH and Cornell
sponsor four undergraduate internship programs at SML, including: (1) Research
Internships in Field Science (RIFS), an internally-funded successor to our NSF
REU Site program that provides undergraduates opportunities for faculty-directed
independent research; (2) Sustainable Engineering Internships (SEI) that provide
undergraduate engineering students the opportunity to monitor, analyze, and
refine the islands electrical, fresh-water, saltwater, and wastewater systems;
(3) Marine Mammal Internships that use photography as a basis for non-disturbing
mark-recapture population size and health estimates; and (4) Transect
Internships that each summer extend the long time series of intertidal
monitoring on Appledore Island. The communications and information technology
improvements supported by this project will significantly and demonstrably
extend the success of research and educational opportunities at the SML.