* 1418775
* Computational Nonlinear Dynamics: Variance Reduction Methods and Numerical Studies of Large, Chaotic, and Noisy Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kevin Lin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 219,999.00

Scientists and engineers increasingly depend on computational analyses of
mathematical models to understand, predict, design, and control dynamic
processes in physical and biological systems. Models often contain numerical
parameters whose values may vary widely, or may be poorly constrained by data;
the sensitivity of model predictions to parameter variations is thus an
essential practical consideration in such computational analyses. However,
exhaustive, brute-force "parameter sweeps," in which one tests all possible
parameters, can be computationally expensive and is sometimes simply
impractical. The proposed research concerns efficient numerical algorithms for
computing sensitivities of noisy, chaotic systems to parameter variations; these
systems arise in a variety of different applications, ranging from statistical
physics to neuroscience. The proposed research can potentially help researchers
in these fields perform computational analyses of mathematical models more
efficiently. The proposal, combining as it does the study of numerical
algorithms and their applications, is also interdisciplinary in nature and
provides ample opportunities for the training of future mathematical scientists
who can collaborate effectively with scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns the design,
analysis, and application of algorithms for computing the statistical properties
of nonlinear dynamical systems that are chaotic, noisy, and potentially high-
dimensional. The proposed projects aim to (i) study novel variance reduction
algorithms for estimating expectation values of observables and their
sensitivities for noisy chaotic systems; (ii) investigate the utility of such
sensitivity estimators in computational nonlinear dynamics; (iii) extend these
general algorithms to special classes of dynamical systems where the general
form of the proposed algorithms may not necessarily apply. The proposal includes
plans for implementing, testing, and analyzing novel numerical algorithms, as
well as applying them to specific dynamical systems. As large, chaotic, and
noisy dynamical systems occur naturally in a variety of physical and biological
contexts, the proposed research is expected to produce algorithmic tools useful
to practitioners in these and other fields where these types of dynamical
systems arise, and will be directly applicable to a range of problems of
interest to the PI, his students, and collaborators.