* 1418725
* Localized Synthesis of Ribosome Components
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jeffery Twiss, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2015
* USD 179,771.00

This research project focuses on understanding how the machinery to generate
proteins is assembled in polarized cells. Polarity is critical for function of
eukaryotic cells, particularly for the neurons studied here that use polarized
domains to transmit all signals for movement and sensation within the brain and
spinal cord. Cellular polarity is determined in part by trafficking of messenger
RNAs (mRNA) and translational machinery for spatially localizing protein
synthesis in subcellular compartments. A surprising finding from recent studies
in neurons is that mRNAs encoding components of the ribosome, the macromolecular
complex that synthesizes proteins, are transported into distal processes of
neurons. All previous work had indicated that ribosomes are assembled in the
cell's nucleus and then transported as intact subunits to other compartments of
the cell. The discovery of mRNAs encoding ribosome components in neuronal
processes suggests that some assembly of ribosomes may occur locally at the
periphery of these cells. This project aims to determine the functional role
that ribosomal protein (RP) mRNA localization serves in the neuron. The aims
will determine if localized RP mRNAs are used to synthesize proteins, if locally
synthesized RPs are added to the ribosome in neuronal processes, and if ribosome
function is altered locally by addition of RPs. The outcome of these studies
will increase understanding of how polarized cells can manipulate their makeup
of proteins locally and whether ribosome structure or function can be locally
altered under different environmental conditions.

The broader impacts of this proposal are two-fold. First, though the work here
is limited to neurons, the implications for localized synthesis of ribosome
components is broadly applicable to other cell types. Cells smaller than neurons
also have polarity that is determined in part by spatial control of protein
synthesis. However, small cell types are not as amenable to the molecular and
biochemical analyses that can be performed with the cultured neurons that will
be used here. The knowledge and scientific approaches developed here can be
readily applied to other model systems. Second, this project will work with
Teaching Faculty in the Biology Department to actively engage undergraduate
students in the research objectives through the co-operative educational
opportunities at Drexel University. This will bring new opportunities for
students in an intensive basic research environment, providing them with
significant additional training and educational experiences within the lab that
will bolster their chances for future employment in a science field and their
opportunities for graduate work in Biology.