* 1418141
* Archaeological Research in Albania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/10/2013,05/31/2016
* Michael Galaty, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 74,800.00

The Projekti Arkeologjikë i Shkodrës (PASH), the Shkodër Archaeological Project,
is a collaboration between Millsaps College in Jackson, Mississippi and the
University of Tirana, Albania. Michael Galaty, the Principal investigator
proposes to investigate the appearance of social inequality in northern Albania,
a strategically important region located in the western Balkans along the
Adriatic coast. The transition to social inequality in northern Albania was
marked by the construction of nucleated, hill-top centers ("hill forts") and
burial of elite individuals ("warrior chiefs") in mounds ("tumuli") at the start
of the Early Bronze Age, about 3000 B.C. In order to understand better the
transition to social inequality in Albania, and in Europe generally, the
research team is conducting three years of interdisciplinary archaeological
research focused on hill forts and burial mounds. The methods will allow the
identification of the various factors that alone or in combination contributed
to the dramatic changes in social organization in northern Albania that marked
the Bronze Age. The team plans two seasons (2012 and 2013) of geological and
archaeological survey and rescue excavation of tumulus burials, followed by
excavation at a representative hill fort (2014).

The study region encompasses the Shkodra Plain and surrounding hills, and is
situated along the eastern shore of Shkodra Lake, the largest freshwater lake in
the Balkans. Geological surveys will be conducted in order to date lake shore
and river course changes, which can be correlated with shifts in settlement, as
established through intensive archaeological survey. Archaeological survey,
along with excavation of tumulus burials and a representative hill fort, will
produce artifacts and human remains. These will be subjected to a battery of
analytical tests, including radiocarbon dating. Radiocarbon dating will allow
determination of whether hill fort and tumulus construction occurred
simultaneously or sequentially. The warrior chiefs buried in tumuli seem to have
accessed multiple sources of power, ranging from violence and warfare to control
of land, food, and trade. In addition, episodes of migration may have affected
the course of events, bringing new blood and ideas at the start of and
throughout the Bronze Age. Conflict and migration will be addressed through
physical-anthropological assessment and strontium-isotope analysis of human bone
remains and teeth from tumuli. Changes in economy and subsistence will be gauged
through study of botanical and faunal remains and residue analysis of pottery.
And the degree and direction of inter-regional interaction will be measured
through the chemical characterization of clays and pottery.

Recently, some archaeologists have suggested that elite institutions and social
hierarchy spread north into Europe from the Near East via Greece in the later
Bronze Age (2000-1000 B.C.). This project is designed to test this model. Time
is of the essence, though. Hill forts and tumuli are being fast destroyed in
Shkodër as the city expands northward. PASH also includes, therefore, a
cultural-heritage educational program targeting landowners and farmers, and will
instruct dozens of Albanian and American students in methods of archaeological
reconnaissance and rescue excavation.