* 1418895
* RAPID: Re-organization of Philippine Rainforest Biodiversity Following Disturbance on Regional Scales from a Powerful Typhoon
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* A. Townsend Peterson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 125,942.00

This research award will use the unique event of the 2013 hyper-typhoon Haiya in
the Philippines to learn about the impacts of massive, natural catastrophes on
the survival and potential recovery of vertebrate animal populations and
species. This is premised on the fact that the research team had been conducting
comprehensive vertebrate species surveys for about five years in the Philippine
archipelago immediately prior to the recent typhoon. This work is important
because such studies have not been conducted before, and they can tell us a
great deal about the processes of local extirpation, colonization, adaptation
and recovery or extinction of both populations and species. In a time of global
environmental change, such studies provide society and resource managers with
valuable empirical examples of what can be expected regarding the responses of
biological diversity to particular catastrophic environmental changes, and how
planning for the future might best proceed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
research objective is to provide an immediate "after the typhoon" species and
abundance survey dataset to complement the prior, fortuitous 5 year effort. The
research team has over 10 well-studied sites for which comprehensive inventories
are already developed, and where they will assess species community changes
caused by the typhoon. All survey methods are based on a proven field research
program in the Philippines. The research team scouts sites, establishes camps,
blazes transects, constructs trapping arrays (snap traps and live traps for
mammals; pit fall traps, funnel traps, and adhesive traps for mammals,
amphibians, and reptiles; and mist nets and harp traps for birds and bats),
collects and handles live animals, collects all relevant data, photographs
specimens, screens vertebrates for parasites, preserves genetic samples, and
prepares modern museum specimens including associated ecological and
microhabitat data. Resurveys will be linked to analyses of vegetation change
developed from satellite imagery at two spatial resolutions, permitting broad
extension of the point-based survey results to infer effects of the typhoon
across the entire Philippine archipelago. The second main goal is to train a
cohort of collaborating scientists in standardized survey methodology and data
analysis frameworks to set the stage for a sustainable series of follow-up
studies 3, 5, and 10 years after the 2014 surveys. This will be accomplished
using (1) an established collaborative network in the Philippines of
participating researchers, students, local government units, and conservation
NGOs; (2) currently valid research permissions that allow for collection and
export of biological specimens; (3) established logistical infrastructure and
host sponsorship at several major universities and the national museum of the
Philippines; (4) equipment, supplies, and a 4-wheel drive field vehicle ready
for immediate use; and (5) research-active in-country counterparts with a proven
track record of working with the NSF PI awardees. By involving students from
both the U.S. and the Philippines (and their advisors) the research ensures a
multi-academic-generational collaboration that maximizes training and capacity
building to achieve research objectives.