* 1418519
* The Effects of Cloud Development and Structure on the Generation of Deep Vertically Propagating Mountain Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Brian Billings, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 52,106.00

The objective of this research is to further clarify the effects of low-level
upstream moisture on the amplitude of gravity waves generated by complex terrain
when actual cloud formation processes are considered. A particular focus is the
net result of two competing processes which will act to strengthen or weaken the
wave activity. The method to be used begins with gathering a verification
dataset of the upstream cloud structure by using a stereo photogrammetry system
during the upcoming DEEPWAVE experiment. These cloud observations will be
combined with upper tropospheric gravity wave data obtained by NCAR's High-
performance Instrumented Airborne Platform for Environmental Research (HIAPER)
and, ideally, upstream wind profiler and radiosonde profiles collected by the
Integrated Sounding System (ISS), which have already been requested as part of
DEEPWAVE. The observed events will then be studied using numerical simulations
in an attempt to identify conditions leading to three scenarios: 1)
amplification of wave activity relative to a dry event, 2) weakening of wave
activity relative to a dry event, and 3) no change in amplitude due to
offsetting of the two factors.

Intellectual Merit : When the special problem of moisture effects on mountain
wave activity has been examined by investigators, the focus has been on how the
presence of water vapor and latent heat release modifies the air's static
stability. However, separate idealized modeling studies of flow blocking show
that the actual microphysical processes involved in cloud condensation can
result in different behavior than that predicted from pure thermodynamics. The
only way to truly know that these effects occur in the real atmosphere is to
observe them, after which numerical simulations which closely match the observed
behavior can be used to explain the underlying physics. Thus, the research
proposed here will allow for a more complete explanation of the effects of
moisture on mountain wave activity, which is part of a larger problem involving
describing this activity when all possible factors (e.g. boundary layer effects)
are considered.

Broader Impacts : The numerous impacts of deep, vertically propagating mountain
waves are well covered by the motivation for the DEEPWAVE experiment itself.
These include aviation turbulence due to breaking waves, the effect of mountain
wave drag on general climate modeling, and the destruction of ozone through
formation of polar stratospheric clouds. As with any human impact, there will be
a desire to predict these effects and the underlying wave activity which is done
with a combination of numerical modeling and subjective forecaster judgment,
both of which will be improved by this research. Between the cloud
photogrammetry, upstream sounding profiles, and wave information collected by
HIAPER, a complete verification dataset exists for testing numerical model
output with observations. Obvious areas to look for improvement would be in the
microphysics parameterization, which can be matched against the cloud
observations. Additionally, documenting the resulting wave activity for
different large scale synoptic patterns and moisture amounts will aid human
forecasters in anticipating events based on routinely available observations,
such as satellite. Since this research is being performed out of an
undergraduate meteorology program, there will also be excellent educational
opportunities for students at an early stage in their careers. While one student
will participate in the actual field campaign itself, along with the planning
and subsequent analysis, the datasets collected can be easily incorporated into
classroom material (especially cloud physics and wave dynamics), emphasizing the
real-world applications of the more theoretical topics.