* 1418750
* High Order Schemes for Hyperbolic and Convection-dominated Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Chi-Wang Shu, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 387,839.00

In this project, the PI will perform research in the algorithm design and
analysis of high order numerical methods. These algorithms are used to solve
scientific and engineering problems arising from diverse application fields such
as aerospace engineering, semi-conductor device design, astrophysics, and
biological problems. Even with today's fast computers, it is still essential to
design efficient and reliable algorithms which can be used to obtain accurate
solutions to these application problems. The broader impacts resulting from the
proposed activity will be a suite of powerful computational tools, suitable for
various applications mentioned above. These tools are expected to make positive
contributions to computer simulations of the complicated solution structure in
these applications.

The algorithms to be investigated include the finite difference and finite
volume weighted essentially non-oscillatory (WENO) schemes and discontinuous
Galerkin finite element methods, for solving hyperbolic and other convection
dominated partial differential equations (PDEs). While the emphasis of this
project is on algorithm design and analysis, close attention will be paid to
applications. Topics of proposed investigations will include the study on high
order accurate bound-preserving algorithms and applications, an inverse Lax-
Wendroff procedure for high order numerical boundary conditions for finite
difference schemes on rectangular meshes when the physical boundary is not
aligned with the meshes, WENO schemes with subcell resolution for
nonconservative problems, Lagrangian type finite volume schemes for multi-
material flows, energy-conserving discontinuous Galerkin methods for long time
simulation of wave problems, efficient discontinuous Galerkin methods for front
propagation problems with obstacles, superconvergence analysis of discontinuous
Galerkin methods and its applications in adaptive computation, simple WENO
limiters for discontinuous Galerkin methods in unstructured meshes for problems
with strong shocks, multi-scale methods based on the discontinuous Galerkin
framework, analysis and numerical solutions for traffic and pedestrian flow
models, turbulence simulation in cosmology, and study on aggregation and
coordinated movement in computational biology. Problems in applications will
motivate the design of new algorithms or new features in existing algorithms;
mathematics tools are used to analyze these algorithms to give guidelines for
their applicability and limitations; practical considerations including parallel
implementation issues are addressed to make the algorithms competitive in large
scale calculations; and collaborations with engineers and other applied
scientists enable the efficient application of these new algorithms or new
features in existing algorithms.