* 1418809
* Acquisition of a Small Boat by the Large Lakes Observatory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 144,670.00

The University of Minnesota Duluth has been awarded a grant to add a smaller
research vessel to the marine facility of the Large Lakes Observatory. The
vessel will be a 20' to 24' long aluminum boat with a cabin and a trailer to
facilitate near-shore research on the North American Great Lakes as well as
research on lakes, rivers and estuaries throughout the upper Midwest. The Large
Lakes Observatory's (LLO) marine facility currently houses the R/V Blue Heron, a
78' former Grand Banks fishing trawler outfitted for scientific research which
is part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System, the umbrella
organization for the U.S. academic fleet. The addition of a smaller vessel will
allow the LLO to facilitate the research and educational needs of a broader
clientele. The boat will be housed at the LLO marine facility in the
Duluth(MN)/Superior(WI) harbor and will have easy access to western Lake
Superior and the St. Louis River estuary. Since the vessel will have a trailer,
it will be used on all the Great Lakes as well as smaller lakes and rivers
throughout the Midwest. Users of the smaller boat will be able to take advantage
of the expertise of the crew and marine technical staff of the R/V Blue Heron,
as well as the large pool of shared-use equipment that is a part of the marine
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new vessel will be used in a broad array of
research in shallow water areas including riverine, estuary and coastal
ecosystem monitoring in the Lake Superior National Estuarine Research Reserve
and studies of contaminates in aquatic systems such as the St. Louis River and
Bay Area of Concern. Additionally, researchers will study the inorganic and
organic carbon pools and how carbon cycles in aquatic systems, nutrient cycling,
especially nitrogen, in the Great Lakes, and the diversity of invasive bacteria
and zooplankton in lacustrine and estuarine systems as well as ship ballast
waters. The vessel will be used in the mapping of the bathymetry of the lake
floor including commercial fishery spawning areas, studies of nearshore fish
habitat and spawning, and work on understanding the physical limnology of the
Great Lakes. The LLO's larger vessel has often been used as a platform for
educational outreach, and the additional of this new vessel will allow classes
to explore areas unreachable by the larger boat and will be used in teacher
education programs. For more information about the Large Lakes Observatory
please go to: http://www.d.umn.edu/llo/.