* 1418857
* Oceanographic Instrumentation 2014
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2016
* USD 103,847.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on the R/V
Marcus Langseth, a 235? Global seismic vessel with general oceanographic
capabilities. The vessel is owned by NSF and operated by Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory of Columbia University under a cooperative agreement. The Langseth
is different than other vessels in the Academic Fleet in that it is a designated
National Facility. It provides a unique combination of capabilities for imaging
the oceans, the seafloor and the solid earth beneath the sea. It is the only
vessel in the word dedicated to academic research that is capable of conducting
3D seismic surveys as well as extended offset 2D surveys. The tuned, linear
source array, consisting of up to 36 air-guns, with a total capacity of 6,600 cu
in is also unique asset of this vessel. &lt;br/&gt;In 2013, R/V Langseth
completed 186 days, 100% of which were NSF funded. In 2014, the schedule shows
139 days, 82% (114 days) of which are NSF funded. Oceanographic Instrumentation
requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Focal Technologies 32-channel
slip rings $47,952 &lt;br/&gt; 2) Geometrics 882 magnetometer $20,724
&lt;br/&gt; 3) Langseth serial/Ethernet network upgrade $35,171 &lt;br/&gt;
$103,847 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.