* 1418991
* Analysis of Algorithms for Simulating Macroscopic Material Response
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Noel Walkington, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 329,999.00

The very essence of science is to explain and understand natural phenomena in
order to predict and forecast outcomes. The most successful predictions result
when fundamental laws of nature are integrated into conceptual models of the
phenomena of interest. Newton's development of mathematical tools to express
many fundamental laws of nature has resulted in mathematical models with
unparalleled predictive power. These models consist of complex systems of
equations relating the physical quantities of interest and form the conceptual
foundation of modern engineering and science. Solution of these complex systems
of equations is a key technology needed to realize the potential of these
theories, and the computational tools under investigation in this project are
indispensable in this step of the modeling process. This project will enhance
the computational tools used to simulate materials such as polymers, liquid
crystals, and many biological components. Improved predictive capability of
computational models will play an essential role in the development and
manufacture of many next generation devices such as micro-mechanical devices,
biological materials, and prosthetic organs. Predicting material response is
essential to determine biological and/or physiological function, reliability,
and durability of these devices. In addition to the technological developments,
this project will also support the education and training of the next generation
of scientists needed sustain the remarkable pace of discovery and our scientific
leadership in these disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
proposal is the development and analysis of numerical schemes to simulate
materials whose macroscopic response depends upon the state of their fine scale
structure. This scenario is typical when material particles exhibit elasticity,
attraction and/or repulsion, entropic interactions which can result in phase
formation, and internal dissipation. At the macroscopic scale these effects are
modeled with internal variables which couple to the dynamic equations of motion.
This multi-scale character gives rise to many modeling, mathematical, and
numerical challenges. Models of materials with microstructure involve formidable
systems of partial differential equations which inherit the delicate balance
between transport and inertial effects, configurational energy, and dissipation
of the physical system. While the past two decades have witnessed the
development of many algorithms and codes in the engineering and scientific
computing communities to solve these equations, there are many gaps in the
mathematical theory and very little analysis of their fundamental properties is
available. In this situation is important to develop numerical schemes which
faithfully inherit the complex interactions of the physical system. Experience
has shown that this paradigm can lead to a deeper understanding of the current
schemes and frequently leads to improved and simpler algorithms. This project
will bring together tools from partial differential equations, continuum
mechanics, and numerical analysis, to develop and analyze numerical schemes
which simulate these systems.