* 1418624
* Non-Iterative Multi-Physics Domain Decomposition Method for the Navier-Stokes-Darcy Model
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mingzhen Wei, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 95,500.00

The Navier-Stokes-Darcy model is crucial to accurately describe many important
real world problems, such as the flow problems in vuggy/fractured porous media,
groundwater systems in karst aquifers, interaction between surface and
subsurface flows, and industrial filtrations. The efficiency of the numerical
methods to solve this model is very important for the large-scale applications.
But most of the related published works focus on a simpler model, which is not
accurate for many applications since it does not consider several crucial
realistic factors. This project is to study a more realistic Navier-Stokes-Darcy
model and design an efficient numerical method to solve it in parallel. The
completion of this project will provide large advances in the study of the
coupled fluid flow and porous media flow. The basic idea and framework of this
project have potential to be applied to other interesting multi-physics coupling
problems. This project provides undergraduate and graduate students many
valuable training opportunities in the development of new methods and packages,
mathematical analysis, and engineering applications. The methods under
development will be applied to simulate the flow in vuggy/fractured porous
media. The investigators plan to disseminate the methods and software packages
to more engineers and scientists by presenting the work in professional
conferences and colloquia and organizing special sessions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to carry out a systematic
research on the development, analysis, and application of a non-iterative multi-
physics domain decomposition method for the Navier-Stokes-Darcy model with the
Beavers-Joseph (BJ) interface condition and defective boundary conditions. The
proposed non-iterative multi-physics domain decomposition method enables us to
efficiently and simultaneously deal with the significant difficulties arising
from the interaction among the aforementioned crucial realistic factors. The key
ideas include a non-iterative algorithm with a direct prediction on the
interface, a multi-physics decomposition with Robin conditions arising from the
three physical interface conditions which include the BJ condition, and the
Lagrange multiplier method to deal with the defective boundary condition. The
major difficulty is the inherent interaction of the nonlinear advection, BJ
condition, parameters in the Robin-Robin decomposition, and the saddle point
problem arising from the Lagrange multiplier method.