* 1418000
* Collaborative research:  Developing a System Model of Arctic Glacial Lake Sedimentation for Investigating Past and Future Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 753,204.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate records of natural variability that
cover broad temporal and spatial scales, and that capture intervals of non-
linear change are needed to fully comprehend the arctic system. This project
aims to develop the first system model to simulate the full chain of processes
that control how weather and climate affect the processes that lead to
deposition of a sediment record in lakes in glaciated watersheds. This model
provides an alternative approach to previous statistically-based models
traditionally used by paleo-climatologists to infer past climate variability
from lake sediment records. The new process-based quantitative understanding
will lay the groundwork for future studies that will be aimed at recovering
records of environmental and climate change that extend back thousands of years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to ongoing efforts through
collaborations with: utility managers of the Municipality of Anchorage who are
planning for diminished glacier meltwater input to Eklutna Lake, a major source
of their electricity and freshwater and with resource managers at US Fish and
Wildlife Service who are developing a monitoring network for the Arctic Refuge
and who are striving to foresee future changes in habitat quality associated
with glacier retreat. This project will benefit climate science researchers by
leading to more accurate climate reconstructions, which will be used as
benchmarks for validating global climate model output. Finally, it will support
four early-career scientists and will train graduate and undergraduate students
in system-science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this project is to develop a system model that encodes the major processes
that govern the amount and grain size of sediment that accumulates in arctic
lakes in glaciated catchments, and to acquire the field-based data for model
input and testing. Sediments that accumulate at the bottom of arctic lakes
contain a wealth of information about how major features of the surrounding
watershed have varied on seasonal to millennial time scales, as well as how they
have responded to natural and anthropogenic forcings. Lakes in glaciated
watersheds record changes in the melt rate of upstream glaciers, which are among
the most dynamic components of the evolving arctic system. The sediment stored
in glacier-fed lakes often comprise distinct rhythmic layers that represent
annual cycles. These varved sediments are among the most valuable of all natural
archives on Earth because they can be placed on a precise time line, and because
they accumulate at a rate that is sufficiently high to track environmental
variability on annual, and often seasonal, scales. They have been used
extensively to reconstruct past climate changes in the Arctic, most often
relying on statistical correlations between records from long-term weather
stations and varve thickness. These statistical correlations disregard the
complex and time-evolving interactions within the glacier-hydrology-lake-
sedimentation system that link climate to changing properties of sediment
deposited at the lake bottom. A more process-based understanding of the
interactions that control sedimentation within lakes of glaciated catchments is
needed to provide the next generation of paleoclimate reconstructions. By
incorporating a system-modeling approach, a process-based system model will be
developed to capture dynamic nonlinearities in the glacier-hydrology-lake-
sedimentation system. The system model will couple three existing model
components: a physically based, spatially explicit hydrological model, which
includes a glacier sub-model; an empirically based sediment-flux model; and a
process-response, basin-filling sedimentation model. The system model will be
applied to three glaciated watersheds that fall along an environmental gradient
spanning from the sub-Arctic to the High Arctic, including Lake Linne
(Svalbard), Lake Peters (near McCall Glacier, Arctic National Wildlife Refuge),
and Eklutna Lake (near Anchorage, Alaska). This study builds on extensive
previous and on-going process studies at or near each of the study sites.
Existing data and proposed glacier, hydrology, limnology, and sediment process
studies will provide the input data to run the system model and to validate its
output.