* 1418044
* Bio-Sphere: Fostering Deep Learning of Complex Biology for Building Our Next Generation's Scientists
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* N Narayanan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,798,985.00

Today's citizens face profound questions in science. Preparing future
generations of scientists is crucial if the United States is to remain
competitive in a technology-focused economy. The biological sciences are of
particular importance for addressing some of today's complex problems, such as
sustainability and food production, biofuels, and carbon dioxide and its effect
on our environment. Although knowledge in the life sciences is of critical
importance, this is an area in which there are significantly fewer studies
examining students' conceptions than in physics and chemistry. The goal of this
project is to help middle school students, particularly in rural and underserved
areas, develop deep scientific knowledge and knowledge of the practices and
routines of science. A major strength of Bio-Sphere is the inclusion of hands-on
design and engineering in biology, a field in which there are fewer instances of
curricula that integrate engineering design at the middle school level. The
units will enable an in-depth, cohesive understanding of science content, and
Bio-Sphere will be disseminated nationally and internationally through proactive
outreach to teachers as well as scholarly
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need to inculcate
deep learning of complex science by bringing complex socio-scientific issues
into middle school classrooms, and providing students with instructional
materials that allow them to practice science as scientists do. Research teams
will develop, iteratively refine and evaluate an innovative learning environment
called Bio-Sphere. Bio-Sphere combines the strengths of hands-on design and
engineering, engages students in the practices of science, and fosters learning
of complex science issues, especially among underserved populations. Each Bio-
Sphere unit presents a complex science issue in the form of a design challenge
that students solve by conducting experiments, using visualizations in an
electronic textbook, and connecting with the community. The units, aligned with
the Next Generation Science Standards, provide greater coherence, continuity,
and sustained instruction focused on uncovering and integrating key ideas over
long periods of time. The project will follow a design-based research
methodology. In Phase 1, the Bio-Sphere materials will be developed. Phase 2
will consist of studies in Wisconsin schools to generate existence proofs, i.e.,
examining enactments with respect to the designed objectives to understand how a
design works. Phase 3 studies will focus on practical implementation: how to
bring this innovative design to life in very different classroom contexts and
without the everyday support of the design team, and will be conducted in rural
schools in Alabama and North Carolina.