* 1418875
* FSML: Instrumentation at UW Friday Harbor Laboratories for Studies of the Biological Impacts of Ocean Acidification and Ocean Change
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Kenneth Sebens, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2018
* USD 349,889.00

The UW Friday Harbor Laboratories (FHL) currently supports a fully functional
NSF-funded (FSML) Ocean Acidification Experimental Laboratory and in-water
mesocosm facility, available to researchers from any institution. Under the new
award, FHL will install an instrument array to monitor local ocean changes, and
to provide data to help design ongoing experiments. UW has already installed a
submarine cable system (spring 2013) that will allow real-time monitoring and
testing of scientific devices. The test-bed infrastructure includes two electro-
optical cables, bundled together on the seafloor, extending 600 feet from shore,
and a third shallower cable will be added in 2014. Instruments connected to each
cable will provide unprecedented data access to scientists and the general
public via the FHL and NANOOS websites. At the end of two cables (7m, 30m) FHL
will install real-time instruments to monitor ocean chemistry, physics and
biological processes in the water column. At the end of the other cable (40m), a
shallow and a deep profiler of the UW OOI Regional Scale Node (RSN) system will
be tested (UW School of Oceanography &amp; Applied Physics Lab); the profilers
will eventually be removed and UW will continue to use this cable and connectors
as a test-bed facility for future instrument
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean change, including ocean acidification
(OA), poses an unprecedented threat to oceanic and coastal ecosystems and to the
societies that depend on them. The scale and complexity of the OA problem
requires new spatially distributed data collection, and an integrated
programmatic approach to OA research. The Salish Sea region, fed by waters of
the Northeast Pacific, is particularly vulnerable to OA events associated with
ocean upwelling and is already experiencing pH ranges that other areas will not
see for many decades; commercial fisheries and shellfish aquaculture already
appear to be affected or at risk. OA is further complicated in estuaries such as
the Salish Sea by local processes including respiration, production, anoxia and
mixing, resulting in wide pH and pCO2 variation in time and space. Long-range
plans for ocean change research at FHL focus on integrated ocean carbonate
system observations, utilizing new advances in the development of ocean sensors
and instruments, and incorporating biological response studies under laboratory
and field conditions. Field conditions will be simulated using environmental and
ecosystem modeling studies, and our findings will provide information for
assessment of policy, and socio-economic
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal needs will be fully integrated with our
research, merging the relevance of the problem and the need for human adaptation
to OA. FHL will engage in knowledge transfer, with data and information flowing
to and from policy makers, affected communities, scientists, and the general
public. The shellfish aquaculture community will benefit economically from the
new data and tribal governments will accrue benefits that could help sustain
traditional food sources. The public will benefit through targeted education
activities that improve general understanding of ocean processes and especially
ocean acidification. UW and FHL will train a workforce that is ready to discover
and deal with the impacts of OA and to realize adaptive responses that will
allow affected industries and communities to thrive in the presence of this
threat. Users include groups engaged in marine resource-based economies, members
of coastal tribes, managers of marine resources, researchers in academic and
government laboratories, and both formal and informal educators. FHL education
programs reach broadly, from high school teachers and their students to
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. At the
graduate level, FHL will prepare students for careers inside and outside of
academia. Under represented minorities (URM) are fully integrated into FHL
activities, with the objective of increasing their representation in
oceanography, biology, fisheries and other OA and ocean-related fields. We will
leverage existing programs (UW IGERT in Ocean Change, FHL Blinks and REU site
programs, FHL Research Apprenticeships, NSF BEACON at UW) and create new
programs to recruit, mentor, and prepare a community of URM students both on and
off the university campus. We will expand our ongoing engagement of Native
American students in ocean change research and education, near their own college
campus (NWIC) and with their own instructors, in a culturally respectful way.