* 1418956
* RUI: Transport of inertial particles in time-dependent and stochastic flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Philip Yecko, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,987.00

Objects in moving fluids rarely go with the flow. Instead they may sink, swim or
steer in order to reach a destination, or they may respond to other influences,
including their own sizes and shapes. Taking advantage of the ways that real
objects interact with flows enables a wide range of important technologies. On
small scales, micro robots may be steered inside the human body to perform
surgery. On the largest scales, ocean drifters may efficiently monitor currents,
marine life or global weather patterns. Each example presents challenges
originating from the complex fluid flow patterns and from the difficulty in
planning the most efficient navigation strategy. This project concentrates on
the challenges of positioning autonomous vehicles in the ocean, where
unpredictable and variable currents, seasonal variability, weather events, and
other random influences must also be accounted for. Computer models of fluid
flows and mathematical models of control will be combined to find optimal
strategies to position autonomous ocean vehicles. Laboratory experiments will
use precisely tuned fluid flows and remotely controlled particles to capture the
important effects of the vehicles' mass, size, and shape. The project payoff is
significant in that a better monitored ocean is advantageous to fishing and
shipping, the military, and environmental monitoring. The project will involve
and support undergraduate and graduate students in leading-edge research.
Significantly, the student population at Montclair State University, and in
particular, the Department of Mathematical Sciences, includes a substantial
proportion who are members of groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines
(including women and minorities) and the research program will leverage existing
programs directed to these students. The outcome of the research will be
disseminated through seminars, presentations at meetings, and publications in
peer-reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project computer models of
fluid flows and mathematical models of transport and control will be combined to
find optimal control strategies for autonomous ocean vehicles, which will be
modeled both as inertial and non-inertial objects. Laboratory experiments on
precisely tuned flows and magnetically controlled particles will be used both to
validate and guide the investigations. The goal is to use experimental and
computed flow fields to identify critical transport features and integrate these
features into control algorithms that optimally position particles. This project
will improve transport control capabilities by developing models for transport
and control of inertial objects in canonical flows subject to time-dependent and
stochastic perturbations. Flow data will be generated by the numerical
simulation of gyre flows, jets, and boundary currents. Inertial particles will
be modeled directly using a state-of-the-art interfacial multi-phase numerical
code. Laboratory experiments have been designed so that similar flows can be
generated by reconfiguring the geometric forcing devices. Through high
resolution particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) and particle tracking,
experimental flow fields and their transport properties will be correlated with
those of the associated model flows. Additionally, control strategies will be
implemented using ferromagnetic tracer particles and magnetic pulses. To gain
insight into the flow transport properties, flow and tracer data will be
analyzed using a variety of geometric and probabilistic methods including
finite-time Lyapunov exponents, inertial particle models, almost invariant sets,
and finite-time coherent sets. These techniques will directly result in the
ability to identify loitering regions and their boundaries and to determine
maximal transport rates. This information will be leveraged to develop simple
predictive models of transport and trajectory control that can be efficiently
adapted to emergent applications.