* 1418858
* Populating a Radiocarbon Database of Western North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Robert Kelly, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 254,870.00

Federal, state and local governments spend millions of dollars each year to
support archaeological research, much of it mandated by law to mitigate impacts
associated with construction/development activities. To obtain maximum return it
is necessary to develop methods to integrate and analyze large bodies of data
which extend across multiple sites and projects. This research project serves to
further that goal.&lt;br/&gt;Radiocarbon dating is the primary method that North
American archaeologists use to document the ages of archaeology sites, and
millions of dollars in federal funding has been spent in obtaining those dates.
With large samples of such dates, archaeologists can generate "summed
probability distributions" to reconstruct population histories. These population
histories provide an important piece of North America's ancient history: where
and when did populations rise and decline? The database this project will create
will provide researchers with a useful tool to investigate many different
problems in several disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compiling the dates is
time-consuming, since there are tens of thousands, and since they are published
in many different places, including on the web, in books, journals, monographs
and in grey literature. In addition, it is not simply the dates themselves that
must be compiled, but also their associated information that researchers need to
"clean" the database and create a sample useful for their research. Dates will
be compiled for California, Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Nevada, Utah, Arizona,
New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana from existing regional databases,
through "deep dive" web searches, and crowd-sourcing to professional and amateur
organizations. The major (private sector) radiocarbon labs have also offered to
assist. Eventually, the compiled dates and associated information will be made
publically available through the Canadian Archaeological Radiocarbon Database,
which will have a Google Earth link so that both temporal and spatial patterns
in date (population) distributions can be studied. Researchers will be able to
upload dates easily in batches to this database to keep it current. Although the
focus is on western North America, the intention is to extend the database to
the eastern U.S. as well. It is anticipated that this will become the world's
largest database of radiocarbon dates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summed probability
distributions of radiocarbon dates are commonly used as measures of prehistoric
population sizes. Therefore, this database will leverage research into all
population-related phenomena in North America. Researchers can use it to test
hypotheses (a) of how human population responds to climate change, technological
innovation, emigration, and disease; (b) that relate behaviors such as warfare,
migration, and technological innovation to population pressure; (c) drawn from
genetic data, e.g., that hypothesize population bottlenecks. Such a database
will transform how hypotheses are tested and consequently how one understands
North American prehistory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (a) create a
free, public archive for researchers that will enhance the research
infrastructure of archaeology in the academic community and the private (CRM)
sector and benefit educational institutions with a resource for student projects
and class demonstrations; (b) help move North American archaeology toward its
next frontier, "Big Data," since archaeology's strength is its ability to see
patterns across vast reaches of space and time; and (c) this project will help
catalyze a shift in the culture of American academic archaeology by moving it
toward a model that is more typical of researchers in the physical and natural
sciences that create databases as research tools.