* 1418768
* Quail Ridge Reserve Field Station Remodel
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Shane Waddell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 334,502.00

The University of California Davis is awarded a grant to remodel the existing
800-square foot field station at the Quail Ridge Reserve. The field station is
the hub of all activity at the reserve - it provides support infrastructure to
all researchers, classes, and visitors. The updated facility will provide an
efficient, hygienic kitchen, two accessible bathrooms, a dedicated computer
server room, and an open multipurpose space. The multipurpose space will serve
as a central meeting area for the reserve, as a research space and an indoor
dining option. All users of the reserve visit the field station when they arrive
on site, before going on to a specific field area. The addition of an ADA-
compliant parking space and restrooms will provide accessibility to all
visitors. The field station remodel complements the recent construction of 8
tent cabins for overnight stays, increasing the overnight capacity of the
reserve from 4 to 32. The server room will provide a climate-controlled home for
multiple servers dedicated to the extensive cyber-infrastructure of the reserve.
Increased server and computing capacity will support research activities
resulting from a recently deployed automated animal tracking system and wireless
mesh network. This network provides the ability for participants to access and
view cameras, acoustical records, and animal movement from any location.

The research program at Quail Ridge continues to grow, and now includes several
NSF-funded projects in addition to many graduate student projects. A fundamental
advantage of working at a well-designed field station is the potential for
cross-disciplinary interactions, often resulting in novel collaborations, and,
particularly in the case of the Quail Ridge Reserve, for truly cross-cultural
interactions between students from very different socioeconomic, ethnic, and
educational backgrounds. Half of the faculty currently involved in teaching and
research at the reserve are women, several minority-serving institutions use the
reserve heavily, and many of the students participating in research projects are
first generation college attendees. Quail Ridge Reserve is currently in the
process of coordinating with the John Muir Institute of the Environment and the
Dept. of Education at UC Davis in developing a citizen-science outreach project
to access, catalogue, and archive data collected by these remote sensors. For
futher information about Quail Ridge Reserve, please visit their website at
http://nrs.ucdavis.edu/quail.html.