* 1418152
* Reclaiming Access to Inquiry-based Science Education (RAISE) for Incarcerated Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Martina Nieswandt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,993,731.00

This project is unique in targeting arguably the most vulnerable learners in the
American education system: youth confined in juvenile corrections facilities.
Three primary problems confronting science education in these settings are: (1)
inadequate curriculum and resources; (2) inadequately prepared and supported
teachers; and (3) a heterogeneous group of learners, many of whom have
disabilities, are disengaged, and/or lack reading and mathematics skills.
Failure to address these challenges and the broader educational needs of
incarcerated juveniles has broad implications for society, so this project is
timely and has high potential for broad impacts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To
address these problems project personnel will employ an iterative development
process to develop a curriculum designed to increase access to and mastery of
science content, concepts, and inquiry skills critical for careers in the 21st
Century STEM workforce. They will then prepare teachers to implement the program
in pilot testing in juvenile corrections facilities in Massachusetts.
Specifically, the investigators will: (1) align and adapt an existing biology
curriculum using Common Core State Standards and Universal Design for Learning
principles; (2) develop all materials, digital supports and scaffolds, virtual
learning environments and labs, assessments, and teacher professional
development materials for one curriculum unit; (3) conduct usability evaluation
of all materials and use the results to refine and finalize two curriculum
units; (4) prepare teachers to implement the biology program in juvenile
corrections education settings; (5) conduct a quasi-experimental study to
examine the impacts of the biology program on the content knowledge and inquiry
skills of students, their interests, and their levels of engagement; and, (6)
disseminate the findings to various constituency groups. The final product will
be a Universal Design for Learning, project-based inquiry science program that
includes virtual learning environments, virtual laboratories, and digital
scaffolds and supports that promote scientific learning for incarcerated youth.