* 1418590
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Modeling Disease Trajectories in Patients with Complex, Multiphenotypic Conditions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Suchi Saria, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,407,883.00

Chronic conditions are driving the majority of our health care costs, and this
burden is only expected to rise. Beyond the enormous economic impact, they often
lead to loss of work productivity, marked decrease in quality of life and
disability. A shift from reactive to proactive management of the disease is
necessary to improve outcomes and reduce costs, yet clinicians have few tools at
their disposal that can help prognosticate which patients are at greatest risk
for decline. Decision making is particularly challenging in conditions where
large heterogeneity is present in the way the disease might present itself.
Simultaneously, due to the rapid proliferation of electronic clinical data
stores such as Electronic Health Records and Patient Registries, longitudinal
electronic health data (EHD), containing the multitude of clinical measurements
taken during routine clinical visits, are becoming available at scale for
retrospective analysis. These data provide an unprecedented opportunity to learn
about canonical patterns of variability between individuals in the way a disease
manifests, and develop novel approaches for individualizing risk prediction.
Traditional clinical risk prediction tools do not exploit the richness -- the
diversity, complexity and heterogeneity -- of EHD. This project proposes a novel
computational framework for individualized risk prediction from modern
electronic health data sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
flexible Bayesian framework for jointly modeling the array of complex
measurements present in the electronic health record to track an individual's
disease status over time. Towards this, the framework addresses challenges due
to missingness and noise in the measurement process, inherent in EHD. In
addition, this proposal demonstrates the framework on data collected from large
scale population databases over two decades for two different disease groups.
This proposal will significantly advance computational modeling for
individualized risk prediction from modern electronic health data sources.
Through this project, we will also train graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, on whom the majority of the funds provided in this grant are being
used; with our rapidly growing healthcare budget, the US is in need for
engineers and computational methodologists who can devise new ways to improve
and optimize our healthcare utilization and outcomes. For further information on
this project see the project web site:
http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~ssaria/individualizedRiskPrediction.html