* 1418923
* Cost-sharing in Transportation Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Amnon Rapoport, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2018
* USD 138,582.00

Communication and transportation networks provide the infrastructure for life in
modern society. Whether messaging over the Internet, making voice or video
calls, or choosing between routes on highways, the quality of one's experience
depends critically on the design and control of such networks. A major concern
of much of the research on networks has been congestion; in particular the
congestion resulting from the negative impact of decentralized decisions on
social welfare. This literature has shown that autonomous, self-interested users
can experience increased costs or substantial losses in efficiency (e.g., delays
in traffic) compared with socially optimal outcomes due to congestion in
networks. Of course, not all decision making in decentralized networks gives
rise to negative externalities. In fact, network industries are often
characterized as those that have increasing returns to scale. Consider, for
example, telephones or fax machines. The value of these technologies increases
in the number of users who have adopted them; similarly, the value of computer
software increases as more users purchase this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a departure from previous experimental
research, we propose studying interactive decision behavior in networks, where
choices result in positive externalities; where the utility that a given agent
derives from her choice increases in the number of other users making the same
choice. We are interested in a family of applications regarding public modes of
transportation where agents, sharing the same route from a common origin to
common destination, can also share part of the cost. We propose to conduct
several laboratory experiments which differ in (i) the cost associated with
alternative modes of transportation, (ii) the homogeneity or heterogeneity of
the players, (iii) the information available to the players about previous
decisions of other players, and (iv) whether decisions are made in a
simultaneous or sequential manner. The research proposed is one of the first
systematic studies that investigate cost-sharing of public transportation by
independent, autonomous agents. We propose a novel approach to cost-sharing
allocation in a dynamic setting that integrates both theory and experimentation.
The examination of heterogeneity in users, the information that they have of one
another, and issues such as segment capacity, all bear important implications
for policy making related to network traffic.