* 1418716
* Acquisition of Automated Particle Size and Shape Analysis for Research and Education in Sedimentology, Paleoclimate, and Related Geoscience
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 170,450.00

Automated analyses of the sizes and shapes of sedimentary particles can be used
in powerful ways to understand how dust preserves in Earth's deep geological
record, to test controversial hypotheses of glaciation during deep geological
time, document how weathering in modern river systems in different climates may
be used to develop quantitative reconstructions of ancient climates, and to
document how sediment accumulation linked to human-induced landscape changes may
modify modern lake basins. These research projects are unified by their focus on
exploring how sedimentary systems inform our understanding of climate change and
landscape change, and will be pursued by researchers at the University of
Oklahoma using a laser particle size analysis system funded by this award. These
projects involve collaboration with, e.g., geochemists and climate modelers, who
rely on information from sediment inputs to furthering our understanding.
Acquisition of state-of-the-art particle size- and imaging analysis capabilities
will expose students, post-doctoral scientists and faculty researchers in
geology, allied sciences, and engineering to expanded capabilities in various
research endeavors. Undergraduate and graduate students will be exposed to the
instrumentation through thesis-related work. Students will be trained on the
instrument and gain hands-on experience in acquiring, analyzing, and
interpreting their own data independently. The researchers and colleagues will
integrate student use of this new equipment, as well as research results enabled
by it, in coursework at University of Oklahoma, in undergraduate and graduate
classes. Finally, to maximize the effects of this instrument acquisition on
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in experiential learning
with state-of-the-art analytical tools, the instrumentation will be used by
participants in a STEM-based summer camp for minority middle school students,
and an in-service teacher professional development training workshop for middle
school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds the
acquisition of a laser particle size analyzer (LPSA) and image analysis system
for sedimentary geology, paleoclimatology, and other applications at the
University of Oklahoma. The LPSA will accelerate and extend the researchers'
capabilities by replacing an obsolete instrument that is unserviceable. LPSA
assesses grain size using laser diffraction, wherein light scatter induced by
particles in a fluid produces a volume-percent size distribution. This is a
rapid and time-tested means to measure a range of sizes simultaneously, and is
particularly useful for geologic materials of &lt;1-3000(+) ìm. Instruments for
automated grain shape analysis are an emerging capability, and employ a high-end
microscope system enabling imaging of individual particles (dry or wet
dispersions), including shape characterization and detection of aggregates.
Quantitative data are captured on 100s-1000s of particles rapidly, including
transparency as well as shape attributes. Particle size and shape analysis is
non-destructive, and will enable rapid progress on an array of current and
planned geological research at University of Oklahoma. These projects include
analyses of: 1) the silicate mineral fraction (atmospheric dust) extracted from
Upper Paleozoic limestone, to constrain atmospheric circulation (including
monsoonal circulation), and biogeochemical effects of aerosols, 2) suspected
ice-contact and proglacial deposits to test the controversial hypothesis of
upland glaciation in tropical Pangaea, 3) modern fluvial sediments from end-
member climates to assess climate controls on physical and chemical weathering
(for proxy development), 4) disaggregated Permian redbeds to assess the
hypothesis of widespread deposition of loess during the late Paleozoic, and 5)
modern lacustrine sediments from Lake Tanganyika (Africa) to assess impacts of
land-use changes on sedimentation in littoral regions.