* 1418729
* Field Station Planning for the Ecological Research and Education Center, University of Kentucky
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Philip Crowley, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The University of Kentucky is awarded a grant that will enable the development
of a 5-year plan for the full utilization of its Ecological Research and
Education Center (EREC) as a field station. The station is situated within the
Bluegrass Ecoregion, a unique and poorly understood subset of the Eastern
Deciduous Forest, where no other field stations are located. There is an 18-year
history of research on the site, dominated by the use of semi-field approaches
(replicated artificial systems in the field), based on artificial streams,
mesocosms, ponds, and aviaries. A series of recent improvements, including the
availability of excellent indoor research and meeting space, new research
initiatives and funding successes, rapidly expanding use for coursework, the
emergence of the BIOTIC outreach initiative, and the appointment of
administrative leadership make this an ideal time to focus on field station
development. In consultation with others who have done this successfully, a
planning process has been designed, and participants who can help guide this
effort have been recruited.

Advancing the study of native Bluegrass species and systems, while conducting
experiments and monitoring the prevalence and impact of invasive species and
diseases, is the current focus of research at EREC. Long-term data sets are to
be gathered and analyzed to detect trends using statistical time-series
analyses. Models will be developed to predict and explain patterns in the data.
Semi-field studies of invasive species will complement field studies and
laboratory analyses. The planning process itself-the activity directly funded by
this grant-will identify the improvements in monitoring, technology,
communications, and facilities likely to prove most beneficial for advancing
this work and for attracting additional research collaborators from UK and other
institutions. This will be accomplished through two workshops, including both
local personnel and outside experts, and ongoing consultation with multiple
stakeholder groups.

A key initiative at EREC is the continuing expansion of undergraduate teaching,
STEM teacher training, and community outreach, with contributions from faculty,
graduate students, undergraduates, and collaborators in UK's Partnership for
Innovation in Mathematics and Science Education Reform. The REU Site and BIOTIC
outreach programs are greatly expanding the reach of this educational role. The
focus is on increasing the understanding of ecological science--its findings,
applications, and new frontiers--to individuals across the full range of
previous exposure to these developments. Opportunities will be exploited to help
our citizen neighbors put some of them into practice. The planning process will
help determine how to integrate research, teaching, and outreach to best effect.
For more information about the center, please visit the website at
http://darwin.uky.edu/~EREC/.