* 1418709
* An Imaging Center to support research across multiple scales at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Brian Bingham, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 176,589.00

The Shannon Point Marine Center (http://www.wwu.edu/spmc) is awarded support to
create an on-site, state-of-the-art Imaging Center, meeting a pressing need to
display, capture, and analyze high-quality digital images and video. With the
addition of an Imaging Center to existing research capacity, scientists at SPMC
will be better able to address questions from subcellular to organismal levels
within an existing framework of field ecology, oceanography, experimental
ecology, chemical/physiological ecology, and molecular biology. The center will
allow researchers to take full advantage of existing SPMC resources while
developing new research themes in, for example, seagrass ecology, invertebrate
larval behavior, ocean acidification, and molecular ecology. The center will
house three research-quality microscopes (epifluorescence, DIC-capable compound
and stereo microscopes), associated cameras (monochrome, color and high-speed
video), imaging software, and supporting computer equipment. This new equipment
will support the increasing breadth and complexity of research activities of
resident scientists and visiting researchers. It will also provide opportunities
for training and research by a host of student researchers at SPMC, including
undergraduates participating in NSF-supported REU Site and COSEE internships,
and the Multicultural Initiative in the Marine Sciences: Undergraduate
Participation (MIMSUP) program. SPMC also trains faculty from local community
colleges to incorporate marine science into the curricula of introductory
courses, impacting students who typically do not pursue degrees in marine
science or science of any discipline. The Imaging Center will play an important
role in training workshops for these groups and in outreach efforts to public
audiences through the SPMC Public Education Experiential Learning program. Based
on activity at SPMC during the past 5 years, we expect that the Imaging Center
will annually benefit up to 13 full-time faculty and staff researchers, 20
undergraduate student and 15 graduate student researchers, and some proportion
of the 150 students and 700+ visitors who, each year, spend time at SPMC taking
courses, participating in workshops, attending lectures or taking
tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Founded in 1973, and located in Anacortes,
Washington, SPMC has as its mandate 1) research on the marine habitats and
living resources of the Puget Sound basin, 2) support of undergraduate marine
science courses offered by Western Washington University and a number of other
public institutions, 3) close articulation between research and instruction at
the undergraduate and graduate student levels, 4) expanding the potential for
research and training by promoting participation of visiting scientists and 5)
assuring broader impact of research and training activities by actively
promoting ocean literacy in the general population and by effectively
translating research to a broader audience. To fulfill these goals, SPMC
participates in a graduate program, an NSF-sponsored program for
underrepresented minority students (Multicultural Initiative in the Marine
Sciences: Undergraduate Participation) and other undergraduate programs
nationwide (REU Site and COSEE programs). The participation by SPMC staff in the
work of the Northwest Straits Commission and their local Marine Resource
Committees has led to new initiatives to study proposed Marine Protected Areas.
Research on other topics of local concern includes studies on the dynamics of
macroalgal and microalgal blooms and the impacts of ocean acidification on
phytoplankton and on larvae of commercial species. Access by students and
visiting scientists to local study sites, including the Shannon Point beach and
the nearby Padilla Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve, enhances the value
of SPMC as a location for research on long-term processes that results from the
accumulation of data over time and from the stability provided by Shannon
Point's supporting facilities.