* 1418265
* Sampling and Inference in Network Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The study of complex networks constitutes an interdisciplinary area of inquiry
that transcends traditional knowledge domains by focusing on the fundamental
interdependencies of components within various systems-of-interest. Examples
abound from social networks to coupled human and natural systems, from financial
networks to disease systems, and from telecommunication networks to energy and
power systems. It is the interconnection among these components that often sit
at the heart of our most vexing global grand challenge problems, including
climate change, energy demands, security, health and wellness, and livelihood
and poverty. The study of such complex systems and often large scale networks --
understanding their intrinsic properties, changes to their structure over time
or due to external factors, multi-scale behavior of individuals to coarser
grained modular communities -- can afford important insights to individuals,
organizations and society at large when tackling such grand challenge problems.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop robust and scalable
sampling methods for the modeling and analysis of large, potentially dynamic,
networks. Sampling is often touted as a means to efficiently combat the inherent
complexity of estimating the relevant characteristics of a population. Sampling
a network is complicated because they are composed of two units (nodes and
edges) that are not always nicely nested. A key objective will be to study and
provide a sound mathematical basis along with high performance tools for both
node-centric and edge-centric sampling methodologies for the analysis and
modeling of networks. The objective of realizing high performance tools for real
world applications, drawn from social networks and network biology, will be
equally significant, and is necessary for sustained innovation of an inter-
disciplinary nature. This research will shed light on the theoretical
underpinnings of graph sampling and probabilistic inference in both the static
and dynamic network contexts. From an educational standpoint, the investigators
will train the next generation of graduate students in this interdisciplinary
arena and will also actively encourage participation of undergraduates and
under-represented minorities.