* 1418270
* Science in the Learning Gardens: Factors that Support Racial and Ethnic Minority Students' Success in Low-Income Middle Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Dilafruz Williams, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,998.00

Science in the Learning Gardens (SciLG) will use school gardens as the context
for learning at two low-income middle schools with predominantly racial and
ethnic minority students in Portland, Oregon. There are thousands of gardens
flourishing across the country that are underutilized as contexts for active
engagement in the middle grades. School gardens provide important cultural
contexts while addressing environmental and food issues. SciLG will bring
underrepresented youth into gardens at a critical time in their intellectual
development to broaden the factors that support motivation to pursue STEM
careers and educational pathways. The project will adapt, organize, and align
two disparate sets of existing resources into the project curriculum: 6th grade
science curriculum resources, and garden-based lessons and units. The curriculum
will be directly aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a design-based research approach to
refine instruction and formative assessment, and to investigate factors for
student success in science proficiency and their motivational engagement in
relation to the garden curriculum. The curriculum will be pilot-tested during
the first year of the project in five sixth-grade classes with 240 students in
Portland Public Schools. Students will be followed longitudinally in grades 7
and 8 in years 2 and 3 respectively, as curricular integration continues. The
research team will support participating teachers each year in using their
schools' gardens, and study how this context can serve as an effective
pedagogical strategy for NGSS-aligned science curriculum. Academic learning will
be measured by assessments of student progress towards the end of middle-school
goals defined by NGSS. Motivation will be measured by a validated motivational
engagement instrument. SciLG results along with the motivational engagement
instrument will be disseminated widely through a variety of professional
networks to stimulate implementation nationwide.