* 1418841
* Planning a Marine Laboratory Network on Ocean Acidification
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Roberta Marinelli, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 24,910.00

The University of Southern California is awarded a grant to lead a focused
planning workshop that will engage west coast marine laboratories, through the
Western Association of Marine Laboratories (WAML), in developing a network
around OA in coastal systems. Ocean acidification impacts in marine ecosystems
are widespread, and yet they are also complex and varied at regional and local
scales. Therefore, regional and local research and observational efforts are
critical to reaching a greater understanding of ocean acidification (OA) impacts
in coastal environments. The strategy will involve coupling long-term ecological
data from diverse west coast ecosystems - kelp forests, coral reefs, estuaries,
coastal waters - with corresponding ocean acidification measurement technologies
based at marine laboratories, and providing data access through existing
organizational frameworks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With focused planning and
subsequent investment in certain key technologies dedicated to understanding the
marine carbonate system, WAML can serve as a nexus for implementing a valuable
coastal network that links knowledge about ocean acidification to regional
ecosystem dynamics. The workshop will seek to coordinate and standardize efforts
across laboratories, and determine what investments are needed to significantly
elevate a nascent WAML-OA alliance to an effective operational network for the
benefit of the region. Ocean acidification and its associated impacts stand to
influence society across many themes including climate, ecosystems, food
security, coastal planning, culture and commerce. Coalescing and communicating
regional OA data will empower not only research activities but also the
decision-making abilities of varied stakeholders.