* 1418891
* Four Specialized Pieces of Equipment to Enhance and Expand Research at the La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 65,000.00

Duke University and the Organization for Tropical Studies have been awarded a
grant to purchase four pieces of specialized scientific equipment that will
enhance research at the La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Specific
research that will benefit from the acquisition of these instruments include
nitrogen fixation by soil microorganisms, effects of chemical and phylogenetic
diversity of plants in the structure of herbivore community and herbivory,
microbial diversity in tank bromeliads and mutualistic associations between
hemiptera and Burholderia bacteria, and amphibian decline.&lt;br/&gt;La Selva is
owned and operated by the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS), a non-profit
consortium of nearly sixty universities, colleges, and research institutions
located at Duke University; it was founded in 1963 to provide leadership in
education, research, and the responsible use of natural resources in the
tropics. OTS maintains three biological research stations in Costa Rica. La
Selva, the largest of the three (comprised of 3900 acres of tropical wet forests
and disturbs lands), has been recognized as one of the most scientifically
productive field stations in the tropics. Few research stations have access to
both diverse tropical forest settings and sophisticated research capabilities as
La Selva, and it is this unique setting and infrastructure, combined with long-
term data sets from nearly fifty years of research, that makes this station
situated along the land-bridge between two major continents, so important. The
new equipment will enable the station to remain at the forefront of research and
eliminate the need to transport samples abroad for analysis. It will enhance
exponentially opportunities for the wide array of research projects currently
taking place at the station, open new lines of research, and expand the exciting
questions researchers and students can ask in the decade ahead while working in
a remote tropical lowland rain forest. &lt;br/&gt;Over the last 10 years, the
number of staff and visitors (researchers, research assistants, eco-tourists) to
La Selva has varied between ~ 28 and 36 thousand a year. Annually, students from
more than 115 faculty-led courses from colleges and universities from the United
States utilize La Selva's forests and laboratories as part of their curriculum.
In addition, each year, OTS itself runs approximately 15 graduate and
undergraduate courses and a ten-week site-based research experience for
undergraduates (REU) program for students from non-R1 research universities and
groups under-represented in the sciences. In fact, over the last five years, 24%
of all U.S. undergraduates in the OTS education programs are from under-
represented groups in the STEM disciplines. The station has sponsored several
working groups on tropical ecotoxicology, multi-trophic interaction diversity,
and bioinformatics and databases. It has hosted a number of multi-institutional
collaborations and workshops that involve scientists from all over the world.
Therefore, the requested equipment will provide an enriching educational, long-
lasting research experience for students and researchers, and potentially lead
to new discoveries in tropical field biology. For more information please visit
the following website: http://www.ots.ac.cr/index.php?option=com_content&amp;tas
k=view&amp;id=163&amp;Itemid=348