* 1418692
* Efficient, Adaptive, and Convergent Numerical Methods for Phase Field and Phase Field Crystal Equations with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Steven Wise, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 105,000.00

This research focuses on the design and practical application of efficient
computational methods for two classes of mathematical models. The first class is
comprised of the phase field crystal equation, the dynamic density functional
theory equation, and several related models. Broadly, these equations describe
crystal growth and dynamics in various materials science applications, modeling
solidification; grain boundary dynamics; crack propagation; and vacancy
transport to name a few. The second class is comprised of models that describe
two-phase fluid flows. A prototypical two-phase fluid system is oil and vinegar;
the constituent fluids do not mix and can form complex multi-phase structures
that are impossible to predict without numerical simulation. Specifically, the
principal investigator shall develop efficient computational methods for Cahn-
Hillard-Navier-Stokes and related equations that model two-phase flows in
various technologically important contexts. Such models can be used to describe
micro-fluids; tumor growth; two-phase polymer flows used to create organic
photovoltaic devices; and flows in porous media such as encountered in oil and
natural gas recovery. The physical phenomena describe technologically important
phenomena in several scientific areas. Gaining a more thorough physical
understanding of the modeled processes through scientific computing is
fundamental to designing better cancer treatments; faster, more reliable
semiconducting and photovoltaic devices; and more durable polymer components, to
mention a few applications. Through this research project, graduate students
will be exposed to cutting-edge scientific computing technologies, to
traditional techniques of rigorous mathematical analysis, and to applications in
real-world problems of materials fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator shall conduct some computational and modeling work for
Phase Field Crystal-type equations in materials science and for the Cahn-
Hillard-Navier-Stokes-type equations for two-phase flows. The equations under
study are coupled systems of highly nonlinear, high-order partial differential
and integro-partial differential equations. Because of this, designing efficient
and reliable numerical methods that give rise to convergent approximations is a
non-trivial task. This project will design unconditionally energy stable, 1st
and 2nd-order-in-time approximations based on the convex splitting framework. PI
will rigorously prove that some of the schemes are optimally convergent. PI will
implement optimally or nearly-optimally efficient solvers that take advantage of
the variational structure of the proposed schemes. With his materials science
collaborators, the PI will develop new PFC-type models to describe complex phase
transformations in novel materials for energy applications. The work will
present some new ideas for implementing and rigorously analyzing efficient and
stable approximation schemes for the equations. The overarching objectives of
the project are to design stable and convergent schemes for the proposed models,
to implement efficient solvers for the schemes, and to apply these to real-world
phenomena in materials and fluids science. The PI will leverage his experience
designing fast adaptive multigrid solvers, using finite element and finite
difference methods in space, and energy stable convex-splitting methods to
discretize time. The codes that the PI develops, including improved versions of
the PI's BSAM software package and new planned adaptive finite element packages,
will be made publicly available through the PI's website, to the benefit of the
wider scientific community.