* 1418947
* Multiscale domain decomposition methods for flow and mechanics problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ivan Yotov, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 359,999.00

A computational framework will be developed for modeling interactions of
different physical phenomena. It will be applied to geoscience and biomedical
problems of societal importance. Coupling subsurface and surface flow and
transport will be investigated to model interactions between contaminated
aquifers, rivers, lakes, and wetlands. Flows in fractured and deformable
reservoirs will be modeled to provide improved understanding and predictive
simulations of important processes occurring in hydraulic fracturing and carbon
sequestration, including surface subsidence, pore collapse, cavity generation,
and wellbore collapse. Another application of interest is flow in arteries,
accounting for flow within the arterial wall. This has an effect on the blood
velocity in the lumen and the speed of the pressure wave, as well as low density
lipoproteins (LDL) transport and drugs filtered into the tissue during coronary
artery flow. We expect the research on modeling arterial flows to lead to the
development of optimized simulation tools which will advance drug delivery as
well prevention, detection, and therapy of cardiovascular diseases. Educational
activities will be integrated with and enhanced by research activities. Graduate
students and postdocs will participate actively in research projects through
research working groups or dissertation work. State-of-the-art research results
will be incorporated into the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this work is to develop a computational framework for modeling
multiphysics systems of coupled flow and mechanics problems with multiscale
input parameters. The research approach is based on a multiblock domain
decomposition methodology. The simulation domain is decomposed into a union of
subdomains, each one associated with a physical, mathematical, and numerical
model. Physically meaningful interface conditions are imposed on the discrete
level via mortar finite elements. The formulation provides great flexibility for
multiphysics and multinumerics couplings. Furthermore, this domain decomposition
approach, combined with coarse scale mortar elements, provides a multiscale
approximation and an efficient way to solve the coarse grid problem in parallel.
The project will develop 1) Mathematically rigorous and physically meaningful
multiphysics models; 2) Robust, accurate and efficient multiscale discretization
techniques; 3) Efficient multiscale parallel domain decomposition solvers and
preconditioners. The computational framework will be applied to geoscience and
biomedical problems. We will develop variational formulations of systems of
partial differential equations coupling free and porous media fluid flows with
deformations of the porous solids. These formulations will couple through
physically meaningful interface conditions free fluid models such as Stokes,
Brinkman, or Navier-Stokes equations with single phase or multiphase Darcy flow.
In regions involving deformable porous media the Darcy flow will be coupled with
elasticity and modeled by the Biot system of poroelasticity. We will study well
posedness of the variational formulations. We will develop stable and accurate
multiscale mortar discretization methods for these multiphysics variational
formulations. We will employ suitable mixed finite element, finite volume, and
discontinuous Galerkin methods for the discretization of the subdomain equations
on a fine scale. A mortar finite element space will be utilized to impose
interface conditions on a coarse scale. We will carry out a priori multiscale
error analysis for these methods. We will also develop efficient parallel non-
overlapping domain decomposition algorithms for the solution of the resulting
algebraic systems by reducing the coupled global multiscale problem to a coarse
scale interface problem. We will analyze the condition number of the interface
operator and will develop efficient preconditioners for speeding up the
interface iteration.