* 1418850
* Mobilizing Women of the STEM Diaspora (MW-STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Elizabeth Davis, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana Britton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Women are underrepresented in science and technology within research and
academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Women of the STEM diaspora within the U.S.
represent an important element in bringing more women into STEM fields as role
models, mentors and peers. This proposed workshop builds on two previous general
sessions on the diaspora and focuses the outcome on research collaborations and
targeted proposals. The synthesis model is designed to quickly form teams among
participants and is outcome focused throughout the workshop session. In
addition, the workshop builds on the International Gender Summit (hosted by NSF
in 2013) and the Global Diaspora Forum (hosted by U.S. State Department in
2013). Both venues have provided collaborative opportunities for women of the
STEM diaspora and it is anticipated that most of the participants will be
identified from these two summits. Graduate students and early career women from
the diaspora and women of color will be invited to attend the workshop and meet
with academic and researchers from the STEM diaspora. Organizers will also use
networking survey tools and assessments to explore network characteristics of
women in the workshop and use social media tools to follow participants post-
workshop and to maintain network connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Mobilizing Women of the STEM Diaspora (MW-STEM) workshop has two goals: (1)
build global network on women of the STEM diaspora, and (2) provide peer-to-peer
and institution-to-institutional mentoring in the development of scientific
collaborations. MW-STEM will be hosted in conjunction with the annual meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Chicago, February
2014 and will be co-hosted by the U.S. State Department and AAAS Fellows. The
proposed workshop will provide a space where the participants work to a common
outcome using facilitated breakout sessions. The MW-STEM agenda is designed
around creating teams that first organize around general topic themes: (1)
research collaborations; (2) peer mentoring networks; (3) theme and proposal
development towards 2014 and 2015 Gender Summits; and (4) white paper/review
authorship. Workshop products will be disseminated through (1) proposal
development and submission; (2) published review paper on identified issues for
women of the STEM diaspora; (3) peer mentoring networks established through
LinkedIn and other social media.