* 1418890
* Development of an Ocean Acidification Testing Facility in the Florida Keys
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Emily Hall, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 255,778.00

Mote Marine Laboratory, an independent non-profit institution celebrating nearly
60 years of innovation in diverse areas of marine research and science
education, has been awarded an NSF grant to enhance the ocean acidification
research infrastructure at Mote's Tropical Research Lab (TRL) in the Florida
Keys. &lt;br/&gt;Ocean acidification - the lowering of ocean pH when carbon
dioxide dissolves into the sea - is a water chemistry change that is often
called the "osteoporosis of the sea" because it weakens and even dissolves
calcium carbonate structures such as coral skeletons and mollusk shells, and it
may affect a wide swath of other marine animals and ecosystems. Therefore, ocean
acidification, caused by increase carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, is perhaps
the greatest risk to coral reefs in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;Ocean
acidification impacts on coral reefs is of great concern in Florida, which hosts
the third largest coral reef on the planet and the only bank barrier reef system
in the continental U.S. More than 65 percent of Florida's coral reef tract lies
within the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. Coral reefs are believed to
support as much as 40 percent of all the marine life on the planet. Yet, over
recent decades, we've witnessed losses of more than 90 percent of our indigenous
coral coverage with some species losing more than 97 percent of their
populations. This is especially troubling since healthy coral reefs serve as an
important economic engine in Florida by: attracting 16 million visitors
annually; supporting more than 71,000 local jobs; bringing $6.3 billion to
Florida's economy; and protecting the state's coastline from tropical storm and
hurricane impacts. Mote is serving in an increasingly important role in the
study of ocean acidification not just by Mote researchers and established
scientists from across the U.S. and around the world, but also by students and
the next generation of ocean researchers. Over the past 10 years, 50 scientists
have conducted NSF-funded research at Mote TRL. Educational groups utilize Mote
TRL approximately 75 days a year with approximately 1,020 student-use days per
year. Work done through Mote TRL over the last five years has resulted in the
publication of more than 83 research articles and presentations at numerous
national and international meetings. This NSF grant award will allow Mote TRL to
grow into a truly national and international center for ocean acidification
research and education related to coral reef ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;Mote's TRL
campus is located in the lower Florida Keys and is the southernmost marine
laboratory in the continental U.S. This field station provides direct access to
a variety of marine systems including Florida Bay, sea grass, hard-bottom and
mangrove habitats. Most important, it is situated with direct access to
Florida's reef tract and provides an important base of operations for many
research and restoration projects focused on coral
reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this NSF grant, Mote is committed to
maintaining operations of this dedicated ocean acidification laboratory as a
national and international center for ocean acidification research related to
coral reef ecosystems. Scientific evidence generated at this facility will help
provide increasingly accurate data for modeling forecasts of potential climate-
driven trends in ocean acidification and its effect on coral growth and health,
and in turn, more effectively guide policy decisions on how financial resources
should be directed to protect and restore coral reef ecosystems for long- term
conservation of marine biodiversity and sustainable use of a major economic
engine for Florida and the U.S. For more information about the labs please visit
(http://www.mote.org and http://isurus.mote.org/Keys/).