* 1418673
* RAPID: Documenting bleaching susceptibility and resilience in Guam, Micronesia
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Kiho Kim, American University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2015
* USD 93,490.00

Coral reef ecosystems are experiencing unprecedented levels of environmental
stress. Guam, Micronesia is currently experiencing an island-wide coral
bleaching event unprecedented in recent decades. The available evidence suggests
that the severity and extent of this event is linked to extended high sea
surface temperature and a delay in the onset of the rainy season. Initial
surveys of coral reefs around the island indicate that the impacts are broad in
both geographic extent and the number of coral species affected. This project
will support a quantitative examination of the patterns of mortality and
recovery of corals from this event in the context of reef resilience, or their
ability to recover. Specifically, the project will examine whether: (a) exposure
differences between the east and west sides of the island result in differential
recovery, and (b) do sites that showed lower bleaching severity during initial
surveys show higher recovery post-bleaching? It is predicted that differential
bleaching is due, in part, to genetic differences in both the coral host and its
symbiotic algae and identifying unique host-symbiont combinations that are less
sensitive to extreme temperature anomalies will be a primary goal of this
project. These hypotheses and predictions will be addressed by returning to a
select subset of reef sites over time by a rapid response team using survey
methods as employed at the NSF funded Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) site which includes permanent transects and fixed quadrats, and
computer software to document changes in the percent cover of corals over time.
Additionally, long-term monitoring of tagged colonies in the genera Acropora and
Pocillopora, specifically for their recovery, and for detailed genetic analyses
to examine host and symbiont genetic diversity, will help determine which
combinations of host-symbiont genotypes are exhibiting recovery versus
mortality.

The proposed work will reveal which specific sites, environmental conditions,
and genotypes are associated with resilience to coral bleaching and will allow
establishment of a system whereby long-term recovery can be documented and also
compared to the Moorea LTER data on coral reef resilience. Such data sets are
rare or non-existent in Micronesia and the ability to identify resilient
populations can provide information to help prioritize management efforts and
evaluate the performance of existing marine parks and preserves.