* 1418988
* The Role Of Competition In The Development Of Societal Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Robert Rosenswig, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 186,886.00

The fundamental goal of this and similar archaeological research is to
understand the processes through which complex societies arise. How in
technologically simple societies do social entities which bind thousands of
individuals into functioning political and economic networks arise? Archaeology,
because it can trace such developments, often over millennia, provides an
important source of insight. The research will contribute to understanding
incipient state power by documenting the important prehistoric Middle American
polity and evaluating whether it emerged as a single state or in competition
with the newly recognized larger center. The first phase of this research
documented the extent of the site for the first time. NSF support also allowed
the documentation of changing overall occupation levels in three adjacent
environments and provided a glimpse of regional political organization through
eight lower-order monumental centers. The second stage of research will
determine the nature of incipient state power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator Dr. Robert Rosenswig will collect lidar (remotely sensed
areal imagery) data and undertake one field season of pedestrian settlement
survey to document the emergence of the Izapa state in the Soconusco region of
Mexico. This is the second stage of research and builds on existing lidar data
and pedestrian survey data funded by the NSF. Lidar is a new and exciting
technology that employs pulses of light to penetrate thick tropical vegetation
and map terrestrial features below. The site of Izapa has long been recognized
as an important center consisting of 100s of mounds and the heart of a regional
style of public art. The research will determine whether Izapa arose as the only
political center in the region or if it developed in competition with the newly
discovered center of Las Viudas. To evaluate these alternate possibilities, all
Formative period (850 BCE - CE 100) monumental centers will be mapped to
determine their regional distribution in relation to Izapa and Las Viudas. The
orientation and internal layout of each lower order centers (of which there is
an estimated 30 more to be documented) will be very accurately documented using
lidar, allowing for site planning patterns to be reconstructed at a regional
scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to Prehispanic occupation of the
region, these lidar data will document the hydrology of streams, creeks and
rivers in the economically important Soconusco. Located as it is at the base of
the Sierra Madre, the region is prone to flooding and was devastated following
Hurricane Stan in 2005. These new data will allow the identification of river
buffer areas eroded in the past and subject to current erosion risk. With this
information, both archaeological sites and modern communities at risk from
future flood-related erosion will be identified and this information shared with
local officials.