* 1418698
* Next-generation instrumented buoys for the University of Wisconsin Trout Lake Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Stephen Carpenter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 211,562.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison is awarded a grant that will allow its Trout
Lake Station to purchase and deploy four fully-instrumented buoys (plus one
spare) and associated telecommunication and data management equipment. The
system is designed to allow year-round collection of high-frequency limnological
data from four long-term study lakes. The data will be made publically available
in near-real time. The Trout Lake Station is a year-round field station operated
by the Center for Limnology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Located in
the Northern Highland Lake District in northern Wisconsin, the Station has a
long history of research on the region's aquatic resources dating back to the
1920s. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumented buoys will make high-frequency
measurements of weather (air temperature, relative humidity, atmospheric
pressure, wind speed and direction, and precipitation), water temperature
throughout the water column, and near-surface dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll a,
phycocyanin, and colored dissolved organic matter. During the open water season
the data will be telemetered to the Station in near real time, run through an
automated range check and posted to a publically available database. The four
lakes to be instrumented differ in their size, depth, trophic status, color,
water chemistry, hydrology, and biotic communities. All are long-term study
lakes of the North Temperate Lakes Long-Term Ecological Research program and
have more than 30 years of comprehensive limnological data available. The lakes
are within 10km of each other (and the Trout Lake Station), so data from the
buoys will be used to compare differential responses of lakes to nearly
identical weather conditions. Such comparisons are powerful in predicting
climatic responses of lakes in general. The buoy data will be used by a myriad
of researchers who require background environmental data for their research
projects on the study lakes. In addition, the data will be used widely within
the Global Lakes Ecological Observatory Network in comparative studies of lake
processes worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumented buoys resulting from
this award will help create new knowledge that has societal relevance, provide
research opportunities and training for students, and increase the scientific
literacy and interest of the general public. The buoy data will be used to
address the likely effect of climate change and variation on lakes and to
provide environmental context for population-, community-, and ecosystem-level
studies. Two summer research experiences for undergraduates will be provided by
this award. Finally, the buoy data in public engagement activities including an
annual Trout Lake Station open house and a very popular and well-attended
Science on Tap-Minocqua series held at the local community microbrewery. For
more information about Trout Lake Station visit the website at
http://limnology.wisc.edu/Trout_Lake_Station.php.