* 1418261
* Collaborative Research: Topological Methods for Parsing  Shapes and Networks and Modeling Variation in Structure and Function
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Shayn Mukherjee, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 311,215.00

Critical to advancing data-enabled science is our ability to probe,
conceptualize, interpret, and visualize information residing in complex datasets
in order to transform data into knowledge. This project develops computational
methods and tools for investigation and visualization of structural variation in
networks and 3D shapes, as well as inference of functional outcomes of such
variation. These problems arise in areas of strategic interest such as health
and medicine, where it is important to understand patterns of morphological
variation in biological shapes and structural changes in biological networks,
and their roles in behavior, health and disease. To emphasize this important
interdisciplinary facet, the project is supported by several case studies that
investigate: (i) mechanisms underlying the development of facial shape; (ii)
interactions between brain shape, skull morphology, and behavior; (iii)
organization of microbial communities in the digestive tract; and (iv)
connections between social networks and microbiome networks. We envision many
long-term ramifications of the project. Potential applications include analyses
of dynamical social networks, exploratory discovery of associations between
biological networks and phenotypic traits or diseases, quantitative studies of
evolution, development, and inheritance of morphological traits, and challenges
such as indexing and organizing databases of networks or 3D shapes for efficient
data management, search, and retrieval. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
integrates techniques from topological data analysis, integral geometry,
spectral geometry, and statistics to develop computational methods and tools for
modeling and visualizing structural variation in diverse collections of shapes
and networks, and exploring associations between variation in structure and
function. The project addresses theoretical foundations, computational methods,
implementation of tools for statistical analysis and visualization, and
validation of methodology. A shape or network is represented by a Borel
probability measure on a Hilbert space whose elements represent Euler
characteristic curves that encode rich geometric and topological properties.
Dimension reduction and discretization of the probability measure lead to
representations that allow organization of complex datasets into compact
dictionaries that facilitate data analytics, processing, visualization, and
search. This enables integration of the new methods with an array of existing
techniques of multivariate statistical analysis to address such problems as
development of regression-based models over networks.