* 1418480
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Neighborhood Identity and Social Practice in a CLassic Mayan City
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* E. Christian Wells, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 29,888.00

This research is important because it addresses the question of how communities
survive and maintain their integrity in the face of difficult environmental and
social situations. Many rural villages approximate in size those of late
prehistoric Maya and this study, in common with much archaeological research has
the potential to track change and cultural response over extended periods of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Dr. E. Christian Wells, Kara
Fulton will study how urban families developed and shared neighborhood
identities at the ancient Maya city of Actuncan, Belize, ca. AD 800-900, a time
when the city experienced rapid population growth as surrounding centers
declined. Archaeologists wish to understand urban processes of growth and decay
in this region, and how they are linked to the behaviors of social factions in
neighborhood communities. The city of Actuncan provides a unique opportunity to
examine these processes, because the city maintained intensive occupation
before, during, and after the political prominence of the nearby and
archaeologically well-known center of Xunantunich. To investigate neighborhood
identities, this research will consider the nature and location of activity
patterns in and around three households. Multiple methods will be employed for
this work, including subsurface testing with auger probes, soil chemical residue
analysis, macro- and microartifact analysis, and analysis of geophysical
prospection data. Soil chemistry is a novel contribution to this line of
research, and is based on the recent observation that low-density urban centers
in the Maya region were nutrient reservoirs that trapped and preserved chemical
residues of various activities. By comparing relative concentrations and
combinations of chemical elements in soils and sediments around households at
Actuncan, patterns from repeated activities (such as cooking and eating) can be
identified and studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will make at
least two significant contributions to scientific archaeology. First, it will
provide insight into the social strategies deployed by residents to maintain
their communities following the collapse of the nearby metropolitan center of
Xunantunich and the reorganization of political power in the region. Studying
relationships among commoner households in the Maya region is an important
foundation for understanding broader political dynamics, including relationships
between households and rulers, and how rulers were able to create, legitimize,
and maintain power and authority. Second, the results will provide empirical
comparative data for other researchers working on similar issues, including the
use of space in, around, and between prehispanic households. This research is
innovative, because a soil chemical approach to extract and characterize
activity residues will provide a deeper level of understanding of the
residential landscape than is otherwise permitted by examining architecture and
artifact assemblages alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this research
will contribute to broadening the ways in which contemporary heritage is viewed
in Belize. Until recently, the tendency of researchers in the Maya region has
been to focus on the lives of the ruling elite members of society. As a result,
cultural history and heritage expressed today is dominated by an elite view of
the past. With a focus on commoner households, this research aims to broaden the
view of history and heritage and contribute to a more balanced perspective of
the past. Moreover, through training a promising young scientist, the research
will connect U.S. and Belizean researchers, which will strengthen international
collaboration and help to make global collaborations in this part of the world
more routine for scientific research.