* 1418179
* 2014 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers, June 2-13, 2014
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 03/31/2016
* USD 48,013.00

2014 Decennial Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers; June 2-13 2014;
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, State College, PA

Penn State's very popular astrostatistics summer school has trained over 575
total participants since its inauguration in 2005. If maintained at a steady
state, this activity will train about 10% of the nation's young astronomers,
providing critical skills to the US scientific workforce. Oriented towards
graduate students and young researchers, participants receive an intense
immersion in statistical methodology taught by highly skilled instructors. The
three-pronged curriculum provides instruction in the underlying principles of
modern statistics, exposure to advanced methodologies useful in astronomy, and
hands-on training in statistical software. Attendees come away with a much
heightened expertise in statistics and its applications to their science, a
better understanding of how to teach this material to others, and a fine
appreciation for the value and meaning of statistics in science. The instructors
have devoted considerable effort to adapting the course material to their
audience, and the curriculum continues to evolve. The formal textbook based on
this curriculum was published in 2012.

Astronomical research often involves imaging, photometric and spectroscopic
surveys of the sky that produce tera- and peta-byte databases and billion-object
catalogs. Survey science is the astronomy of the near future, with a new
generation of formidable telescopes and the federation of diverse astronomical
datasets. While the promise is great, achieving the scientific goals depends
critically on extraction of useful knowledge using statistical inference, and
especially the use of advanced statistical methods. Observational astronomers
are thus confronting a wider range of statistical challenges than ever before,
while unfortunately most U.S. astronomers are not well trained in statistics,
learning only elementary methods through books written by and for physical
scientists. Such volumes usually treat only a narrow range of problems,
providing inadequate conceptual foundations in mathematical statistics and
little guidance in advanced applied statistics. Statistics is an available
technology that must be tapped to advance the needs of astronomy and
astrophysics.

The 2014 Summer School in statistical inference for young astronomers will
present concepts and methodologies at an intermediate level, using experienced
instructors and an innovative curriculum. This being the decennial offering, and
based on comments from the past school participants, the 2014 school covers a
two-week extended period of instruction, divided into three independent modules:
the regular statistical inference course for astronomers in the first week, a
two-day supplement on 'Statistical modeling of cosmic populations', and a three-
day school on 'High-Performance Computing for Astronomical Data Analysis &
Bayesian Computing'. The Penn State Research Computing & Cyberinfrastructure
Group, and its Institute for CyberScience, are providing technical manpower and
partially supporting the high-performance computing.