* 1418163
* CodeR4STATS - Code R for AP Statistics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Eric Simoneau, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 563,835.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Increasingly, all STEM fields rely on being able to
understand data and use statistics. This project builds on prior efforts to
create teaching resources for high-school Advanced Placement Statistics teachers
to use an open source statistics programming language called "R" in their
classrooms. The project brings together datasets from a variety of STEM domains,
and will develop exercises and assessments to teach students how to program in R
and learn the underlying statistics concepts. Thus, this project attempts to
help students learn coding, statistics, and STEM simultaneously in the context
of AP Stats. In addition, researchers will examine the extent to which students
learn statistical concepts, computational fluency, and critical reasoning skills
better with the online tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resources developed by
the project aim to enhance statistics learning through an integrated application
of strategies previously documented to be effective: a focus on data
visualization and representation, engaging students in meaningful investigations
with complex real-world data sets, utilizing computational tools and techniques
to analyze data, and better preparing educators for the needs of a more complex
and technologically-rich mathematical landscape. This project will unite these
lines of work into one streamlined pedagogical environment called CodeR4STATS
with three kinds of resources: computing resources, datasets, and assessment
resources. Computing resources will include freely available access to an
instance of the cloud-based R-studio with custom help pages. Data resources will
include over 800 scientific datasets from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute,
Harvard University's Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest, Boston University, and Tufts University with several
highlighted in case studies for students; these will be searchable within the
online environment. Assessment and tutoring resources will be provided using the
tutoring platform ASSISTments which uses example tracing to provide assessment,
feedback, and tailored instruction. Teacher training and a teacher online
discussion board will also be provided. Bringing these resources together will
be programming lab activities, five real-world case studies, and sixteen
statistics assignments linked to common core math standards. Researchers will
use classroom observational case studies from three classrooms over two years,
including cross-case comparison of lessons in the computational environment
versus offline lessons; student and teacher interviews; and an analysis of
learner data from the online system, especially the ASSISTments-based assessment
data. This research will examine learning outcomes and help refine design
principles for statistics learning environments.