* 1418922
* WORKSHOP: HRI 2014 Pioneers
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2014
* USD 35,016.00

This is funding to support a Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 18 graduate students and post-docs (including about 12 U.S.
participants) from diverse research communities (e.g., computer science and
engineering, psychology, cognitive science, robotics, human factors, human-
computer interaction design, and communications), along with distinguished
research faculty. NSF funding will be used solely to cover travel, housing, and
subsistence for eligible U.S. attendees. The event will take place on Monday,
March 3, 2014, immediately preceding the Ninth International Conference on Human
Robot Interaction (HRI 2014), to be held March 4-6 in Bielefeld, Germany, and
which is jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. HRI is a single-track, highly
selective annual international conference that seeks to showcase the very best
inter- and multi-disciplinary research in human-robot interaction with roots in
social psychology, cognitive science, HCI, human factors, artificial
intelligence, robotics, organizational behavior, anthropology and many more, and
invites broad participation. The theme of HRI 2014 is "(E)Merging Perspectives"
which seeks to combine both user and system perspectives to advance new and
possibly unorthodox methodologies. To extend the current singular approaches,
this year's conference emphasizes papers that demonstrate the usage of novel
empirical methods, the integration of empirical findings into complex robot
systems, and holistic approaches in system evaluation. More information about
the conference is available online at http://humanrobotinteraction.org/2014.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pioneers Workshop is designed to complement the
conference, by providing a forum for students and recent graduates in the field
of HRI to share their current research with their peers and a panel of senior
researchers in a setting that is less formal and more interactive than the main
conference. During the workshop, participants will talk about the important
upcoming research themes in the field, encouraging the formation of
collaborative relationships across disciplines and geographic boundaries. To
these ends, the workshop format will include oral presentations from 2 student
attendees, poster presentations from all attendees, a hands-on meet-and-greet
session, two alumni speakers, a keynote, and a panel presentation by senior
researchers. The oral presentations and the interactive poster sessions will
provide a forum for participants to share their research, enabling them to
receive feedback on their work and to gain perspective on the field. The hands-
on meet-and-greet session will involve networking and the cultivation of cross-
disciplinary ideas. The alumni presentations will provide advice for short-term
goals and a recent perspective on looking for jobs within the community. The
keynote lecture will provide a global and future vision for HRI. The panel
presentation will feature five senior HRI researchers from both academia and
industry who will share insights about their own careers, answer career path
questions, and provide insight into the interdisciplinary nature of the HRI
community. The conversations between the panel and participants will continue
over lunch and during dinner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
workshop will afford a unique opportunity for the best of the next generation of
researchers in human-robot interaction to be exposed to and discuss current and
relevant topics as they are being studied in several different research
communities (including but not limited to computer science and engineering,
psychology, robotics, human factors and ergonomics, and HCI). This is important
for the field, because it has been recognized that transformative advances in
research in this fledgling area can only come through the melding of cross-
disciplinary knowledge and multinational perspectives. Participants will be
encouraged to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development, to form
collaborative relationships, and to generate new research questions to be
addressed during the coming years. Participants will also gain leadership and
service experience, as the workshop is largely student organized and student
led. The PI has expressed her strong commitment to recruiting women and members
from under-represented groups. To further ensure diversity the event organizers
will consider an applicant's potential to offer a fresh perspective and point of
view with respect to HRI, and will limit the number of participants accepted
from a particular institution to two, with one being a woman if two are accepted