* 1418352
* Situating Big Data: Assessing Game-Based STEM Learning in Context
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Constance Steinkuehler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 777,955.00

This REAL project arises from the 2013 solicitation on Data-intensive Research
to Improve Teaching and Learning. The intention of that effort is to bring
together researchers from across disciplines to foster novel, transformative,
multidisciplinary approaches to using the data in large education-related data
sets to create actionable knowledge for improving STEM teaching and learning
environments in the medium term and to revolutionize learning in the longer
term. The project team aims to understand how to use data collected from the
environment in which learning technologies are used to do the following: (1)
allow automated assessment that takes the full range of classroom activities and
discussions around use of the technology into account in providing customized
feedback recommendations; (2) come to better understand how learning and the
context in which it is happening interact; and, (3) provide theory-informed and
evidence-based advice for refining learning approaches and activities. This will
make it easier for teachers to manage ongoing assessment and to adapt classroom
activities to learners' needs in learner-centered, project-based, and inquiry-
driven learning environments. Results of this project will lay the foundations
for making assessment regular, routine and ongoing and to take a fuller range of
learning activities into account. This, in turn, will allow better
personalization and ongoing feedback and scaffolding for learners. Results will
enhance understanding of how to assess and foster not only disciplinary
learning, but also disposition, identity development, and long-term
participation.

The PIs seek to integrate theories of situated cognition with analysis of big
data. They will explore how to integrate clickstream data from technology with
key forms of multimodal data describing the contexts in which the technology is
being used, e.g., individual and group discourse (online and in-room),
individual and curricular artifacts, classroom assessments, and school
performance, to generate a data-driven methodology for: (1) understanding the
learning happening in technology-rich learning environments; (2) assessing
development and needs of individuals within those environments in ways that will
suggest adaptations and scaffolding; and (3) investigating situated cognition.
They aim to make it easier to manage ongoing assessment and to adapt classroom
activities to learners' needs in learner-centered, project-based, and inquiry-
driven learning environments. They will investigate how to (1) enable
consideration of the full ecosystem of learning and data collected across it
when assessing learning and engagement, and (2) identify what is working and not
working to foster learning in a situation. They will demonstrate where and how
useful data are situated in the learning ecology when learners are engaged in
hands-on and discourse-rich learning activities, and how to use these data to
assess effectiveness and impact of interventions. Their plan involves matching
important patterns in hand-coded qualitative data to patterns of automatically
collected data; this will allow them to identify the patterns in automated data
collection that can be used as indicators of factors such as understanding,
confusion, learning, and participation.