* 1418176
* WORKSHOP: VL/HCC 2014 Graduate Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Caitlin Kelleher, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2014
* USD 32,282.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 9
graduate students from U.S. universities, along with a panel of 3 distinguished
research faculty as mentors. The event will take place in conjunction with and
immediately preceding the 2014 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-
Centric Computing (VL/HCC), to be held July 28-August 1 in Melbourne, Australia,
and sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society. This year marks the 30th anniversary
of the Symposium. Established in 1984, VL/HCC's mission is to support the
design, formalization, implementation and evaluation of computing systems that
are easier for a broader group of people to learn, use, and understand. This
includes research aimed at visual technology and text, and technology that uses
sound, taste, virtual reality, and the Web. It also includes research on
theories about the many media used toward this goal. VL/HCC occupies a unique
niche among HCI and programming language conferences, in that it focuses
specifically on how to help end users successfully develop and use software.
Recent advances in computing have led to continually deeper integration between
computers and human society. People now swim in a "sea" of socio-technical
systems that synthesize large numbers of contributing users with vast amounts of
source code. Examples include social media systems, open source repositories,
online marketplaces and massively multiplayer online games. Yet as the socio-
technical systems in this sea have grown in complexity, they have become
increasingly difficult for end users to understand and direct toward productive
ends. More information about the VL/HCC Symposium may be found online at
https://sites.google.com/site/vlhcc2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this year's VL/HCC Doctoral Consortium, the twelfth to be funded by NSF in
this series, is to stimulate graduate students' thinking about how to make
computation easier to express, manipulate, and understand. In particular, what
methods, models and tools can people use to visualize, analyze, tailor, and
direct socio-technical systems? The doctoral consortium aims to stimulate novel
approaches that go far beyond simplistic solutions like Web browsers and search
engines. Although search engines do provide information that is useful in simple
situations, they represent only one portion of a socio-technical system
(information retrieval); search engines alone are not powerful enough to be used
to start new businesses and run them competitively, for example, since they only
give people the ability to find resources provided by other people rather than
the ability to create new resources. Effective approaches will bring users and
software together in creative and productive ways that bear directly on the
needs of modern society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will build community
among young researchers working on different aspects of these problems from the
perspectives of diverse fields including computer science, the social sciences,
and education. It will guide the work of these new researchers by providing an
opportunity for experts in the research field (as well as their peers) to give
them advice, in that student participants will make formal presentations of
their work during the workshop and will receive feedback from a faculty panel.
The feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how their
work is positioned relative to other human-computer interaction research,
whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects,
whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether the results
are appropriately analyzed and presented. As in prior years the VL/HCC 2014
Doctoral Consortium will be part of the regular conference program. A 2-page
extended abstract of each participant's work will be published in the conference
proceedings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of
relevance to a great many people within our society. This event will promote
discovery and learning, by encouraging the student researchers to explore a
difficult and challenging open problem, through involvement of a panel of well-
known researchers whose task is to provide constructive feedback, and through
inclusion of other conference participants who will also learn from and provide
additional feedback to the students and to each other. The PI and the members of
the organizing committee will make special efforts to attract a diverse and
interdisciplinary group of student participants, with special attention paid to
recruitment of students from underrepresented institutions and women; to further
increase diversity, no more than 2 student participants (one of whom must be
female if two are accepted) will be accepted from any one institution.