* 1418462
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Resilience And Adaptation To Abruptly Dynamic Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Arlene Rosen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 30,532.00

The "Neolithic Revolution" marks a crucial turning point in human prehistory.
The domestication of plants and animals provided increased subsistence resources
which, in turn, set the stage for the emergence of civilization and complex
society as we know it today. This research project is significant because it has
the potential to shed light on the factors which initiated this
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Professor Arlene Rosen,
Monica Nicolaides will investigate the long-term patterns of Epipaleolithic
(23,000-11,500 cal. BP) plant-use in the Eastern Levant, present day Jordan.
During this period the region experienced extreme shifts in climate due to the
Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Studies have rarely focused on the wide range of
hunter-gatherer plant-use strategies and adaptations during this period,
focusing instead on later cereal cultivation and the origins of agriculture.
This is due, in part, to the poor preservation of plant remains at
Epipaleolithic sites, with the exception of Ohalo II, Israel. To address this,
Ms. Nicolaides will compare the more robust microscopic plant remains
(phytoliths and starches) from nine sites in the eastern Levant and one site in
Lebanon, to the well-preserved plant remains at Ohalo II. Given the temporal and
regional breadth of the sites investigated this project provides a unique
platform to consider the dynamic relationship between changing environment and
hunter-gatherer plant-use in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of nearly
100 years of archaeological inquiry, the processes and timings of the
transition, from cereal-gatherer to cereal-cultivator, remain unclear. Ohalo II
places the initial dietary shift to grains 10,000 years earlier than previously
recognized. Ms. Nicolaides' research will provide the first microbotanical
analysis of both stone tools and sediments from Ohalo II. By integrating
macrobotanical and microbotanical evidence, she will develop an innovative wild
plant use model to study Epipaleolithic people-plant interactions. This research
will present direct evidence for a defining moment in prehistory and will show
how plant resources were managed, collected, processed and consumed. By
exploring the diverse and sophisticated plant-collection strategies employed by
Epipaleolithic peoples this dissertation will reconsider the way one sees
hunter-gatherers in the prehistory of the Levant. It will not only expand
understanding of Epipaleolithic plant-use, but more broadly, hunter-gatherer
resilience and adaptation to changing environments. Importantly, this research
will offer relevant insight for the current challenges of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad impact. The research
contributes to several large international excavation projects that require
technical and regional specialists from the United States, United Kingdom,
Europe, Israel and Jordan to work together. These working relations engender a
level of cooperation and allow collaborators to share their skills, methods and
technical expertise. Importantly, the results of this project will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and the raw data will be distributed
online for public use. This project will also contribute to the facilities and
student experience at the University of Texas at Austin. It will leave a starch
comparative collection, add to the existing phytolith comparative collection and
provide undergraduate students with an opportunity to experience
archaeobotanical research first-hand, while receiving basic microbotanical
laboratory and identification training. In addition, the lab supplies purchased
for this project will be left at the Environmental Archaeology Laboratory, at
the University of Texas at Austin, a productive legacy to future student
researchers.