* 1418805
* Applications and development of finite element exterior calculus
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Douglas Arnold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 387,387.00

Computer simulation of physical systems involving the deformation of solid
materials, the motion of fluids, electromagnetism, and other phenomena is
applied in countless ways every day in areas as varied as geophysics, medicine,
and civil engineering. Once a physical system has been modeled by a system of
mathematical equations, successful simulation depends not only on powerful
computer hardware but also on mathematical algorithms that can harness the
computer's high speed to obtain accurate solutions of the model's equations.
While such algorithms exist for many important physical systems -- and moreover
have been certified by mathematical analysis so that we can have confidence in
the results -- there remains substantial room for improvement, with large
potential payoffs. Even more important is the need to develop accurate, fast,
and certifiable algorithms for important applications for which they do not yet
exist. This project focuses on a new approach to the development and analysis of
computational algorithms for simulation that has in recent years achieved great
success for simulations involving the deformation of solid materials ranging
from auto bodies to bones. A primary goal of the project is to increase the
range of systems that can be simulated accurately and confidently. One emphasis
will be on complex materials that combine solid and fluid aspects together, such
as the tissue in the human brain, or the saturated subsurface soil and sand in
which groundwater flows. A second emphasis will be on the simulation of gravity
on an astrophysical scale, which is at the heart of a new class of astronomical
observatories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will devise,
improve, and validate algorithms for the computer simulation of complex physical
phenomena modeled by partial differential equations. The algorithms to be
developed and studied are finite element methods, which are an indispensable
tool for simulation of a wide variety of phenomena in science and engineering,
with the tremendous asset that they not only provide a methodology to develop
numerical algorithms for simulation, but also a theoretical framework in which
to assess the accuracy of computed solutions, and thus the possibility to
develop validated methods. The present work will be based on a theory called
finite element exterior calculus, initiated by the Principal Investigator and
developed over the past decade, which has greatly enhanced our understanding of
finite element methods and extended the range of problems for which validated
finite element methods can be used. A major direction of the research will be
the extension of newly discovered methods for linearly elastic materials to more
complex materials such as nonlinear, viscoelastic, and poroelastic materials. A
second major direction will be the development of finite element methods suited
to the Einstein equations of numerical relativity. In a third direction the
Principal Investigator will participate as the computational scientist in a
mathematics/physics theoretical/computational team seeking to elucidate the
important but poorly understood phenomenon of localization of eigenfunctions in
disordered media. Although this phenomenon, known as Anderson localization, was
discovered 50 years ago in Nobel prize winning research, we still lack the
understanding needed to accurately predict and control it.