* 1418133
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Environmental Sustainability - Model My Watershed
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Anthony Aufdenkampe, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,588,886.00

This project will develop curricula for environmental/geoscience disciplines for
high-school classrooms. It will teach a systems approach to problem solving
through hands-on activities based on local data and issues. This will provide an
opportunity for students to act in their communities while engaging in solving
problems they find interesting, and require synthesis of prior learning. The
Model My Watershed (MMW) v2 app will bring new environmental datasets and
geospatial capabilities into the classroom, to provide a cloud-based learning
and analysis platform accessible from a web browser on any computer or mobile
device, thus overcoming the cost and technical obstacles to integrating
Geographic Information System technology in secondary education. It will also
integrate new low-cost environmental sensors that allow students to collect and
upload their own data and compare them to data visualized on the new MMW v2.
This project will transform the ability of teachers throughout the nation to
introduce hands-on geospatial analysis activities in the classroom, to explore a
wide range of geographic, social, political and environmental concepts and
problems beyond the project's specific curricular focus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Next Generation Science Standards state that authentic
research experiences are necessary to enhance STEM learning. A combination of
computational modeling and data collection and analysis will be integrated into
this project to address this need. Placing STEM content within a place- and
problem-based framework enhances STEM learning. Students, working in groups,
will not only design solutions, they will be required to defend them within the
application portal through the creation of multimedia products such as videos,
articles and web 2.0 presentations. The research plan tests the overall
hypothesis that students are much more likely to develop an interest in careers
that require systems thinking and/or spatial thinking, such as environmental
sciences, if they are provided with problem-based, place-based, hands-on
learning experiences using real data, authentic geospatial analysis tools and
models, and opportunities to collect their own supporting data. The MMW v2 web
app will include a data visualization tool that streams data related to the
modeling application. This database will be modified to integrate student data
so teachers and students can easily compare their data to data collected by
other students and the government and research data. All data will be easily
downloadable so that students can increase the use of real data to support the
educational exercises. As a complement to the model-based activities, the
project partners will design, manufacture, and distribute a low-cost
environmental monitoring device, called the Watershed Tracker. This device will
allow students to collect real-world data to enhance their understanding of
watershed dynamics. Featuring temperature, light, humidity, and soil moisture
sensors, the Watershed Tracker will be designed to connect to tablets and
smartphones through the audio jack common to all of these devices.