* 1418074
* Collaborative Research:  Testing the Impact of Climate Change on the Greenland Ice Sheet: Combining Past Climate Records with a Coupled Climate and Ice-Sheet Model
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2017
* USD 178,617.00

This project is aimed at understanding the response of the Greenland Ice Sheet
to past climate changes, with the ultimate goal of improving predictions of its
response to future change. The investigators will compile all available data on
the size of the ice sheet at times in the past 20,000 years. They will also
gather data on the history of surface air temperatures, the accumulation rate of
ice, and surrounding ocean temperatures from ice- and sediment core records. The
climate records will be used as inputs to a numerical model of the regional
climate and the Greenland Ice Sheet to investigate the response of the ice sheet
to changes in climate conditions. Direct observations of changes in the
Greenland Ice Sheet only span the past few decades, making it difficult to
identify a trend and distinguish it from natural variability. The relative roles
of oceanic and atmospheric warming in driving Greenland Ice Sheet retreat also
remain poorly constrained and debated. Ascertaining past Greenland Ice Sheet
response to a warming climate can provide important bounds on the rates at which
the ice sheet can retreat and lose mass. The last deglaciation (20 to 6 thousand
years ago) provides a natural experiment for assessing large-scale Greenland Ice
Sheet response to changing conditions including rising atmospheric carbon
dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three fundamental questions will be addressed by
this project. 1) What drove the disparate behavior between west-east margins and
southern margins of the ice sheet during the last deglaciation and how does this
relate to abrupt deglacial climate change? 2) What is the relative importance of
atmospheric versus oceanic warming in causing rapid ice margin retreat during
the last deglaciation? 3) Given the large, sustained deglacial climate warming,
what is the maximum rate that the Greenland Ice Sheet has delivered ice to the
ocean as constrained by the geologic record and how do those rates compare with
ice-sheet model simulations? Addressing these questions will 1) provide
essential insight into how the broader Greenland Ice Sheet behaves in a warming
world, 2) test the sensitivity of terrestrial versus marine ice-margin settings
to warming, and 3) test the fidelity of a Greenland Ice Sheet model that can be
applied to future simulations. The investigators will disseminate scientific
results to the public through lectures and publications in popular science
magazines, and to museums with movies and animations on the Magic Planet
visualization system. The project will train a postdoc and Ph.D. student
(geochronology-data analysis and numerical modeling) in a multi-disciplinary
approach to paleoclimatology, glaciology, glacial geology, and paleoceanography.
Undergraduates will work on the project, with a goal of recruiting under-
represented groups in the geosciences.