* 1418711
* EDU: Developing Open Authentic Case Studies for a MS in Cybersecurity Capstone Course
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robert Gardner, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,468.00

The project will develop a case method capstone course for a new
multidisciplinary Master's degree program in Cybersecurity at the University of
South Florida (USF). It extends a project that focused on developing a capstone
course for an undergraduate program employing the case method pedagogy. That
study demonstrated the feasibility of building a course entirely around
discussions of local case studies and demonstrated positive learning outcomes
using a variety of instruments. The new MS-Cybersecurity program has been
designed as a multidisciplinary offering by collaborating departments of
Information Systems and Decision Sciences; School of Information; Criminology;
and Instructional Technology. The case studies to be developed will all have a
common focus, decision making related to cybersecurity, and will be published as
an open-access textbook. The Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program
funds proposals that address Cybersecurity from a Trustworthy Computing Systems
perspective; a Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences perspective; and
proposals focusing entirely on Cybersecurity Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
fields such as business and education, the constructivist paradigm employed by
the case method has proven to be an effective tool for developing judgment,
problem solving and communication skills for complex situations. The focus of
the capstone curriculum being developed is on improving the decision-making
skills of individuals designing and using Information Technology systems.
Additionally, the prior study found strong evidence that the process of
developing cases can play a pivotal role in strengthening relationships between
researchers, practice and students; this study will allow faculty teaching in
the program to strengthen their ties with Cybersecurity professionals. This
effort will contribute to the development of a repository of open access cases
and teaching materials, and will provide training to a diverse set of faculty
members in the use of case method instruction and case development. Specific
project deliverables include development the Cybersecurity case studies;
workshops offered to faculty members from other institutions; and an open access
textbook that includes the cases and supporting materials along with a
controlled-distribution instructor's manual that pays particular attention to
the effective online use of the cases.