* 1418710
* CAREER: A Generalized Compressive Sensing Approach to Data Acquisition and Ad-Hoc Sensor Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Nazanin Rahnavard, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 334,832.00

The objective of this project is to advance the field of compressive sensing and
broaden its scope into a multitude of new applications, such as ad hoc
networking, by significantly enhancing the efficiency through the utilization of
problem-specific signals and systems properties. The proposed approach is to
design a novel rateless-coding-inspired generalized compressive sensing (GCS)
framework and to integrate it into different stages of sensing, information
processing, and cross-layer designs in the network design
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
bridges the gap between the advanced theoretical research on modern coding and
compressive sensing, as to significantly enhance the efficiency of data
acquisition and ad hoc networking. GCS offers the flexibility of exploiting
problem-specific properties, such as non-uniform sparsity and non-uniform
importance of data in the sensing and recovery phases. This is expected to
result in a significant reduction in sensing and communication costs. Through
cross-layer design of GCS and underlying network protocols, efficient data
acquisition and distributed data storage problems in sensor networks will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal is expected to
have a significant direct impact on advancing the theory and practice of
compressive sensing and an indirect impact on many areas in which compressive
sensing has potential application, such as medical imaging, hyper-spectral
imaging, and bio-informatics. Furthermore, it expected to have an impact on
increasing the participation of under-represented students in the PI's research
group, as well as in promoting engineering education among high school students,
in integration of research and education through curriculum
development/revision, in training graduate students, and in promoting
multidisciplinary research and collaboration through initiating ECE Seminar Day
Program at OSU.