* 1418726
* Collaborative Research: A Climate Station Network for the Chiricahua Sky Island Ecoregion
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Dawn Wilson, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 124,513.00

This collaborative project between the Southwestern Research Station (SWRS) and
the Western Regional Climate Center (WRCC) at the Desert Research Institute
(DRI) will build five high-quality, long-term climate monitoring stations
positioned along an elevational gradient on the eastern and western slopes of
the Chiricahua Mountains. The data collected by these climate stations will be
important both locally to scientists conducting research at the SWRS, and
globally to scientists all over the world to observe both predicted changes in
the distribution and abundance of plants and animals, as well as, the associated
gradients in climate data. Climate change is predicted to be associated with
changes in the distribution and abundance of plants and animals. Various climate
models predict the most dramatic effects of climate change to be apparent along
the slopes of the "Sky Islands" of southeast Arizona. However, climate
monitoring stations are almost entirely lacking in this otherwise well-studied
mountain range. Because of the wide diversity of habitats and organisms easily
accessible in the areas surrounding the Southwestern Research Station (SWRS),
the distributions and abundances of plants and animals of this area have been
well studied for over five decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SWRS is
located in the Chiricahua Mountains, part of a unique complex of about 27
mountain ranges, the Madrean Archipelago/Sky Islands of the southwestern U.S.
Much of the data collected by SWRS scientists already has had direct influence
on the conservation and management of the Madrean Sky Island habitats and
species. The high biodiversity of plants and animals of this diverse area
insures that scientists will continue to be attracted to the SWRS for future and
ongoing studies of the area?s biota. Installation of five climate stations,
spanning the eastern and western slopes of the Chiricahua Mountains and an
encompassing an elevational gradient from 1280 to 2743 m, will allow scientists
to compare their ecological observations to this shared climate data and expand
their questions to include new areas of ecology-climate interactions at
different spatial scales. Access to local climate data by visiting scientists,
students, and teachers will enhance virtually all research and educational
activities at the SWRS. Partnership with the WRCC and its host institution DRI
will expand the use of collected climate measurements to the academic,
governmental, management, and private sectors. Physical geographers and
atmospheric scientists building climate models will benefit from the data
obtained along the elevational gradient of this sky island mountain. For more
information about the Southwestern Research Station, visit their website at
http://research.amnh.org/swrs/.