* 1418825
* An Ecohydrology Monitoring Array for Water Sustainability, Biological Diversity and Integrated Research/Education Programs at the Steele/Burnand Anza-Borrego Desert Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Travis Huxman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 270,822.00

The University of California Irvine is awarded a grant to improve the
environmental sensing capacity supporting research, education, and outreach at
the Steele/Burnand Anza-Borrego Desert Research Center (SBABDRC), a site within
the University of California Natural Reserve System (UCNRS) administered by the
University of California, Irvine (UCI). Funds will be used to build an eco-
hydrology array measuring environmental and water balance characteristics over
the diverse settings and landforms within the Borrego Springs Valley and sites
within Anza-Borrego Desert State Park (ABDSP; a cooperating partner in
administering SBABDRC) along a 1300 m elevation gradient through installation of
seven small stature remote automated weather stations. Data communication and
connectivity at the Research Center will be upgraded and linked to campus based
resources. This infrastructure enhancement is targeting research areas recently
prioritized by NSF, which are motivated by contemporary grand challenges facing
society (such as the future of water resources and impact of non-native species
invasions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eco-hydrology array supported by this grant
will enable measurement of environmental and water balance characteristics for
users of the facility and the diverse projects centered at our site. The eco-
hydrology array will connect specifically to four program areas: (1) academic
research focused on understanding water sustainability in the context of global
change, (2) community engaged research evaluating the impacts of non-native
species on local biodiversity, (3) undergraduate and graduate field experiences
in ecology and evolution, and (4) outreach and engagement activities associated
with teacher training and K-12 curricular enhancement. The integration of data
to our existing environmental portal and server locations at UCI, along with
common collection/portal facilities will provide broad access to the
enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will encourage research that
integrates many potential disciplines utilizing the field station and we will
connect and compliment the growing networks of eco hydrological assessments
throughout the southwestern U.S. (including two Critical Zone Observatories
(criticalzone.org), a number of AmeriFlux sites (Ameriflux.ornl.gov),
elevational arrays such as NevCAM (sensor.nevada.edu), and vegetation change
transects such as the Semiarid Ecohydrological Array, or SECA. This project will
not only serve UCI faculty and students but will also make data available
nationally to entice new users from other universities and the surrounding
community.