* 1418764
* Expansion and modernization of stable isotope analysis capabilities at the University of Texas Marine Science Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* James McClelland, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 349,582.00

The University of Texas Marine Science Institute (UTMSI)
http://www.utmsi.utexas.edu, established in 1941, has a long history of
excellence with respect to innovation and application of stable isotope
techniques in biogeochemical and ecological studies. This project will improve
research infrastructure for stable isotope analyses at the UTMSI through
acquisition of instrumentation as well as renovations to existing space that
will house the instrumentation. A new isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) and
peripheral components will be purchased to improve natural abundance stable
isotope analysis capabilities. In addition, a unique Ammonium Isotope Retention
Time Shift (AIRTS) high performance liquid chromatography system that is used
for measurements of 15N-enriched ammonium in nitrogen process studies at the
Institute will be upgraded. Improvement of stable isotope analysis capabilities
at the UTMSI will advance scientific discovery by supporting more investigators,
using a wider range of stable isotope techniques in their work. The new
instrumentation will enable development and application of a variety of stable
isotope techniques that are pushing the frontiers of biogeochemical and
ecological studies, while enhancing our ability to support internal and external
users that rely on existing analysis capabilities at the Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to education, the improvements will 1)
promote greater training of graduate students and postdoctoral scientists in
stable isotope analysis and application techniques, and 2) support additional
opportunities for undergraduates to employ stable isotopes in research projects.
A new undergraduate education program (Semester by the Sea) initiated in spring
2013 is bringing more undergraduates to the Institute. This program includes a
major research component, and students in the program are encouraged to consider
stable isotope applications as they develop research projects. The project also
includes a commitment to public outreach. Project personnel will work with
ongoing programs at the Institute to share their knowledge and interest in
stable isotope applications with a broader audience. This will include
development of a new food-web oriented module for the Summer Science Camp at
UTMSI that highlights how stable isotopes help scientists understand dietary
relationships.