* 1418422
* Shape and data analysis using computational differential geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Hong-Kai Zhao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2018
* USD 328,860.00

Due to rapid and vast data acquisition by modern technology, experiments and
computer simulations, computational and data analytical approaches have become
increasingly important for many important applications in science and
engineering. An important but challenging task in data representation, analysis
and understanding is to extract information of interest, which includes
intrinsic geometric features and global structures from large data set. The aim
of this project is to introduce advanced mathematical theories and analytical
tools in differential geometry and translate them into efficient computation
algorithms for data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main effort of this
project is to develop new mathematical models and computational tools for a few
important but challenging tasks in 3D modeling and data analysis in higher
dimensions. These models and tools will be utilized to extract and characterize
geometric structures for data analysis in various applications. In particular,
quasi-conformal map and conformal structure will be used for representation and
analysis for surface maps and shape modeling. Intrinsic geometric differential
operators, such as Laplace-Beltrami operator and its eigen-system, will be
explored for point cloud analysis and manifold learning in high dimensions.
Models, methods and computational tools developed in this project will be tested
on benchmark data sets as well as real applications. Interdisciplinary
applications and collaborations with computer scientists and statisticians will
also be pursued.