* 1418123
* Quantifying and modeling the effects of deciduous shrubs and trees on the water balance of Arctic ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Kenneth Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 894,685.00

This project addresses an important question, based on surprising preliminary
findings, about the role of deciduous shrubs and trees in the water balance of
Arctic ecosystems. In the tundra and boreal forest, large amounts of water are
released during a short period (2 to 3 weeks) in spring when the winter's snow
rapidly melts. Most of this snowmelt water flows out through rivers, because the
ground is mostly frozen during snowmelt, while the remaining sizable fraction of
snowmelt water is thought to be lost through evaporation or sublimation, or to
groundwater recharge in those areas where permafrost doesn't prevent it. Uptake
and storage by plants at this time of year has been considered negligible.
Preliminary data from a small watershed in interior Alaska shows that deciduous
trees take up 25-40% of the snowmelt water prior to leaf out and draw from these
stores throughout the summer, including during lengthy dry periods. Preliminary
data also show that arctic deciduous shrub stems rise and fall diurnally as the
snow melts, which the investigators suspect is linked with water uptake, but the
link between shrub water content and snowmelt is unknown. Water uptake by
deciduous trees and shrubs has important ecosystem implications, from the water
balance to climate feedbacks to coping strategies of deciduous vegetation during
dry periods. The observed expansion of deciduous shrubs and trees in Alaska
during the 20th century is likely altering the water balance and Arctic
ecosystem in ways currently not being considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators ask: To what extent do deciduous vegetation (trees and shrubs) use
snowmelt water? What are the consequences of deciduous tree and shrub expansion
on the ecohydrology of northern ecosystems? What are the plant ecological
consequences (such as buffering from weather variability) of the storage and use
of snowmelt water? They propose to characterize shrub and tree physiology (water
uptake, water stress, transpiration, growth, photosynthesis), as well as
environmental variables, including snowmelt, across a climate gradient in
Alaska. These data will be integrated into statistical models that will quantify
the controls on snowmelt water uptake by trees and shrubs, and will quantify the
role of snowmelt water in sustaining physiological activity during dry periods.
The proposal addresses emerging avenues of ecohydrology by quantifying the role
of deciduous plants on the pathways and reservoirs of snowmelt water, and by
assessing the potential for stored snowmelt water to buffer vegetation during
dry periods. The transformative nature of the proposed work lies in
reconsidering the dogma that vegetation plays a minor role in snowmelt
hydrological processes. This reconsideration is salient given the observed
widespread expansion of deciduous trees and shrubs and observed advancing
snowmelt dates. The project would support two early career investigators, a PhD
student, and 3 undergraduate students. Several distinct outreach activities are
proposed, including teacher workshops aimed at enhancing the science curriculum
of local and rural Alaskan K-12 classrooms, a traveling museum exhibit, an art
exhibit featuring the work of the lead PI, and a partnership with a science
writer for statewide dissemination of one article per year in statewide (Alaska)
news outlets.