* 1418780
* Hatfield Marine Science Center Experimental Seawater Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 272,812.00

Oregon State University's Hatfield Marine Science Center (HMSC),
http://hmsc.oregonstate.edu, has been awarded a grant for the construction of a
2256 sq ft Experimental Seawater Facility. The facility will significantly
expand HMSC's capacity for interdisciplinary, collaborative research for
faculty, graduate and undergraduate students - especially in emerging areas of
research including those related to climate change and ocean acidification -
through increased access to wet lab space. HMSC's 1.5 million gallon per day
seawater system has reliably enabled nearly 50 years of teaching and research
excellence and is a critical component of current research by OSU and six
federal and state agencies co-located on the HMSC campus. The Experimental
Seawater Facility increases the immediate value and versatility of the seawater
system by increasing key wet lab research space and enabling real-time
monitoring and experimental manipulation of laboratory seawater and light
environment. The facility and associated instrumentation will provide: 1)
instructional wet lab space for undergraduate and graduate student researchers
in support of current programs and academic program expansion 2) wet lab
research space for short-term research by OSU faculty, graduate students and
visiting scientists without other access to seawater labs 3) wet lab research
space for high-risk or pilot projects for faculty, graduate students and
visiting users which may lead to collaborative, interdisciplinary research on
emerging or critical issues 4) the ability to monitor and manipulate
environmental parameters of laboratory seawater for experimentation,
complimenting existing and planned monitoring of estuarine, nearshore and
oceanic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Experimental Seawater Facility's
multi-purpose design builds on decades of research and teaching success and on
the results of a 2006 NSF planning grant. A portion of the new wet lab space
will be designed and equipped for undergraduate and graduate student researchers
including NSF-funded Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) interns.
Experimental monitoring and manipulation of laboratory seawater will complement
the NSF-funded Ocean Observing Initiative?s (OOI) Endurance Array off the coast
of Newport, which will collect real-time ocean data at a range of spatial and
temporal scales. The facility will also enable new research complementing
several NSF-funded research programs in ocean acidification, an emerging area of
research in the North Pacific. HMSC's extensive outreach and education programs
provide a vehicle for new research on emerging issues to inform and inspire the
larger community through the HMSC Visitor Center, which through NSF funding also
serves as a free-choice learning laboratory and as a COSEE Learning Center.