* 1418378
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Social Interaction and Performance in STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Danielle McNamara, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 226,587.00

This Research on Education and Learning (REAL) project arises from an October
2014 Ideas Lab on Data-intensive Research to Improve Teaching and Learning. The
intentions of that effort were to: (1) bring together researchers from across
disciplines to foster novel, transformative, multidisciplinary approaches to
using the data in large education-related data sets to create actionable
knowledge for improving STEM teaching and learning environments in the medium
term; and (2) revolutionize learning in the longer term. In this project,
researchers from the Educational Testing Service, Columbia University Teachers'
College, Arizona State University, and North Carolina State University will
conduct data-driven, exploratory analyses to identify key places where social
interactions impact learning outcomes in specific learning environments, with
the goal of improving teaching and learning in large-scale STEM
courses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research takes advantage of data traces left
in large-scale blended and online learning environments (including massively
open online courses, or MOOCs). The researchers will develop a comprehensive
model for social learning in the context of such courses that will enable
assessment of both the collaborative needs of individuals within the context of
a class, and the quality of collaborations they are carrying out. Such diagnoses
will allow both instructors and automated systems to provide advice to learners
about the peers they might work with to enhance their learning (e.g., regarding
the kinds of social interactions that will foster better understanding and
development of important disciplinary capabilities). An interdisciplinary team
of investigators with expertise in theory-driven educational data mining,
natural-language processing, psychometrics, social-network analysis, and
computer support for collaborative learning will collaborate to explore when
learners in blended and online classes benefit from social interactions, and to
understand how to identify more and less productive collaborative interactions.
The researchers will use data from three blended and online classes (e.g., log
files capturing collaborative discussions, individual and collaborative
interactions around well-instrumented examples, peer tutoring sessions, pair
programming labs, paired projects) and a variety of data analysis approaches
(e.g., text analysis, machine learning) to determine: (1) which cognitive,
social, and affective dimensions of need and interaction can be identified from
available data; (2) which analyses are useful in providing action-oriented
collaboration advice; and (3) what additional types of data may be needed for
making such recommendations. This exploration will be grounded in theories of
social interactions for learning (e.g., self-explanation, dialectic with oneself
and others, zone of proximal development, social learning theory of Bandura,
peripheral and centripetal participation).