* 1418149
* Computer Science in Secondary Schools (CS3): Studying Context, Enactment, and Impact
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Marie Bienkowski, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2019
* USD 3,128,654.00

Computational thinking is an important set of 21st century knowledge and skills
that has implications for the heavily technological world in which we live.
Multiple industries indicate the under supply of those trained to be effective
in the computer science workforce. In addition, there are increasing demands for
broadening the participation in the computer science workforce by women and
members of minority populations. SRI International will examine the
relationships among the factors that influence the implementation of the
Exploring Computer Science (ECS), a pre-Advanced Placement curriculum that
prepares students for further study in computer science. SRI will work in
partnership with the ECS curriculum developers, teachers, and the nonprofit
Code.org who are involved in the scaling of ECS. This study elucidates how
variation in curricular implementation influences student learning and
determines not only what works, but also for whom and under what
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SRI will conduct a pilot study in which they
develop, pilot, and refine measures as they recruit school districts for the
implementation study. The subsequent implementation study will be a 2 year
examination of curriculum enactment, teacher practice, and evidence of student
learning. Because no comparable curriculum currently exists, the study will
examine the conditions needed to implement the ECS curriculum in ways that
improve student computational thinking outcomes rather than determine whether
the ECS curriculum is more effective than other CS-related curricula. The study
will conduct two kinds of analyses: 1) an analysis of the influence of ECS on
student learning gains, and 2) an analysis of the relationship between
classroom-level implementation and student learning gains. Because of the
clustered nature of the data (students nested within classrooms nested within
schools), the project will use hierarchical linear modeling to examine the
influence of the curriculum.