* 1418964
* Fast high-order methods for electrohydrodynamics of vesicle suspensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Shravan Veerapaneni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 216,637.00

The objective of this project is to develop novel computational tools for
simulating the electrohydrodynamics (EHD) of vesicle suspensions. Vesicles
enclose a viscous fluid and they share the same structural component of a
biological cell, the bilipid membrane. Hence, their EHD has been a paradigm for
understanding how general biological cells behave under an electric field. The
dynamics of this system is characterized by a competition between viscous,
elastic, and electric stresses on the individual membranes and the nonlocal
hydrodynamic interactions. A number of technological applications call for
better understanding of EHD including targeted drug delivery, gene transfection
and lab-on-a-chip design. The proposed work will enable researchers to learn how
the physics at micro-scale (e.g., single particle deformation) alters the macro-
scale behavior of dense suspensions (e.g., electrorheology). In addition, this
project will undertake educational, mentoring, and outreach activities that are
expected to have a broad impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical model
for multiple-vesicle EHD consists of the incompressible Stokes equation for the
fluid surrounding the membranes combined with a far-field boundary condition and
a kinematic condition at the fluid-vesicle interfaces. The classical Taylor-
Melcher leaky-dielectric framework models the electric response of individual
vesicles and the Helfrich energy combined with local inextensibility models
their elastic response. The proposed numerical methods will be based on boundary
integral equation formulations, which avoid volume discretizations. Fast, high-
order methods will be developed for solving the coupled boundary integral
equations for the vesicle positions and their trans-membrane electric
potentials. Computational challenges faced by the vesicle EHD are shared by
other particulate flows such as drop, bubble and capsule flows. Therefore, the
methods proposed here could more generally be applied to several other problems
of practical importance. This award by the Computational Mathematics Program of
the Division of Mathematical Sciences is co-funded by the Particulate and
Multiphase Processes program in the CBET Division of the ENG Directorate.