* 1418966
* Collaborative Research:  Boundary Integral Simulations for Solvent Effects in Protein Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robert Krasny, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 164,869.00

Proteins are large biomolecules each consisting of a unique sequence of amino
acids with a complex three-dimensional structure. Proteins perform many
essential functions in living organisms, and some diseases are associated with
improper protein structure. Hence there is great interest among biomedical
researchers in understanding the structure, dynamics, and function of proteins.
In their natural environment proteins are surrounded by water with dissolved
salt; the protein/solvent interactions are critical to proper function in the
organism. Laboratory experiments are used to study these protein/solvent
interactions, but computer simulations are also increasingly employed to
complement the experiments. The investigators will use their expertise in
computational mathematics to develop improved numerical algorithms and software
for computing protein/solvent interactions, with potential impact on areas such
as protein folding and synthetic drug design. Several applications will be
studied in collaboration with bioscientists. The software developed will be
posted in open source format on a public website and will be installed in a
widely distributed molecular simulation software package for use by bio-
computational researchers. The project will train a postdoc and a graduate
student in this important branch of scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop improved numerical algorithms and
software for computing electrostatic solvent effects which play a key role in
determining protein structure, dynamics, and function. Computing these effects
is challenging, and implicit solvent models based on the Poisson-Boltzmann (PB)
equation for the electrostatic potential are a popular approach to reducing the
cost. However, grid-based PB simulations encounter difficulties due to the
singular point charges representing the protein, the complex geometry and
discontinuous dielectric constant across the molecular surface, and the
unbounded computational domain. In previous NSF-supported research, the
investigators developed a new treecode-accelerated boundary integral (TABI)
potential solver with improved accuracy and efficiency, low memory usage, and
straightforward parallelization. The current project has the following
components. 1. (algorithm development) The investigators will extend the current
TABI potential solver to compute the electrostatic solvation forces needed for
molecular dynamics simulations. This requires careful discretization of singular
integrals representing the induced charge on the molecular surface separating
the low-dielectric protein domain from the high-dielectric solvent domain. 2.
(parallel computing) The investigators will develop a new parallel TABI solver
for graphics processing units (GPUs), taking advantage of the treecode's low
memory and communication requirements. 3. (biological applications) The
investigators will apply the new TABI potential solver and force driver to study
solvent effects in proteins. Applications to be studied in collaboration with
bioscientists include: (a) pH-dependent properties of a bactericidal lectin
protein; (b) structural changes of a neurotransmitter receptor in an ionic
environment which is relevant to an autoimmune disease; (c) extension of TABI to
incorporate polarizable atomic multipole solutes.