* 1418386
* Novel Paradigms in Geometric Modeling of Large and High-Dimensional Data Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Gilad Lerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

The principal investigator and his collaborators aim to develop effective data
modeling paradigms that are sufficiently simple for statistical inference.
Current scientific investigations, as well as industrial applications, produce
and rely on massive, high-dimensional and possibly corrupted data sets. A major
focus of applied mathematicians and statisticians in this area has been on
quantitative geometric data modeling. In order to effectively analyze large data
and obtain meaningful statistical inference, the underlying geometric models
need to be sufficiently simple. The proposal suggests mathematical paradigms for
such effective geometric models. It plans to develop rigorous mathematical
theory for these paradigms combined with carefully designed numerical strategies
addressing specific and important applications. Despite the recent progress in
this area, there are many open directions, several of which this research
project addresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposal focuses
on several important directions of geometric data modeling. One direction aims
to address modern issues in single robust subspace modeling with respect to new
paradigms of learning and computation that have hardly been addressed so far in
this setting. Another direction will explore important issues in modeling data
by multiple subspaces or manifolds with new paradigms and perspectives. The
proposal will also emphasize specific paradigms of low-rank and sparse modeling,
which are induced by important applications, such as approximate nearest
subspace for object recognition, improved feature tracking, structure from
motion in computer vision, and sparse modeling in the atmospheric sciences.