* 1418235
* Moving Next Generation Science Standards into Practice: A Middle School Ecology Unit and Teacher Professional Development Model
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Barbara Nagle, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,163,394.00

Schools and teachers face unprecedented challenges in meeting the ambitious
goals of integrating core interdisciplinary science ideas with science and
engineering practices as described in new standards. The American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH), in collaboration with the University of Connecticut
(UConn), and the Lawrence Hall of Science (the Hall), will develop a middle
school ecology unit and related teacher professional development that will help
high-need and urban middle school students, including English Language Learners,
understand these ideas and related practices. Teachers will be supported through
professional development that is directly linked to the curriculum and is
designed to develop their science content knowledge as well as their knowledge
of how to teach the curriculum. The project builds on existing AMNH resources
that include video and text passages supported with literacy strategies, online
interactive data tools to plan and carry out investigations, and prior research
on these resources used with teachers in professional development and with
students in classrooms. In addition to serving the schools, teachers and
students who directly participate, the project's deliverables include the
ecology unit, teacher professional development, assessment tools, and a model
for designing such comprehensives science programs that relate to NGSS.

The curriculum unit will be modeled after the Biological Sciences Curriculum
Study (BSCS) 5E model that will use the 5 Phases (Engage, Explore, Explain,
Elaborate, and Evaluate) for students to work through with each of five themes:
Ecological Communities, Food Webs, A River Ecosystem, Zebra Mussel Invasion, and
Monitoring Human Impact. Teachers will participate in 12 days of professional
development that will introduce the program's pedagogical approach (the 5E
model) and how it reflects NGSS, with teachers having significant time to learn
the science, try out the activities, learn how to facilitate the program,
provide feedback on the program as part of the evaluation, and reflect on their
practice. The initial approach to the curriculum and teacher professional
development will be designed in Year 1 and then iteratively revised and
evaluated in Years 2-4 through formative evaluation that focuses on curriculum
PD, and measures of student and teacher outcomes. The evaluation will assess the
contribution of teacher science and pedagogical knowledge to increases in
student knowledge. The evaluation findings and assessment tools developed for
the project will provide the foundation for a future efficacy study. The project
is one of a relatively small number of projects funded through NSF's DRK-12
program that directly addresses the need for NGSS-related learning resources.
The project's learning resources, assessment tools, and model for designing
NGSS-related and comprehensive science programs will be shared through
professional publications, conference and workshop presentations, and liaison
with organizations active in developing new resources bring NGSS into practice.