* 1418689
* Highly efficient and accurate numerical schemes  for nonlinear gradient flows with energy stability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Cheng Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 189,998.00

The goal of this project is to study efficient and robust tools to numerically
simulate certain nonlinear gradient flows. These numerical schemes will yield
highly efficient solvers to study the complicated long-time dynamics of
different models in physics, materials engineering, and biological sciences.
This work is expected to have a direct and immediate impact on many scientific
disciplines. The large time scale simulation of these nonlinear gradient flows
is vital for understanding phase transformations of materials at the atomic and
nanometer scales, the complex processes in biological growth and development,
and the complicated topological change involved in two-phase flows, etc. Some
numerical schemes developed by the PI have been efficiently applied in large
scale, multi-discipline scientific projects; a collaborative part of the project
will leverage expertise in angiogenesis analysis of tumor growth simulation and
is expected to lead to significant impact in the medical sciences community. The
PI will make the computational tools available in the public domain so that
researchers will have direct access to some of the developed algorithms. Through
work in the project, a graduate student will receive extensive training in high-
performance scientific computing, numerical mathematics, and modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed gradient flow models, the physical energy
can be decomposed into purely convex and concave parts. The PI considers convex
splitting (CS) numerical schemes, including both the 1st and 2nd order accurate
splittings in time, and finite difference, finite element and pseudospectral
approximations in space. A major challenge is designing truly efficient solvers
for these highly nonlinear CS schemes. For example, a direct nonlinear multigrid
solver can be applied. As an alternate approach, linear iterative algorithms are
proposed in this work, and a contraction mapping property is expected for these
linear iteration based solvers. In other words, although the formulated CS
scheme is nonlinear, a linear iteration based algorithm can be used to
approximate solutions of this highly nonlinear system with a geometric
convergence rate. A detailed comparison between a nonlinear solver and linear
iteration algorithm will also be conducted.