* 1418202
* Collaborative Research:  Semiparametric ODE Models for Complex Gene Regulatory Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Guang Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2017
* USD 46,022.00

Gene regulation plays a fundamental role in cellular activities and functions,
such as growth, division, and responses to environmental stimuli. The regulatory
interactions among genes and their expression products (RNAs and proteins)
intertwine into complex and dynamic gene regulatory networks (GRNs) in cells.
Recent technical breakthrough has enabled large-scale experimental studies of
GRNs. A central question in GRN analysis is to elucidate network topologies and
dynamics that give rise to biological properties at study. However, the
magnitude and complexity of these network data pose serious challenges in
extracting useful information from within. This project aims to develop
statistical and computational tools to reveal underlying structure, dynamics,
and functionality of GRNs. New statistical theory and inference methods will be
developed to tackle theoretical and computational challenges in modeling and
analyzing large-scale GRNs. Results from this research will establish a novel
framework to dissect dynamical and complex biological networks, and particularly
a GRN that regulates cell proliferation in our case
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional statistical analysis of GRNs typically
assumes that interactions between network nodes can be described by linear
functions or low-order polynomials. However, biological processes are usually
complex and molecular interactions between network nodes may not be accurately
described by simple functions. The main goal of this project is to develop novel
and flexible statistical approaches to dissect and reconstruct GRNs by learning
nonlinear interactions from time-course experimental data, with either
continuous- or discrete-valued gene expression. Specifically, we will develop
new modeling and analysis approaches to study GRNs using semiparametric ordinary
differential equations (ODEs), and will develop state of art computational tools
to characterize the structures and dynamics of GRNs, to help scientists address
crucial cellular systems regulated by GRNs. The project has two parts. The first
part focuses on Methods and Theory, consisting of three aims: (1) to develop new
and automated statistical procedures for studying local patterns and dynamic
structures in large and complex GRNs; (2) to establish valid statistical
inferences on topological features and regulatory interactions of GRNs; and (3)
to develop efficient computational algorithms and software for analyzing large-
scale GRNs. Developed methods from this research will provide valuable tools for
modeling the topologies and dynamics of GRNs using ODEs. In the second part, we
will focus on real data applications. Specifically, we will apply newly
developed tools in the first part to analyze a retinoblastoma (Rb)-E2F gene
network, which plays a key role in controlling cell proliferation and the gene
regulation within.