* 1418804
* A Practical Approach to Rothe's Method:  Method of Lines Transpose
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Andrew Christlieb, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 205,000.00

Many important equations in Physics, Chemistry and Materials Science exhibit a
range of critical time scales. Generally, behaviors break up into a range of
fast, medium, and slow time scales. Take for example the process of casting a
polymer membrane that undergoes phase separation during the casting process.
Polymers of this type include fuel cell membranes, separators in modern
batteries, and polymer based solar cells. The fastest time scale is the spinodal
region (an initial coursing process during casting) which might be pico to micro
seconds. Then comes a longer transient phase, which is on the order of tens of
minutes to hours. This transient is when the system settles down and the
membrane starts to take its final form. The overall casting process can take
days to complete, dictating how well the membrane will work. The state of the
art for modeling these processes is to use direct simulation of casting by
modeling the individual atoms in the system using molecular dynamics. However,
even on the biggest super computers, the best methods can only simulate hundreds
of pico seconds. To obtain accurate models of these systems over these time
scales, a new class of models, functionalized Cahn Hilliard, was proposed.
However, this type of model is very challenging to solve, requiring both
temporal and spatial accuracy over a wide range of scales. To accommodate this
model, we are developing a new class of numerical methods which take advantage
of the multi-core computing revolution. If successful, this new class of
numerical methods will facilitate rapid simulations of problems we could only
experimentally interrogate in the past. The overall goal in developing this new
class of numerical methods for challenging models of this nature is to move the
process of design away from an Edisonian approach to one of thoughtful design
process. With reliable numerical tools, the process of design can be greatly
enhanced. A key example of this is the materials and wing design of the new
Boeing 777 aircraft, which was designed primarily through computer simulation.

This proposal centers on the development of O(N), semi-analytic, high order,
implicit solvers based on the method of lines transpose, otherwise known as
Rothe's method, for a large class of PDEs. The methods are motivated by the PIs
work on developing an A-Stable to all orders in time implicit method for
acoustic problems with a variable wave speed. The method starts by discretizing
the PDE in time, then solving the resulting non-oscillatory Helmholtz equation
using a fast summation methodology, i.e., we use the free space Green's function
to invert the operators followed by applying a boundary integral to correct the
free space solution. To generate high order solutions, a new approach based on
successive convolution is introduced. The proposal centers on the extension of
the core algorithm, based on successive convolution, to a wide class of linear
and non-linear PDEs. A novel method for multi-level domain decomposition (DD) is
presented. The DD method offers a possible path for developing scalable versions
of the algorithm for distributed multi-core platforms.