* 1418020
* Collaborative Research: Learning Linkages: Integrating Data Streams of Multiple Modalities and Timescales
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Bruce Sherin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 210,287.00

This Research on Education and Learning (REAL) project arises from an October
2014 Ideas Lab on Data-intensive Research to Improve Teaching and Learning. The
intentions of that effort were to (1) bring together researchers from across
disciplines to foster novel, transformative, multidisciplinary approaches to
using the data in large education-related data sets to create actionable
knowledge for improving STEM teaching and learning environments in the medium
term; and (2) revolutionize learning in the longer term. In this project,
researchers from Carnegie-Mellon University, Wested, Arizona State University,
and Northwestern University will collaborate to enhance understanding of
influences on learning, and improve teaching and learning in high school and
middle school STEM classes. To accomplish this, they will leverage the latest
tools for data processing and many different streams of data that can be
collected in technology-rich classrooms to (1) identify classroom factors that
affect learning and (2) explore how to use that data to automatically track
development of students' understanding and capabilities over time.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Two forces are poised to transform research on learning. First, more
and more student work is conducted on computers and online, producing vast
amounts of learning-related data. At the same time, advances in computing, data
mining, and learning analytics are providing new tools for the collection,
analysis, and representation of these data. Together, the available data and
analytical tools enable smart and responsive systems that personalize learning
experiences for individual learners. The PIs aim to collect highly enriched data
that go far beyond typical computer data capture, leveraging the latest tools
for data processing to generate new insights about STEM teaching and learning.
Working to maximize the potential while mitigating the risks of automated data
collection and analysis, they will: (1) collect and integrate diverse sources of
data including log files, videos, and written artifacts from across eight
different two-week enactments of two different computer supported learning
environments (one used in middle school math and one in high school science);
and (2) compare analyses of log-file data with analyses of integrated datasets
to understand the possibilities and limitations in using log-file data for
assessment of student learning and proficiency. The collaborators expect their
findings will inform both theories and practical recommendations applicable
across a wide range of disciplines and settings.