* 1418012
* NeTS: Small: RUI: On-Demand Spectrum Access: Application-Oriented Dynamic Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 12/04/2013,08/31/2018
* Chunsheng Xin, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2018
* USD 453,687.00

With the proliferated growth of wireless communication services, the radio
spectrum has become a precious resource. On the other hand, many licensed
spectrum bands are considerably under-utilized in both time and spatial domains.
This situation has motivated dynamic spectrum access to increase spectrum
utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a novel application-
oriented dynamic spectrum access model, termed on-demand spectrum access (ODSA),
to capitalize on recent spectrum policies evolution, while eliminate technical
barriers bothering the existing dynamic spectrum access model. We consider a
spectrum service provider to offer on-demand spectrum services to users, such
that users can dynamically set up application-oriented virtual topologies to
carry out specific applications. This project will develop optimal or near-
optimal spectrum allocation algorithms, and novel techniques to improve spectrum
sharing and increase spectrum utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed
algorithms, techniques, and architectures have the potential to affect the
spectrum authorities on policy reform of spectrum management, and affect the
design, deployment, and operation of future wireless communication systems, to
result in significant economical, societal, and public safety impacts. This
project also offers an excellent opportunity to promote broadening participation
of underrepresented minority students in research and education, by directly
supporting underrepresented minority students and outreach activities.