* 1418738
* UC Santa Barbara Marine Laboratory SCUBA Compressor Improvement
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 147,455.00

The University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB) is awarded a grant to replace
an obsolete SCUBA air compressor with an upgraded model that supplies both air
as well as mixed gas nitrox. The UCSB marine laboratory (http://msi.ucsb.edu)
supports the largest research diving program in the United States with faculty
and students conducting National Science Foundation (NSF) funded research across
a variety of campus departments including: Ecology, Evolution and Marine Biology
(EEMB), Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology (MCDB), Geography,
Geology, Physics, and Engineering as well as the Marine Science Institute, Bren
School of Environmental Science and Management, and the Earth Research
Institute. An upgraded SCUBA air compressor that provides air and nitrox gas
will dramatically increase the safety of the campus diving program, produce more
educated and capable research divers and increase the efficiency of research by
allowing for longer bottom times and shorter surface intervals between research
dives. Nitrox diving requires added training in physiology, safety, and
equipment. Having this resource available allows the campus diving program to
increase its level of American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) diver
training above industry standards as well as improve our training collaborations
with other educational institutions.

The UCSB marine diving community that will be supported by the new SCUBA
compressor collaborates with local non-profits, educational institutions, county
and state authorities, and community outreach organizations. Providing a safer
and more accessible research diving program at UCSB through upgraded equipment
has far reaching effects on a local, regional, and even global scale. Research
divers work in a myriad of specialties that include ocean acidification, kelp
forest ecology, biomaterials, fisheries, management and sustainability. The lab
also provides resources to visiting researchers, both domestic and foreign, and
contributes to a multitude of education and outreach programs as far reaching as
Japan. As the scientific world evolves the UCSB marine lab and diving program
continues to stay at the forefront helping to support new and often logistically
difficult research programs.