* 1418822
* Discontinuous Petrov Galerkin (DPG) Method with Optimal Test Functions. Space-Time Formulations and Elements of Irregular Shapes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Leszek Demkowicz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* matthias gobbert
* 06/30/2017
* USD 235,014.00

The project focuses on the development of a new technique for simulating
complicated physical and engineering processes with computers - the
Discontinuous Petrov Galerkin (DPG) method. The DPG methodology has the
potential to transform existing Finite Element software at US National Labs and
industry. Without undermining the logic of existing codes, the method asks for a
complete overhaul of local operations (on the element level) utilizing emerging
multicore architectures. The method will have a lasting impact on software
development for difficult problems arising in applications which require high
accuracy simulations. Application areas targeted in this work include aerospace
engineering (transonic and supersonic flows), geomechanics and bioengineering
(implants, imaging of soft tissues). On the application side, the project builds
on collaboration with Sandia and Argonne National Laboratories, Ben Gurion
University and Boeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on two research directions: (a) DPG space time elements, and (b)
use of elements with irregular shapes. The DPG method minimizes residuals in the
dual norm corresponding to a prespecified test norm. Computation of the residual
requires inversion of the Riesz operator in the test space. With the use of
broken test spaces and localizable test norms, the inversion can be done
element-wise using standard Galerkin and "enriched" spaces. With the error of
inverting the Riesz operator controlled locally, i.e. on the element level, the
method automatically guarantees discrete stability for any well-posed problem in
the sense of classic theory of closed operators. The methodology leads to
uniform stability for singular perturbation problems and, being a minimization
method, does not suffer from any preasymptotic instabilities. The residual is
computed rather than estimated and provides a basis for automatic adaptivity.
The first focus area deals with space-time elements for convection-dominated
problems with applications to compressible and incompressible Navier-Stokes (NS)
equations in two space dimensions. The second line of research investigates the
sensitivity of the method to element shapes with a view to using elements of
arbitrary polyhedral shapes. This part of the project will be done in the
context of linear elasticity and hyperelasticity in three space dimensions with
applications to geomechanics and bioengineering. The proposed work includes both
analysis and semi-professional software development. The project builds on
existing codes and joint computational effort with Argonne and Sandia National
Laboratories.