* 1418714
* Collaborative Research:  Computational techniques for nonlinear joint inversion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jodi Mead, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 270,000.00

An accurate representation of the Earth's subsurface is needed to manage natural
resources such as groundwater and to monitor pollutants such as those from
industrial landfills. Geophysical exploration techniques are non-invasive
strategies for imaging the subsurface. In these approaches, electric fields are
induced into the subsurface and the subsequent decay response is measured. These
measurements are converted into information about the subsurface by combining
them with a physical model in an inversion methodology. It is often the case
that these problems are mathematically ill-posed because the measurements and
mathematical model provide inconsistent or incomplete information. This project
will provide a new method of electromagnetic geophysical characterization that
combines complex resistivity and ground-penetrating radar measurements,
integrating material properties across a vast range of frequency bands: 102 -
109 Hz. This range of information will be combined in a joint inversion that
offers more observational information than is traditionally used to image the
subsurface. We will accommodate inconsistent information by appropriately
weighting measurements and models with experimental statistics. The algorithms
developed under this project are computationally efficient and can be used with
large data sets or complex mathematical models because they are grounded in
modern numerical linear algebra techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regularizing
solutions for ill-posed linear inverse problems have been widely studied with
respect to the impact of the choice and relevant weighting of applied
regularizers. Yet, in the context of the solution of ill-posed nonlinear inverse
problems the impact of stabilizing a Jacobian inversion within a Newton update,
which effectively regularizes the solution, appears to be less well-appreciated.
In addition, Lagrange parameters that connect one or more models and data for
joint or multiple inversion, and control the relationship between components of
an inversion process, may be chosen in a somewhat ad-hoc manner. The
computational cost of generating a convergent sequence of solutions in the
linear framework limits serious consideration of most linear approaches in the
nonlinear framework. This project transforms the solution of relevant nonlinear
problems by applying techniques that appropriately include physically based
modeling constraints, and choosing regularization parameters based on underlying
noise statistics in data. This methodology opens efficient avenues for
incorporating uncertainty in solutions of nonlinear problems by emphasizing
solution techniques that permit analysis of the propagation of intrinsic
measurement and numerical error through the solution process. Thus the
underlying computational algorithms have the potential for significant impact
beyond the specifics of this project.