* 1418677
* Krylov Multigrid Methods for Eigenvalues and Linear Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ronald Morgan, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

The characteristic values (eigenvalues) associated with a matrix are important
throughout science. For an airplane, eigenvalues give the natural frequencies of
vibration, and thus knowledge of eigenvalues can be used to prevent destructive
resonance. Eigenvalues are computed for buildings in earthquake zones for
similar purposes, and eigenvalues are employed in a wide variety of other
contexts as well, for example in finding the energy levels of atoms and
molecules. As mathematical models become more accurate and sophisticated, it
becomes necessary to compute eigenvalues of ever larger matrices, requiring
increasing computational time. The plan for this project is to take advantage of
different sizes of matrices that are developed by placing different size grids
on the domain of the problem. By doing much of the work on a smaller matrix,
there is potential to substantially reduce the computational expense. Another
application of eigenvalues is to improve convergence of systems of linear
equations. This project will look at how eigenvalues from a grid with fewer
points can effectively speed up the convergence for an iterative linear
equations solver on a grid with many points. This project has potential impact
in many areas of science, since many scientific applications lead to partial
differential equations that are solved with grid-based eigenvalue
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New methods are studied for large eigenvalue
problems and systems of linear equations. The methods combine multigrid with
Krylov iterations in order to solve difficult problems. Regular multigrid
methods are for differential equations that are solved on a grid, and they cycle
through different grid sizes. They struggle for some problems (such as
indefinite or too nonsymmetric). The proposed methods are more robust in that
they can be effective in situations where regular multigrid fails. For
eigenvalue problems, a method is proposed that computes eigenvalues on a coarse
grid and improves them on the fine grid. An Arnoldi-type method is used that,
unlike standard Arnoldi methods, can accept initial approximate eigenvectors. It
is planned to develop and test this approach including for multiple grid levels.
Also needed is analysis to explain why fine grid convergence unexpectedly
matches that of regular Arnoldi. Near-Krylov theory will be developed for this.
Iterative linear equations solvers suffer slow convergence when there are small
eigenvalues. The plan is to use approximate eigenvectors from the coarse grid to
essentially remove eigenvalues and improve the convergence. This approach can be
used on preconditioned systems including with multigrid preconditioning. There
is potential to very significantly improve computations for difficult eigenvalue
problems and linear equations.