* 1418256
* Linking Glacier Discharge and Ocean Circulation at the Edge of a Tidewater Glacier Using New Measurement Techniques
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Fiammetta Straneo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 814,081.00

Improved predictions of future mass loss from Greenland are essential to
resolving issues of global concern, such as sea-level rise and the freshening of
the North Atlantic. Such predictions are hampered by a poor understanding of
processes occurring at the face of glaciers that terminate in the marine waters
of fjords. Data collection in such locales is difficult and dangerous, because
the glaciers are intermittently calving icebergs. Using other funding, the
scientists involved in this project have collected two unique data sets from
near a glacier face in Greenland and propose to analyze these data. A successful
and insightful project will transform the manner in which we model and observe
these regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an
interdisciplinary team of oceanographers, glaciologists and engineers, including
a graduate student and a post-doctoral associate who will benefit from exposure
to the diverse methods to be used in this interdisciplinary science project. A
multimedia Ice Sheet / Ocean Interaction exhibit at the MIT Museum to run for
the duration of this project, along with two public museum lectures by project
personnel, will provide dedicated and widely accessible public dissemination of
the research methodology and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will provide a detailed description of the dynamics within the ice/ocean
boundary layer of a medium-sized glacier in west Greenland, whose margins are
characterized by turbulent plumes fed by subglacial discharge, as well as more
quiescent regions. The data, collected over two summer seasons (one with
exceptional melt) using private funds, include unique measurements within 100 m
of the ice front taken from two autonomous vehicles (one surface and one
underwater) and moorings deployed by helicopter. Ocean property and velocity
data will be used to characterize the spatial and temporal variability of the
near-ice dynamics and will be compared with existing theories. This analysis
will be complemented by glaciological, meteorological and climate model data to
constrain the frontal position, catchment size, glacier velocity, surface
meltwater production and runoff. A key objective is to characterize the
parameter regime in order to constrain future modeling. A second objective is to
evaluate and provide feedback on the use of new technology to overcome the
challenges of observations in this region, a requirement for future
oceanographic and glaciological investigations.