* 1418064
* Collaborative Research: Combining Arctic Observing Network Observations and Remote Sensing Data to Understand Sea Ice Mass Balance and Albedo Feedbacks in a Changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Eric Skyllingstad, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 160,252.00

Arctic sea ice is undergoing significant and accelerating change, which has been
observed in increasing detail over the past several decades. Stakeholders in the
Arctic and beyond are impacted by the cascading effects that these changes have
on resource accessibility, ecosystem health, and earth?s physical climate
system. Planning mitigation and adaptation strategies requires improvements in
the ability to predict the arctic climate system. Confounding predictive model
development are large gaps that remain in the understanding of the role albedo
feedbacks are playing in sea ice loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve the understanding the impacts of solar energy absorption and
partitioning on ice mass balance by tracking Arctic Observing Network (AON) sea
ice sites as they move through space and time, using the rich datasets being
collected at the sites as case studies. The approach integrates AON data with
measurements from prior field campaigns, atmospheric reanalysis products, and
high resolution remote sensing data using a 3D resolved sea ice-ocean mixed
layer coupled model. The objectives are to quantify the deposition of solar
energy within a 10x10km study domain around the sites with meter-scale
resolution, identify the fate of that solar energy over time (e.g. ocean storage
vs. ice bottom melt vs. lateral melt), and improve the ability of our resolved
scale model to represent the processes controlling solar absorption and fate.
The model explicitly represents critical ice and ocean processes such as melt
pond formation, brine drainage, freshwater balance, and upper ocean
stratification, providing a tool for data integration that can account for all
first order processes impacting radiative transfer and heat storage. Important
gaps in initialization datasets will be addressed by an ensemble modeling
approach. Iterative comparison of site observations with model states will
inform the selection of poorly constrained initial conditions, evaluate system
sensitivity, and allow testing of improved model parameterizations for processes
such as pond evolution.