* 1418960
* Numerical methods for non-Newtonian fluid structure interaction problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Hyesuk Lee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 206,248.00

This research project is focused on the stable and efficient numerical
approximation of equations describing the flow of a non-Newtonian fluid
interacting with an elastic structure. Such fluid flows are ubiquitous in our
everyday lives, from the flow of blood in our bodies to flow in industrial
processes such as pharmaceutical blending and microfluidics. This theoretical
investigation will provide a solid foundation for the further development of
numerical algorithms for such systems. The research project will also broaden
the mathematical basis for the numerical simulation of non-Newtonian fluid flow
in physically realistic settings.

The goal of this research project is the development and analysis of stable and
efficient numerical schemes for non-Newtonian fluid structure interactions.
There has been significant mathematical research for Newtonian fluid flow
problems, but to date few investigations of non-Newtonian flows. The systems
studied in this project involve coupled domains representing multi-physics
behavior. This increases the numerical complexity as both stress and velocity
must be resolved in the domains, and the strong interaction between the
governing equations requires solution algorithms that achieve optimal
convergence rates for efficiency while splitting the operators. Because of the
large number of unknowns required to compute an accurate approximation of non-
Newtonian (in particular viscoelastic) fluids, there is a need to develop
efficient solvers for these problems. This research will contribute to the
development and rigorous analysis of stability and accuracy properties of
numerical methods for non-Newtonian fluid structure interactions.