* 1418742
* Rational Geometric Splines for Isogeometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Marian Neamtu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 219,897.00

Modern engineering applications, such as computer-aided design and manufacturing
of aircraft and auto parts, demand a surface representation methodology that can
be used with so-called unstructured meshes, which are typically required for
modeling of complex geometric shapes on a digital computer. This research
project will address theoretical questions concerning recently introduced
parametric surfaces for approximating solutions of partial differential
equations. The research involves areas critical to many industries, such as the
aircraft and car manufacturing industries and others, and it has the potential
to lead to significant cost savings for these industries. Although the proposed
research will be conducted mainly in the context of engineering applications,
the fields of computer-aided design and finite element analysis span many other
disciplines, including medicine, biology, art, architecture, scientific
visualization, and crude oil and natural gas exploration. The results of this
project will advance scientific discovery, which may contribute to increased
competitiveness of U.S.-based industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
address theoretical questions concerning recently introduced parametric
surfaces, called RAGS - Rational Geometric Splines, and their utility in
Isogeometric Analysis for approximating solutions of partial differential
equations. RAGS are piecewise rational functions that can be used to model
surfaces of arbitrary topology from unstructured meshes. The project will
investigate the applicability of RAGS in representing finite-element spaces and
their effectiveness in approximating solutions of differential equations
numerically. In particular, one goal of the proposed project will be to
determine whether RAGS can successfully compete with and/or complement the
current technology used in Isogeometric Analysis, namely NURBS (Non Uniform
Rational B-splines) and their generalization, T-splines. The objective is to
develop tools for Isogeometric Analysis that are more versatile and robust than
NURBS. The PI and collaborators will develop and test new methods for spline-
based surfaces and the associated finite-element spaces that are mathematically
sound and computationally tractable. The project will also explore how a
successful synergy of disciplines, ranging from the classical approximation
theory to industrial computer-aided design and engineering, can be achieved to
advance the understanding of geometric models and their analysis. The research
will also have an important educational component: graduate students will be
exposed to interesting and relevant problems of interdisciplinary nature.