* 1418333
* Collaborative Proposal:  A Data-Intensive Exploration of the Links Between SES and STEM Learning Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Anna Gassman-Pines, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 353,273.00

The links between family SES and students' learning, in STEM and other
disciplines, is well noted in the literature. However, the nature of the data
that has been used for these studies is quite coarse grained and is increasingly
hard to get as schools are no longer required to determine who is eligible for
free and reduced-price lunch. The researchers in this project will use
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or food stamps data utilization
data as a proxy for socioeconomic status (SES) to determine the utility of such
data. In addition, educators are increasingly exhorted to use data to inform
decision-making, though the data available and the data representations are not
always sufficient for educator use. The collaborative interaction between
researchers collecting and organizing data and stakeholders who are brought
together to make sense of the data provides the strong context in which better
interpretations of data are supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers in
this exploratory study funded as part of the Ideas Lab for Data Intensive
Research will examine the relationships among fluctuations in patterns of
students' SES measured by daily transaction data using SNAP data and multiple
STEM achievement, behavioral referral, and attendance outcomes. The researchers
will also examine the extent to which the relationships identified can be
visualized in ways that have utility to various stakeholders including school
staff and those who work in youth-serving organizations. Three research
questions will structure this research as follows: 1). In what ways can SNAP
transaction data and student achievement data be used to explore the
relationships between temporal variation in SES and STEM learning outcomes?; 2).
How do stakeholders make sense of and how do they construct implications for
action based on data intensive analyses and visualizations of students' time-
varying SES?; and, 3). What supports do stakeholders need in order to construct
implications for action and engage in collaborative data analyses? Food stamp
data provided from North Carolina's Department of Health and Human Services will
be integrated with data on students' data obtained from the North Carolina
Education Research Data Center at Duke University. These data will be analyzed
with longitudinal data analysis models, visual data analytics, and multi-level
modeling techniques. Stakeholders from the Durham, North Carolina school
district will include teachers, administrators and counselors from the
districts' K-12 schools and youth-serving organizations. This research-
practitioner collaboration will identify ways in which new data about students
and new data visualizations support interpretations that enhance stakeholder's
decision-making related to students' success in STEM.