* 1418288
* DRK-12: Developing and Testing the Internship-inator, a Virtual Internship in STEM Authorware System
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kristen Scopinich, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,999,719.00

Ensuring that students have the opportunities to experience STEM as it is
conducted by scientists, mathematicians and engineers is a complex task within
the current school context. This project will expand access for middle and high
school students to virtual internships, by enabling STEM content developers to
design and customize virtual internships. The Internship-inator is an authorware
system for developing and testing virtual internships in multiple STEM
disciplines. In a virtual internship, students are presented with a complex,
real-world STEM problem for which there is no optimal solution. Students work in
project teams to read and analyze research reports, design and perform
experiments using virtual tools, respond to the requirements of stakeholders and
clients, write reports and present and justify their proposed solutions. The
researchers in this project will work with a core development network to develop
and refine the authorware, constructing up to a hundred new virtual internships
and a user group of more than 70 STEM content developers. The researchers will
iteratively analyze the performance of the authorware, focusing on optimizing
the utility and the feasibility of the system to support virtual internship
development. They will also examine the ways in which the virtual internships
are implemented in the classroom to determine the quality of the STEM internship
design and influence on student learning.

The Intership-inator builds on over ten years of NSF support for the development
of Syntern, a platform for deploying virtual internships that has been used in
middle schools, high schools, informal science programs, and undergraduate
education. In the current project, the researchers will recruit two waves of
STEM content developers to expand their current core development network. A
design research perspective will be used to examine the ways in which the
developers interact with the components of the authorware and to document the
influence of the virtual internships on student learning. The researchers will
use a quantitative ethnographic approach to integrate qualitative data from
surveys and interviews with the developers with their quantitative interactions
with the authorware and with student use and products from pilot and field tests
of the virtual internships. Data-mining and learning analytics will be used in
combination with hierarchical linear modeling, regression techniques and
propensity score matching to structure the quasi-experimental research design.
The authorware and the multiple virtual internships will provide researchers,
developers, and teachers a rich learning environment in which to explore and
support students' learning of important college and career readiness content and
disciplinary practices. The findings of the use of the authorware will inform
STEM education about the important design characteristics for authorware that
supports the work of STEM content and curriculum developers.