* 1418874
* EAGER: Algorithms for Synthetic Gene Library Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Dimitris Papamichail, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 199,999.00

Introduction/Motivation: Synthetic Biology moves beyond conventional genetic
manipulation to construct novel biological components which do not originate in
nature. There still exists though a big gap of knowledge between genomic
sequence and function. To enhance understanding of gene expression, researchers
have constructed and evaluated libraries of gene variants, which traditionally
have limited size due to synthesis costs, and random or biased composition.
Valuable insights have been gained, but precise control of expression in
redesigned synthetic genes remains elusive.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed algorithmic
research involves combinatorial design of synthetic gene variants to aid the
construction of large scale, purposed libraries. The aim is to assay the most
important sequence features which determine gene expression, while minimizing
experimental cost and maximizing the exploration of the coding landscape.
Proposed design, synthesis and wet-lab evaluation of reporter gene variants with
modified characteristics will help determine their quantitative effect on
expression in a model organism and validate our algorithmic
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Upon successful completion,
this project will make major advances in the computational and life sciences,
through new algorithmic results in combinatorial design of diverse gene
libraries with minimized cost, and fundamental discoveries regarding gene
expression. PIs expect their design methodologies to fuel an array of new
discoveries by enabling high throughput cost effective experiments to study the
effects of sequence features of genes and pathways, and help gain important
insights by comparing experimental observations with long standing computational
and theoretical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The algorithms and
software developed with this award will be used to design the next generation of
large-scale synthetic construct experiments, which will enable optimized
redesign of genetic elements to be transferred from one organism to another,
adapting to an altogether different environment. The primary impact will
ultimately rest with the science done using these techniques, such as drug and
chemical synthesizing microorganisms with improved yields, rapidly produced
vaccines, and CO2 transforming micro-algae. The educational impact includes
active promotion of computational and synthetic biology in lectures towards
graduate and undergraduate students, and dissemination of research findings and
data through web accessible repositories.