* 1418339
* Advancing Arctic Paleoecology: An Integrative Approach to Understanding Species Refugia and Population Dynamics in Response to Late-Quaternary Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 853,564.00

TITLE: Advancing Arctic Paleoecology: An Integrative Approach to Understanding
Species Refugia and Population Dynamics in Response to Late-Quaternary Climate
Change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use an innovative approach to
investigate glacial refugia and population dynamics associated with vegetation
responses to late-Quaternary climate change in Alaska and adjacent Canada. The
research will test the following hypotheses based on data from two target
species (Picea glauca and Alnus viridis): (1) Multiple Last Glacial Maximum
refugia existed for each species in isolated areas nested in a complex
topography, and the locations of these refugia differed between species; (2)
Some of the refugial populations expanded to form modern species ranges whereas
others remained largely restricted to their Last Glacial Maximum locations; (3)
Within and between species, refugial populations spread at different rates and
in different directions during the early postglacial period; and (4) Glacial
refugia existed in areas with low climate velocity, and the directions and rates
of postglacial colonization were determined by the spatial patterns of climate
velocity. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive transdisciplinary
training and gain a broad perspective to global change study. This project will
provide intellectual focus, financial resources, and mentorship for the career
development of three young investigators. Research results will be disseminated
broadly to the scientific community, the public, and land managers. The
centerpiece of the outreach activities is a workshop to educate high school
teachers on Arctic climate and ecological changes. Through these teachers, a
large group of midwestern students will be exposed to the excitement of Arctic
research. Materials from the workshop will be disseminated online to a broad
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will integrate genomic analysis,
species distribution modeling that involves remote-sensing techniques, climate-
velocity mapping, and existing fossil data in a hierarchical Bayesian modeling
framework. The proposed research will uncover cryptic glacial refugia in the
study region, elucidate the landscape and climate contexts for refugial
populations, and offer new insights into population dynamics in late-Quaternary
vegetation development. The project promises to provide spatially explicit,
population-level details of species range shifts in relation to climate change
that cannot be reliably acquired using conventional paleoecological analyses.
Equally important, this project may serve as a model demonstrating the utility
of a crosscutting approach to investigate the impacts of climate change on plant
population processes in the paleorecord. The novel approach that will be
developed through this project presents an opportunity to advance Arctic
paleoecology and foster next generation research and training in the
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;