* 1418989
* Changing Agrarian Foundations Of Urban Life: A Long-Term Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 104,218.00

The central goal of this research is to understand how within traditional
societies (such as those which characterize many parts of the developing world
today) urban and rural dwellers are linked together through social and economic
ties and how these linkages are affected by environmental change. Archaeology
provides an excellent context for analyses of this type because it can trace and
correlate changes in social organization and environmental context sometimes
over millennial time scales.

This NSF-supported investigation will reconstruct the economic foundations of
agrarian life through time in the northern Maya area in Yucatan, Mexico. The
power and complexity of the economic foundations of pre-modern states is acutely
reflected in the impacts that governmental institutions had on the humblest,
most peripheral residents of society. Such effects can be positive, neutral, or
negative. For example, thriving market networks can connect rural houselots to
larger spheres of interaction with the outside world that bring opportunities
for affluence and occupational specialization. Alternatively, commoners situated
within a matrix of competitive city states may suffer suppressed opportunities
for prosperity, due to higher levels of taxation or instability associated with
warfare. Of equal importance are bottom-up processes by which ordinary citizens
innovate or reproduce economic strategies that foster household maintenance and
survival. Understanding the economic organization of rural populations is
essential for evaluating the prospects for a sustainable agrarian food base
needed to support urban towns and cities of this arid region.

The primary research objective is to document the degree of diversity in
farming, craft production, and service industries that characterized the work
lives of rural residential groups through time. Related factors will also be
evaluated, including the degree of wealth, stability, and longevity of the
hinterland commoner house groups, as well as their level of dependency on local
and regional exchange for the essentials of daily life. An extensive program of
household archaeology will provide the data needed to address these research
objectives, building on a previous NSF-supported investigation that located
thousands of dwellings across a continuously-occupied area of 40 square
kilometers, using LiDAR remote sensing. Rural life in two contrastive political
geographic settings will be compared. Initially, Late and Terminal Classic era
houselots were located in an extremely marginal position, far from towns or
cities of significant size. Later, Postclassic homesteads were within four
kilometers of a major political capital, the site of Mayap√°n, a large urban
center that emerged in this area. This study will document the resulting
transformations to regional political economy. The study will examine long term
viable strategies for farming in a drought-prone environment in an area that
suffered repeated catastrophic demographic collapses, followed by remarkable
resilience and demographic recovery. Although prior surface surveys revealed
that the Yucatecan countryside was surprisingly populous in ancient times, with
rural densities of at least 6 persons per hectare across vast tracts of the
outback, no prior study has targeted the household economies of the non-urban
Maya countryside.