* 1418704
* EAGER: Investigation and Optimization of Thermoelectric Properties of Highly-Doped Polysilicon Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Reza Abdolvand, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 03/31/2017
* USD 144,145.00

The objective of this project is to develop a robust fabrication process for
manufacturing micro-structures that will be used to measure the thermoelectric
properties of polysilicon nanowires and subsequently to generate guidelines for
optimizing the thermoelectric figure of merit in polysilicon nanowires. The
effect of size, deposition parameters, and doping type/concentration on the
figure of merit will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is
in filling the existing knowledge gap about thermoelectric properties of
polysilicon nanowires. Such nanowires have an immediate application in
developing high-performance IR sensors. Despite earlier reports on enhanced
thermoelectric properties of silicon nanowires, there has been no report of
practical thermoelectric devices that function based on such superior
properties. This is mainly due to the complex process of growth and transfer of
silicon nanowires, which hinders the batch-fabrication of such devices. The
results of this research can potentially transform this status since polysilicon
nanowires can be fabricated through conventional microfabrication processes and
nanoscale lithography. This creates a unique opportunity for production of novel
thermoelectric devices that take advantage of enhanced properties of
nanowires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is envisioned in enabling
low-cost and high-performance IR detectors with widespread usage in military,
civilian, and medical diagnostic applications, where cost effective solutions
with adequate performance do not exist. The funds received for the proposed
research activities will also allow the PI to recruit and train local talents
with priority given to underrepresented minorities and also will produce
material for graduate level courses on micro/nano-systems.