* 1418309
* Collaborative Research: Self-Aggregation of Moist Convection, Radiative-Convective Instability, and the Regulation of Tropical Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2020
* Marat Khairoutdinov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 334,645.00

Tropical showers and thunderstorms play an important role in the regulation of
Earth's climate. One theory regarding tropical convection is that as sea surface
temperatures warm, more clouds form and the atmosphere becomes drier. While the
clouds reduce solar radiation from warming the surface, that effect is more than
counteracted by a drier atmosphere allowing more outgoing radiation to pass.
This could suggest that the tropical climate has a level of self-regulation. To
study this idea, the researchers involved in this project have created an
idealized computer model to address what they call the "self-aggregation" of
convection. This is the tendency for clouds and thunderstorms to move together
into clusters. This award will provide funding to enhance the model with more
realistic wind and sea surface temperatures. The impact of this research would
be through improvements in the representation of tropical convection in weather
and climate models. The project would also help to train the next generation of
scientists by involving multiple graduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
understand how aggregation of convection in an environment more realistically
representative of the tropics may help regulate tropical climate. The related
hypothesis is that aggregation reduces tropical climate sensitivity by providing
a powerful negative water vapor feedback that is highly temperature dependent.
The researchers will introduce a diurnal cycle and wind shear to their
simulations in order to decrease or eliminate the strong aggregation state lock
that they found in their prior work. Sea surface temperatures would also be
allowed to vary, which will let the researchers test the hypothesis that the
existence of aggregation may drive the system's climate toward the critical sea
surface temperature for aggregation. The next step will be to use the
theoretical model to explore the climate sensitivity of the system by varying
the solar constant and CO2. Finally, the researchers will test the hypothesis
that the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) results from self-aggregation of
convection independent of larger atmospheric waves.