* 1418423
* GRIDS: Graphing Research on Inquiry with Data in Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,999,748.00

The Graphing Research on Inquiry with Data in Science (GRIDS) project is a four-
year full design and development proposal, addressing the learning strand,
submitted to the DR K-12 program at the NSF. GRIDS will investigate strategies
to improve middle school students' science learning by focusing on student
ability to interpret and use graphs. In middle school math, students typically
graph only linear functions and rarely encounter features used in science, such
as units, scientific notation, non-integer values, noise, cycles, and
exponentials. Science teachers rarely teach about the graph features needed in
science, so students are left to learn science without recourse to what is
inarguably a key tool in learning and doing science. GRIDS will undertake a
comprehensive program to address the need for improved graph comprehension. The
project will create, study, and disseminate technology-based assessments,
technologies that aid graph interpretation, instructional designs, professional
development, and learning materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GRIDS will start by
developing the GRIDS Graphing Inventory (GGI), an online, research-based measure
of graphing skills that are relevant to middle school science. The project will
address gaps revealed by the GGI by designing instructional activities that
feature powerful digital technologies including automated guidance based on
analysis of student generated graphs and student writing about graphs. These
materials will be tested in classroom comparison studies using the GGI to assess
both annual and longitudinal progress. Approximately 30 teachers selected from
10 public middle schools will participate in the project, along with
approximately 4,000 students in their classrooms. A series of design studies
will be conducted to create and test ten units of study and associated
assessments, and a minimum of 30 comparison studies will be conducted to
optimize instructional strategies. The comparison studies will include a minimum
of 5 experiments per term, each with 6 teachers and their 600-800 students. The
project will develop supports for teachers to guide students to use graphs and
science knowledge to deepen understanding, and to develop agency and identity as
science learners.