* 1418136
* Building High School Students' Understanding of Evolution
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jo Ellen Roseman, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,064,257.00

Understanding evolution is fundamental to understanding contemporary biology,
but many students do not understand the core ideas of evolutionary theory.
Students misinterpret phylogenetic trees, they misunderstand fundamental
concepts of common ancestry, and they have a poor grasp of evolutionary time.
This project will address widespread misunderstandings related to evolution by
developing and testing a new high school curriculum unit and assessment measures
focusing on biological evolution. The University of Utah Genetic Science
Learning Center and the American Association for the Advancement of Science are
collaborating to develop a curriculum unit that models integration of the three
dimensions of the Next Generation Science Standards: disciplinary core ideas,
science practices, and crosscutting concepts. The new curriculum will also
integrate Common Core Mathematics standards on reasoning abstractly and
quantitatively, and an English Language Arts standard for writing arguments
focused on discipline-specific content. This project builds on a previously
funded NSF project that developed and tested six prototype lessons on natural
selection. In classroom enactments the lessons showed preliminary promise for
significantly increasing student understanding of natural selection and
decreasing their misconceptions about natural selection and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research and development project is based
on the hypothesis that students will better understand the disciplinary core
ideas about biological evolution when curriculum materials and instruction have
certain identified features and when professional development experiences
prepare teachers to use those materials and instructional practices. The
research questions and research plan are designed to test this hypothesis using
a randomized controlled trial design that allows for iterative rounds of
refinement. The study will engage 20 teachers of grades 9-10 biology from across
the U.S. who teach a diversity of students. To conduct the research, the project
will develop measures of student understanding and a measure of teacher content
knowledge. A measure of evidence-based evolution argumentation will also be
developed for use with teachers and students.