* 1418791
* Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND), May 29-31, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Robert Kass, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

The workshop Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND7) will take place May
27-29, 2015, at the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, run jointly by the
Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh, in Pittsburgh PA.
Major advances in neural recording and imaging technologies have put into the
hands of investigators wonderful tools for conducting previously unimagined
experiments, yielding rich data sources that can shed new light on basic
neuroscience and its clinical implications. The data sets are, however, often
large and complex, so that novel methods of analysis are needed if the wealth of
new information is to be turned into useful knowledge. (SAND7) will bring
together euro-physiologists, statisticians, physicists, and computer scientists
who are interested in quantitative analysis of neuronal data. The scientific
lectures will be given by 6 keynote speakers, and 12 junior investigators. Each
keynote lecture will be followed by an invited discussion of the topic. There
will also be a poster session. Authors will be encouraged to submit papers to
the Journal of Computational Neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAND7 is the
seventh workshop in a series that began in 2002. The objectives of the workshop
are to define important problems in neuronal data analysis and useful strategies
for attacking them; foster communication between experimental neuroscientists
and those trained in statistical and computational methods; and provide further
dissemination of the findings presented at the workshop via a set of peer-
reviewed articles. Other objectives are to encourage young researchers,
including graduate students, to present their work; expose young researchers to
important challenges and opportunities in this interdisciplinary domain, while
providing a small meeting atmosphere to facilitate the interaction of young
researchers with senior colleagues; and include as participants women, under-
represented minorities and persons with disabilities who might benefit from the
small workshop environment. See http://sand.stat.cmu.edu/sand for further
information.