* 1418069
* Quantum field Theory and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Silviu Pufu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Silviu Pufu at Princeton
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Pufu's research addresses, from
different points of view, how the behavior of physical systems changes between
short and long distance scales. This research is focused on physical systems
that are effectively two-dimensional, such as layered materials that have weak
interactions between the layers and very strong interactions within each layer.
Such two-dimensional systems are interesting partly because they might realize
new strongly-interacting phases of matter, and partly because they represent toy
models for phenomena that occur in our three-dimensional world and are hard to
understand. Professor Pufu will develop theoretical tools for understanding how,
in these two-dimensional systems, the short-distance physics affects and
constrains the long-distance physics. These tools are partly based on ideas from
string theory, whereby one can describe strongly-interacting two-dimensional
systems by gravity in three spatial
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project's goals are to
deepen our understanding of the renormalization group by investigating
constraints on possible renormalization group flows; to study properties of
three-dimensional quantum field theories with holographic duals; and to learn
about monopole operators in simple non-supersymmetric conformal field theories.
This research aims not only to cement our understanding of quantum field theory
and of the renormalization group, but also to gain insight into phenomena like
confinement in three space-time dimensions that are hard to understand in the
theory of strong interactions in four space-time dimensions. In addition,
studying strongly-interacting theories with holographic duals can teach us,
indirectly, important lessons about quantum gravity. The proposed research
provides a bridge between the high energy and condensed matter communities,
because learning about confinement and monopole operators is very important in
understanding which types of consistent theories can describe, at least in
principle, the low-energy physics of various lattice systems. This project has a
significant educational and mentoring component, whereby it can be used to train
post-doctoral researchers, graduate students, and advanced undergraduate
students and prepare them for successful scientific careers. Pufu will be
involved in advising science-inclined beginning undergraduates on matters that
would prepare them for careers in scientific research.