* 1418523
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Learning and Sensory-based Modeling for Adaptive Web-Empowerment Trauma Treatment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Simon Lucey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 251,757.00

Mental trauma following disasters, military service, accidents, domestic
violence and other traumatic events is a health issue costing multiple billion
of dollars per year. Beyond its direct costs, there are indirect costs including
a 45-150% greater use of medical and psychiatric care. While web-based support
systems have been developed these are effectively a "one-size-fits all" approach
lacking the personalization of regular treatment and the engagement and
effectiveness associated with a tailored regimen. This project brings together a
multi-disciplinary team of leading researchers in trauma treatment, facial
analysis, computer vision and machine learning to develop a scalable, adaptive
person-centered approach that uses vision and sensing to improve web-based
trauma treatment. In particular, the effort measures specific personalized
variables during treatment and then uses a model to adapt treatment to
individuals in need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core treatment design builds on
well-established social-cognitive theory, where self-efficacy and physiological
response are critical elements of recovery. The project measures these as well
as engagement that is critical in self-directed web-based treatment. The
modeling requires advances in computer vision and facial analysis to develop
individualized models that can be computed with just a standard laptop. This
project is the first effort to approximate changes in self-efficacy from sensory
data. The effort uses and advances machine learning and domain adaption to
support this approximation as well as to support the rapid personalization of
models. Building a smart system that empowers individuals by combining sensing
and learning to improve web-based treatment offers a transformative approach to
this national health need for cost-effective evidence-based treatment of trauma.