* 1418914
* Skukuza Science Leadership Initiative: partnering research and science education
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 289,189.00

Duke University and the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) have been
awarded a grant to construct a science center on the OTS campus in Kruger
National Park, South Africa. The OTS campus is a three-acre site at the park
headquarters and administrative village of Skukuza located near the center of
the Park. The science center is a key part of the OTS campus and will consist of
wet and dry laboratories, a computer laboratory, and a library. The much needed
wet and dry laboratories will be used by students and researchers alike to work
on field samples in Kruger and will provide adequate, clean, and
temperature/humidity-controlled environment. Bench-space will be provided for
individual graduate students, researchers, IRES students, as well as group
benches for class work. Also, as part of the grant, OTS will purchase much-
needed equipment to enable students to engage in the critical basics of plant
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) is
a non-profit consortium of nearly sixty universities, colleges, and research
institutions, including South Africa's University of Witswatersrand and the
University of Cape Town, and is located at Duke University. OTS was founded in
1963 to provide leadership in education, research, and the responsible use of
natural resources in the tropics. The OTS science center will serve three
constituencies: U.S. undergraduate students participating in OTS semester
program and summer courses, U.S. students participating in an NSF IRES Program,
and U.S. graduate students, undergraduates, and researchers conducting research
in the Park. The semester-long program, African Ecology and Conservation, is a
field-based program to provide students with the skills and experience to
conduct independent research. OTS also offers two four-week summer-programs in
Global Health, and through the NSF IRES Program, U.S. students each year are
provided with mentored research experiences with South African scientists. The
new laboratory and library will enhance the students' ability to monitor and
analyze plants and insects and conduct crude soils analysis. Students also
engage in OTS long-term, ongoing research on the effect of elephants on floral
and faunal diversity; pollination and dispersal of savanna trees, tree-grass
interactions. In addition, OTS maintains engagement with a range of
international partners (Carnegie Institute, University of Florida, North
Carolina State University to name a few). Given the paucity of laboratory
facilities in Skukuza, these collaborations will continue. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;As part of its broader impact, OTS has run a range of specialist
training courses for local institutions. In essence, OTS is partnering local
biodiversity institutions in training South African students, including the
South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI), the South African
Environmental Observation Network (SAEON).&lt;br/&gt;Within US populations, OTS
has a strong record of training undergraduates from groups underrepresented in
the sciences. Over the last five years, minority students have represented 24%
of all undergraduates in OTS programs. The science center will not only greatly
expand the research experience of these minority students, but greatly expand
their international experience through interaction with members of local
communities. For more information please visit the following website: http://ots
.ac.cr/index.php?option=com_content&amp;task=view&amp;id=321&amp;Itemid=447