* 1418754
* Computational Methods for Stochastic Eigenvalue Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Howard Elman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This project concerns the development of numerical algorithms for efficiently
computing eigenvalues of algebraic systems of equations derived from
mathematical models of physical processes. The study and understanding of
eigenvalues is of fundamental importance in numerous engineering applications.
Examples include the design of buildings and bridges, for which eigenvalues
correspond to resonant frequencies at which structures vibrate, and
identification of qualities of flowing liquids or gases that establish whether
or not the flows are turbulent. The focus of the project is on solving
eigenvalue problems in cases where the underlying model is stochastic. This
scenario arises when components of the model, such as elastic properties of the
materials used in structures or permeabilities of the media in which flows take
place, are not known with certainty but instead are treated as random variables.
The resulting eigenvalue solutions are themselves also random variables. Having
such solutions will enable scientists and engineers to incorporate new
probabilistic methods into design, for example, by using new mathematical
techniques to analyze the likelihood that a structure will buckle and devise
methods to prevent it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approaches the PI will
use in the project include the study of solutions of stochastic eigenvalue
problems to develop an enhanced understanding of stability of dynamical systems
and the impact of uncertainty on mathematical models. For example, it is known
that pseudospectral analysis reveals aspects of stability not shown by
traditional linear stability analysis, but it is difficult to use pseudospectral
methods to make quantitative statements. The PI expects to be able to assess the
probability of a linearly stable process being unstable when pseudospectra
suggest it is, and how such an assessment depends on the statistical properties
of the random components of the model. He will also develop new and efficient
computational algorithms for solving the eigenvalue problems, including
algorithms designed for stochastic Galerkin finite element discretizations and
stochastic collocation methods, and strategies for reduced-order models.