* 1418744
* ATD: Improving Analysis of Microbial Mixtures through Sparse Reconstruction Algorithms and Statistical Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* William Graham, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 378,802.00

The project aims to improve microbial classification and comparison from next-
generation sequencing technology. The first objective is to improve microbial
identification from short reads, using a Bayesian classifier. While the
classifier is fast, it can rely on a large set of features. This is due to its
reliance on fixed DNA word sizes that may have many zero-frequencies when the
word size is long. The investigators propose to compensate the classifier with a
zero-inflated negative binomial and Poisson models, instead of traditionally
using linguistic "smoothing" techniques that are ad-hoc at best. The second
objective is to reduce the feature size for whole-genome analysis. For long DNA
word sizes, there is an enormous feature space, and by using random manifolds,
compressive sensing, and other techniques, the investigators propose to reduce
the feature space while retaining accuracy of microbial classification. Finally,
the third objective is to be able to model and fit functions to microbial
population changes in a gradient (a changing environmental factor), especially
when many of the data points are missing. This final objective will allow
biologists and ecologists to now correlate the microbial composition (from the
first two objectives) to environmental factors and to model microbial changes
and thus improve future threat detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
are developing mathematical methods to model how an environment is uniquely
identified by its microbial community. Because a chemical will not have to be
measured directly, the projects' results will enable advances in biotechnology
for trace chemical detection and forensics. An example is modeling soil
microbial community changes in response to buried explosives in order to enhance
detection of these devices and secure our troops.