* 1418717
* RAPID:  TYPHOON HAIYAN - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS ON THE PHILIPPINES
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Benjamin Horton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 12/31/2015
* USD 20,018.00

This RAPID will compare the environmental impacts of the 2013 Typhoon Haiyan and
the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami. Sedimentary deposits of Typhoon Haiyan will be
collected and compared with previously collected sedimentary deposits of the
Indian Ocean Tsunami in order to measure land elevation, storm surge flow, and
sediment deposit. Post-depositional change within overwash deposits will also be
determined. In turn, the differences from these two datasets will be linked to
the physics of sediment erosion, transport, and deposition. Field research will
focus on the Leyte Gulf coastline, which was the region that suffered the
largest storm surge during Typhoon Haiyan. Perishable data and vital
characteristics of the storm surge and its deposits will be collected
immediately following Typhoon Haiyan. The same site will be revisited and
resampled a year later to assess the degree of post-depositional change in a
tropical environment. The 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami deposits were sampled at
similar intervals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will collect a unique
dataset that will illustrate the nature, magnitude and spatial variability of
coastal changes from beach erosion, overwash deposition and island breaching.
The project complements the research of existing international research groups
and will further refine predictive models of coastal impacts from severe storms.
Additionally, the research includes a strong international collaboration between
researchers from the US, Singapore, and the Philippines as well as training of
graduate students and postdocs from all three countries. This RAPID award is co-
funded by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program and the Office of
International and Integrative Activities.