* 1418887
* FSML Increasing Data Integration, Research Collaboration, and Training at Archbold
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Hilary Swain, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,624.00

Archbold Biological Station in south central Florida is awarded a grant to
enhance its computer network to expand data integration, enhance research
collaboration, and improve student training. Archbold is an independent
research, education, and conservation organization with a 73-year history of
long-term ecological research. A multimedia server with Adobe Creative Cloud
will improve image archiving and cataloguing to enable searches of Archbold's
impressive archive of images and videos, so they can be accessible to
researchers, educators, conservationists, and the public. Archbold maintains a
database for seamless data management and online data access; a new server will
speed up access to searchable environmental and research data, providing growing
room for inevitable future demands on data storage. A new Virtual Private
Network will allow secure offsite access to the network for remote users such as
research collaborators and students, and for staff when traveling or working
from home. A large archive server will house static media like orthophotos in a
repository. Finally the Station will move to an enhanced disk-based backup to
increase the efficiency of backups and improve security and disaster recovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network enhancements will enhance Archbold's ability
to work collaboratively among staff science teams and outside researchers and
students, enabling new synthesis and fermenting new ideas. The enhancements will
further interactions with scientists at more than 50 universities and research
institutions currently working with Archbold, including important research
networks that Archbold is a member of such as the Global Lakes Ecological
Observatory Network GLEON and the newly-formed USDA Long-Term Agro-ecosystem
Research Network. Students being trained at Archbold, mostly graduates from
universities around North America in the Station's post-baccalaureate program,
will integrate more closely into home institutions and with large science teams.
Research collaborations meeting at the Station's conference facilities will
experience better support to enable science interactions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Archbold's extensive education, outreach, and conservation programs
will benefit directly from the enhanced infrastructure. Education programs
disseminate Archbold science directly to the public, involving thousands of
students annually (K-Gray) in the process of science. Improved access to
collections of videos and imagery will be vital to the many creative teams
working with Archbold to enhance science communication. This will also help
build the programs (Arts-Science Alliance) that attract artists and
photographers. Public visitors to the Station's Learning Center learn about on-
site research via high quality interpretive signage and many public events. The
award will enhance the web site providing a richer focus on information and
education materials. Overall this award to improve IT capacity will have wide-
ranging impact on Archbold's substantial education, outreach, and conservation
programs. For further information about Archbold, please visit the website at
http://www.archbold-station.org.