* 1418308
* Positive definiteness preserving approaches for viscoelastic flow of Oldroyd-B and FENE-CR types: Applications to particulate flow
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Roland Glowinski, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 234,212.00

The motion of particles in fluids is not only of fundamental theoretical
interest, but is also of importance in many applications to industrial processes
involving particle-laden materials. While numerical methods for simulating
particle motion in Newtonian fluids have been very successful, numerically
simulating particle motion in viscoelastic fluids is quite complicated and
challenging. Through the computational methodologies explored in this project,
efficient simulations will be performed to investigate and understand the
complex fluid-particle and particle-particle dynamics in viscoelastic fluids,
especially the sedimentation, migration, lift-off and resuspension of particles
in three dimensional channels. The simulation tools developed in this project
will have significant engineering and biomedical applications, such as proppant
transport in hydraulic fracturing operations used in oil and gas wells and the
elasto-inertial particle focusing for developing cost-effective labs-on-a-chip
such as cell counting devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical methods for
simulating particle motion in viscoelastic fluids is quite complicated and
challenging. One of the difficulties for simulating viscoelastic flows is the
breakdown of the numerical methods. It has been widely believed that the lack of
positive definiteness preserving property of the conformation tensor at the
discrete level during the entire time integration is one of the reasons for the
breakdown. To preserve the positive definiteness property of the conformation
tensor, the constitutive equation can be reformulated as equations for the
matrix logarithm of the conformation tensor to preserve the property of the
positive definiteness as Fattal and Kupferman did. Another approach is to
factorize the conformation tensor and then to write down the new associated
equations at the discrete level, and hence the positive definiteness of the
conformation tensor is forced as Lozinski and Owens did. In this project, we aim
to extend and combine fictitious domain based distributed Lagrange multiplier
methods, which is for simulating particle motion in fluid, with either the
Lozinski and Owens' factorization approach or the log-conformation tensor
approach via an operator splitting technique to preserve the positive
definiteness property of the conformation tensor for simulating particle motion
in viscoelastic fluids of Oldroyd-B and FENE-P types. Through the computational
methodologies proposed in this project, efficient simulations will be performed
to investigate and understand the complex fluid-particle and particle-particle
dynamics in viscoelastic fluids, especially the sedimentation, migration, lift-
off and resuspension of particles in two and three dimensional channels.