* 1418411
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Temperature Amplification during the Middle Pliocene (ArcAMP): Assessing the interaction among feedback mechanisms
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Bette Otto-Bliesner, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,598.00

The Arctic is currently warming faster than anywhere else on Earth. This so-
called Arctic Amplification of surface temperatures is well documented; however,
the various feedback mechanisms and how they co-operate to amplify arctic
temperatures remain uncertain. Important clues for solving some of these
fundamental climate questions regarding arctic amplification may be found during
the Pliocene (2.6 to 5.3 million years ago), which is the last time in Earth's
history when atmospheric CO2 concentrations were comparable to modern
concentrations of about 400 ppm, and yet arctic temperatures were 10 to 20
degrees C warmer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
interactions among terrestrial feedback mechanisms during the Pliocene and their
role in amplifying arctic surface temperatures. In particular, it investigates
the net radiative forcing of vegetation albedo, atmospheric water vapor, and
black carbon emitted from fire on the arctic climate system. This will be
accomplished by conducting high-resolution reconstructions of past temperatures,
atmospheric CO2, and fire for three high arctic sites that have been recently
well-dated by terrestrial cosmogenic nuclides. To disentangle how these
processes may have been interacting to amplify arctic temperatures, a series of
climate experiments will be conducted using the Community Earth System Model.