* 1418052
* Collaborative Research: Focus on Energy: Preparing Elementary Teachers to Meet the NGSS Challenge
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Sara Lacy, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,999,836.00

The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) identify an ambitious progression
for learning energy, beginning in elementary school. To help the nation's
teachers address this challenge, this project will develop and investigate the
opportunities and limitations of Focus on Energy, a professional development
(PD) system for elementary teachers (grades 3-5). The PD will contain: resources
that will help teachers to interpret, evaluate and cultivate students' ideas
about energy; classroom activities to help them to identify, track and represent
energy forms and flows; and supports to help them in engaging students in these
activities. Teachers will receive the science and pedagogical content knowledge
they need to teach about energy in a crosscutting way across all their science
curricula; students will be intellectually engaged in the practice of
developing, testing, and revising a model of energy they can use to describe
phenomena both in school and in their everyday lives; and formative assessment
will guide the moment-by-moment advancement of students' ideas about energy.

This project will develop and test a scalable model of PD that will enhance the
ability of in-service early elementary teachers to help students learn energy
concepts by coordinating formative assessment, face-to-face and web-based PD
activities. Researchers will develop and iteratively refine tools to assess both
teacher and student energy reasoning strategies. The goals of the project
include (1) teachers' increased facility with, and disciplined application of,
representations and energy reasoning to make sense of everyday phenomena in
terms of energy; (2) teachers' increased ability to interpret student
representations and ideas about energy to make instructional decisions; and (3)
students' improved use of representations and energy reasoning to develop and
refine models that describe energy forms and flows associated with everyday
phenomena. The web-based product will contain: a set of formative assessments to
help teachers to interpret student ideas about energy based on the Facets model;
a series of classroom tested activities to introduce the Energy Tracking Lens
(method to explore energy concept using multiple representations); and videos of
classroom exemplars as well as scientists thinking out loud while using the
Energy Tracking Lens. The project will refine the existing PD and build a system
that supports online implementation by constructing a facilitator's guide so
that the online community can run with one facilitator.