* 1418696
* High Throughput Manufacturing of Carbide Nanowire-Carbon Microfiber Hybrid Structures and Polymer Composites from Cotton Textiles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Xiaodong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,623.00

This grant provides funding for synthesizing large quantities of radially-
aligned high-strength carbide nanowires using cotton textiles as both the
template and carbon source. Nanowires are of great interest for use as
reinforcements in polymer matrix composites but are not in widespread use today
due to manufacturing challenges. The primary goal of this work is to solve the
two most critical limitations in nanocomposite manufacturing, i.e., poor
dispersion of the reinforcements and low throughput. The novelty of the approach
is the controlled dispersion of the nanowires "by design" as the result of
growing the nanowires on a substrate that is both the template and carbon
source. This research program will study both the mechanisms of formation for
the nanowires on the cotton substrate as well as study the reinforcing
mechanisms of the carbide nanowire-carbon microfiber hybrid structures in
composite structures. High throughput manufacturing of laminated polymer
nanocomposites will be explored through specially designed spin casting and
sheet molding processes.

If successful, the results of this research will contribute to a better
understanding of the manufacturing-structure-property-function of carbide
nanowire-carbon microfiber hybrid structures and their reinforced polymer
nanocomposites. This research has the potential to change the conventional
concepts for nano-reinforcement dispersion and to significantly impact existing
nanomaterials manufacturing technologies. The research advances made through
this project will generate new knowledge that will be introduced to
undergraduate and graduate students through existing courses and the research
activities will be used as an educational platform for students at all levels to
learn about materials processing and manufacturing.