* 1418833
* Conference on the Foundations of Computational Mathematics 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Agnes Szanto, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 11/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports increased participation of US researchers at the Conference
on the Foundations of Computational Mathematics (FoCM), hosted by the
Universidad de la Republica in Montevideo, between December 11 - 20, 2014. The
conference, organized by the Society for the Foundations of Computational
Mathematics, is eighth in a sequence that commenced with the Park City (1995),
Rio de Janeiro (1997), Oxford (1999), Minneapolis (2002), Santander (2005), Hong
Kong (2008), and Budapest (2011) FoCM meetings. The NSF funding predominantly
supports participation of qualified US-based graduate students, postdocs, and
recent Ph.D. recipients in the conference, either as workshop speakers or as
poster presenters, promoting their integration into the research community. The
conference's diverse activities -- distinguished plenary talks, specialized
workshops, poster session, and informal interactions between participants -- all
integrate front-line research with mentoring and training opportunities for
young participants, helping them develop networks that include the world's
leading researchers. Central to the overall conference organization is the
organizer's continuing commitment to the tradition that FoCM conferences welcome
and integrate newcomers into the research community.

The FoCM conference offers an effective forum for the dissemination of research
results across diverse fields within computational mathematics, capitalizing on
a rapid evolution in our understanding of the interplay between mathematics and
computation. The organizers and committed participants of the conference have a
history of intellectual and service contributions to the foundations of
computational mathematics. The conference program includes 17 plenary speakers
who are among the leading researchers in the field; the organizers of the 19
workshops are chosen to include both established senior and talented junior
researchers, their potential, diversity and creativity promising a vibrant
scientific program. Many of the confirmed plenary speakers and workshop
organizers at FoCM are from the US, reflecting the vitality of US based research
in a variety of disciplines within computational mathematics. The award will
advance the international exposure of research conducted in the US, and will
have long-term effects in catalyzing new collaborations between US and
international participants of the conference.

Conference web site: www.fing.edu.uy/eventos/focm2014/