* 1418820
* Planning Grant: Developing a Strategic Plan and Infrastructure Needs Assessment for the CICHAZ Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Gil Rosenthal, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

Texas A&M University is awarded a grant to support the Centro de Investigaciones
Cient√≠ficas de las Huastecas "Aguazarca" (CICHAZ: www.cichaz.org) in developing
a strategic plan for future improvements to infrastructure to continue to serve
a diverse group of international life and social scientists as well as
educational and outreach programs. Located in a region of Mexico with high
biological and cultural diversity but devoid of academic and research
institutions, CICHAZ has become a hub for multi-disciplinary research on social
sciences, freshwater ecology, and environmental biology. The current need for
CICHAZ is to develop plans for providing the infrastructure and equipment for a
contemporary field station that will serve a growing group of researchers as
well as outreach efforts. This planning project has two primary objectives: (1)
enable CICHAZ personnel to visit established, productive field stations
including NSF FSML supported stations and work with their leaders to learn best
practices for stations with research and education missions and (2) to hold
workshops that will bring together stakeholders from both sides of the US-Mexico
border, both education and research backgrounds, and both life science and
social science perspectives at CICHAZ in order to develop a strategic plan.
Ultimately, the practices learned from visiting other stations together with the
workshops will culminate in a 5-year plan and additional long-term objects with
landmarks for achieving those objectives. As an international research station
with a strong outreach mission and particular focus on research and educational
relationships between the U.S. and Mexico, the broader impacts of the longer-
term initiatives of the field station include research experiences for US and
Mexican undergraduates and a mentoring program for local junior and high school
students. This planning effort will specifically include activities to develop
strategy that will help to achieve these goals.