* 1418482
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: BESI: Behavioral and Environmental Sensing and Intervention for Dementia Caregiver Empowerment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Grace Byfield, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 647,394.00

Caregiver burden, stress, and depression resulting from agitation exhibited by
some people with dementia (PWD) are the primary reasons cited for PWD
transitioning from aging-in-place to long-term care facilities. Non-
pharmacological interventions provided by caregivers (e.g., distraction,
providing rest, calming the environment, speaking softly, gentle touch, favorite
music selections, etc.) can reduce the frequency and severity of agitation in
PWD. However, agitation can be unpredictable and influenced by the environment,
and early signs of agitation often go undetected and can escalate to aggressive
agitation that is more difficult to manage. As a result, most methods used to
deal with agitation in dementia are reactive rather than proactive and are
administered too late in an agitation escalation to be effective. A tool to
predict agitation episodes and detect early stages of agitation would empower
caregivers to intervene early and ultimately reduce agitation, thus reducing
caregiver burden and extending aging-in-place and the associated quality-of-life
and cost benefits. This caregiver empowerment based strategy to PWD care could
have a significant impact on the ability of PWD to age-in-place. Community
outreach efforts will be conducted that engage PWD and their caregivers
throughout the project, and the resulting knowledge products can be disseminated
to a range of stakeholders across various sociocultural ecosystems, from
researchers to family members and respite providers. The project rests on the
practice of universal access, demonstrating a design that is beneficial to and
accessible by the broadest range of user groups. This project will also
establish a framework for a collaborative approach between engineers,
clinicians, and the caregiving community to address critical healthcare needs,
which will be the basis of new course modules and conference
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will overcome the fundamental
scientific barriers to realizing such a tool with a three-phase research plan to
employ Behavioral and Environmental Sensing and Intervention. First, a system of
body-worn and in-home sensors will be developed to provide continuous, non-
invasive agitation assessment and environmental context monitoring. Second, this
system will be deployed in the homes of community-dwelling PWD to model the
relationship between agitation and the environment and to identify features of
early-stage agitation, both of which will inform the development of real-time
caregiver notification strategies. Third, proof-of-concept for will be
demonstrated through a human subject pilot study, with caregivers receiving
real-time notifications to alter the environment in advance of probable
agitation episodes and to administer PWD interventions in the early stages of
agitation. Successful completion of this 3-phase project will motivate a follow-
up large-scale proof-of-practice study.The investigative team combines expertise
in technology function (computer engineering), accessibility (human centered
design), and applicability (medical research and clinical care) to address
fundamental challenges of multimodal sensing system-of-systems, modeling cyber-
socio-physical system dynamics, and real-time notifications - all within the
context of a critical societal need. Diverse sensor streams will be aggregated
by fusing assorted data types across multiple time scales, aggregated data will
be analyzed using novel agitation assessment and environmental characterization
methods, extracted information will be used to develop dynamic system models,
and customized automated notifications will empower caregivers to intervene
before agitation escalation - all while meeting real-time intervention
requirements. These models will be PWD-caregiver dyad specific, requiring
dynamic in-situ training, and will present new ontologies for cyber-socio-
physical systems that incorporate contexts, technologies, and social dyads to
predict and mitigate disruptive neurological events. Ontologies for complex
systems interventions in dementia do not yet exist but will emerge from the
exploratory, integrative, and analytical efforts of this project
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information on this project, see the
project web site: http://wirelesshealth.virginia.edu/content/BESI