* 1418767
* RUI: Carroll University Biological Field Station Improvement Project
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Jane Hopp, Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 244,055.00

Carroll University has received funds to create a research and education center
at the Carroll University Greene Field Station (GFS). Despite the lack of on-
site facilities for research and appropriate infrastructure to support data
acquisition, management, and dissemination, Carroll faculty and students have
conducted research at the GFS outdoor laboratory since the 1970s. The renovation
of an existing building into a research facility will expand research agendas,
provide infrastructure needed for outside collaboration and community use, and
offer space for the university to introduce the experimenting across the
curriculum initiative, a groundbreaking project that will integrate research and
education, educating all students in scientific literacy. The research and
education center will also provide the foundation needed for Carroll faculty to
conduct ongoing projects both in ecological and pedagogical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expanded GFS will serve as an important
research facility not just for science students and faculty at Carroll
University, but also for non-science majors to become citizen scientists. The
observational and experimental data accessible at the facility will contribute
to public participation in scientific research efforts and provide benefits to
society. All Carroll students will be trained in the processes of sciences as
they submit data collected at the GFS to regional and national databases. One
quarter of Carroll's undergraduate students are first generation and 21% come
from economically disadvantaged families. Providing an opportunity for students
to participate in well-supported inquiry based learning at the facility through
their general education coursework will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the processes of science. The new facility will also
broaden collaborations across universities, area school districts, non-profit
agencies, and governmental agencies, thus enhancing the infrastructure for
research and education in the community. More information about the GFS can be
found at: http://www.carrollu.edu/greene-field-station/.