* 1418114
* Interactions of Particles, Fields and Strings
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Howard Georgi, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 659,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Howard Georgi and Cumrun
Vafa at the Physics Department of Harvard University, along with post-docs and
students. The area of research covered by this project includes two broad
classes: One in particle physics and the other in string theory. The particle
physics side will involve the development of a new idea in describing the high
energy scattering of particles using the idea that the aftermath of collisions
involves a shell of energy which emanates from the collision site of the
particles. This is an area which is currently being developed by Georgi and his
students. In string theory, the fundamental objects are strings, not particles.
All string theories exist in a higher number of dimensions, and the method of
reducing these to four dimensions can lead to theories that can be compared with
experiments. Vafa will be continuing his work on better understanding of these
theories, including the various methods of reducing the numbers of dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgi's work in particle physics will involve the
development of LSET (Light-Shell effective theory). The hope is that this
approach will give a different effective theory involving high energy
scatterings, of the type encountered at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
complementary to the Soft Collinear Effective Theory approach currently used,
and may lead to new methods of analyzing the large number of particles produced
in these collisions. On the string theory front Vafa will be continuing his work
on better understanding of superconformal theories which have been discovered to
exist in 5 and 6 dimensions. These theories involve tensionless strings.
Computation of their partition functions have been developed recently and their
relation to (twistorial) topological string is the major focus of this effort.