* 1418730
* Improvements to laboratory facilities at Powdermill Nature Reserve
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* John Wenzel, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 347,780.00

Carnegie Institute is awarded a grant to build a modern technical field
laboratory to augment the research capacity of Powdermill Nature Reserve, the
ecological research field station of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History,
Pittsburgh. At Powdermill, current research programs include such topics as the
occurrence of avian influenza in migratory birds, nonlinear boundary effects on
decomposition in forensic entomology, regional sampling of water chemistry to
assess health and quality, terrestrial toxicology and flow of metals into the
ecosystem via pollen and nectar, as well as extensive and diverse programs
related to forest succession. Modern ecologists use technical laboratory methods
more than they did formerly, and leading field stations must provide support for
such procedures. Increasing the capacity of the Powdermill field station will
have strongly accelerate research in the diverse programs already executed at
Powdermill, and lead to additional programs in the future. These investments
will help the facility to provide a leading research platform for the central
Appalachians, one of the most diverse temperate ecosystems on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed addition will provide a standard wet
laboratory with hood, sinks, centrifuges, heat blocks, refrigeration, freezers
(including -80C), balances, electrophoresis gel rigs, and all the ordinary lab
ware and starting materials typical of a basic laboratory capable of tissue
preservation, DNA extraction, incubation, restriction digests, gel
electrophoresis, and other such procedures. Investment into a modern laboratory
will contribute to expanded use by visiting researchers and formal college and
university classes. In 2012 and 2013, eight federally funded projects were
executed in part at Powdermill, including work by four PIs with NSF funding.
About 40 researchers and professors use this station, and building a support
facility will significantly improve research and teaching capacity in this
region and beyond, and have a great multiplier effect in the local community.
For more information about the Powdermill Nature Reserve, visit the website at
http://www.carnegiemnh.org/powdermill/.