* 1418936
* Kinetic Approaches for Multi-Scale Problems in Quantum Chemistry and Seismology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Xu Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 293,266.00

This research project concerns an interdisciplinary topic that is of general
interest to both computational mathematicians and scientists from other areas.
This project will lead to quantitative understanding of the optical properties
of crystals and in imaging Earth rock structures clearly, simply, and quickly.
More importantly, these new methods will provide important advances in
computational mathematics, leading to practical benefit in the fields of
materials science and seismology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is motivated
by recent work on Frozen Gaussian Approximation (FGA) and its unique
interpretation of high-frequency waves that suggests many new numerical
techniques embedded. State-of-the-art numerical methods will be developed and
used in various applications. The work will have impact in a wide range of
problems of significant interest in physical sciences and industry.
Specifically, the project investigates the following topics: 1. To theoretically
study the FGA method in more depth. This includes analyzing the asymptotic
accuracy of FGA, and integrating it with the Tailored Finite Point/Cell Method
(TFPM/TFCM). 2. To study the dynamics of electrons in crystals by computing the
Schr√∂dinger equation with a lattice potential in both the Lagrangian and
Eulerian approaches. 3. To compute seismic wave propagation in heterogeneous or
non-lateral media based on FGA and its combination with TFPM/TFCM. 4. To survey
the practical performance of developed numerical methods on, e.g., tsunami and
earthquake models.