* 1418848
* Collaborative Research: Pre-Ionization Controlled Laser Plasma Formation for Ignition Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Zhili Zhang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,100.00

Pre-Ionization Controlled Laser Plasma Formation for Ignition Applications Azer
Yalin (Colorado State University), Anthony Marchese (Colorado State University),
Mikhail Shneider (Princeton University), Zhili Zhang (University of Tennessee -
Knoxville)

Broader Significance and Importance: Plasmas formed from focused laser beams
provide reactive heated volumes of gas, somewhat analogous to the sparks
produced by conventional ignition systems. Laser plasmas, therefore, are of
interest for a number of applications including ignition. We will develop the
basic plasma science to provide tailored laser pulse schemes for ignition and
laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) applications. In terms of
combustion, laser ignition has many potential benefits. For reciprocating
natural gas engines one can ignite leaner mixtures (reducing NOx emissions and
pollutant formation) and higher pressure mixtures (leading to higher engine
efficiencies and fuel-savings). In aerospace applications one can achieve better
relight in aero-turbines. The multi-pulse approaches may lower the burden on
required laser sources and fiber delivery implementations. We will present our
activities to local minority-serving public schools (K-12) and include research
advances in courses at our universities. We will specifically target
underrepresented or minority groups to work on the project as their Ph.D. thesis
research.

Technical Description: The proposed research focuses on innovative approaches
employing pre-ionizing pulses (ns-ps-fs) to enhance and control laser plasma
formation in gases. In particular, we will examine cases in which an initial
pulse is used to achieve pre-ionization, and is followed by a second pulse that
provides controllable energy addition. The energy addition of the second pulse
is enabled by pre-ionization due to the first pulse. The result will be a laser
plasma that is not at full breakdown conditions (i.e. no spark), but that has
elevated temperature (>~2000 K). Such laser plasmas can provide novel and
improved ignition sources by avoiding the unnecessarily high temperatures,
strong shock waves, and elevated laser pulse energies that accompany full laser
breakdown (sparks). We will consider a range of pulse durations (ns-ps-fs) as
well as both non-resonant and resonant schemes for pre-ionization. We will also
study both non-resonant pre-ionizing pulses as well as Resonant Enhanced Multi-
Photon Ionization (REMPI) schemes. The REMPI schemes will be developed for
future applications in air with initial studies in synthetic gas mixtures, e.g.
we will study REMPI of argon and oxygen which are abundant in air. The plasmas
will be experimentally studied and characterized as well as modeled numerically.
We will determine optimal laser pulse parameters (wavelength, duration, temporal
separation etc.) to provide sufficient pre-ionization and to allow subsequent
energy addition. Owing to the lack of visible emission, the study of such
plasmas is challenging and a key feature of our proposal is the use of a newly
developed microwave scattering technique to measure electron parameters. The
proposed research will be transformative in terms of laser plasma formation;
despite a large body of research in laser breakdown using single laser pulses
there has been minimal research on multi-pulse approaches and pre-ionization.
The three-year program will be conducted by Colorado State University (CSU),
University of Tennessee at Knoxville (UTK), and Princeton University (PU) and
combines experimental studies, advanced diagnostics, and computational plasma
and combustion modeling.