* 1418268
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Economic and Socialcultural Effects of Developing Cyber-Infrastructure for Global information Storage in Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Lisa Rofel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2017
* USD 30,240.00

This award supports the dissertation research project of Alix Johnson, PhD
candidate at the University of California Santa Cruz. Ms. Johnson's research
investigates how the increase in private and public investment in global
information infrastructure in Iceland affects social-cultural, economic, and
governance systems, as well as national identity. Information technology and
trade is often proposed as a solution to the economic challenges of many rural
Artic communities. This research has the potential to inform other Arctic
communities about the societal impacts of information technology as an approach
to economic self-sufficiency in the north. This research project examines a
range of ongoing efforts by private and public entities to make Iceland an
"information haven" - an attractive location for storing data from around the
world. By building data centers, founding start-ups, and passing "information-
friendly" legislation, Icelanders hope to carve out a national niche and attract
global data to Icelandic infrastructure. The project will explore how the
development of this new infrastructure is changing local Icelandic livelihoods
and senses of national identity. Juxtaposing the globalization of information
with nationalism and sovereignty, identity and place-making is a new look at
these processes in the Arctic, processes that Arctic communities will see more
of in the coming decades.