* 1419267
* The Multi-Scale Dynamics of Sundowner Wind Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Tilley, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,327.00

The research project seeks to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms that
cause Sundowner wind events in Southern California. Sundowner winds are
typically associated with extreme heating in the absence of very strong surface
wind velocities. Sundowner winds cause conditions favorable for devastating
Southern California wildfires making forecasting them critically important and
extraordinarily difficult due to their fast and very fine scale onset. The basic
hypothesis to be tested spans a multiplicity of scales of motion: At larger
scales (meso-alpha/beta) Sundowner wind events are associated with: 1) a low-
level coastal jet driven by an upstream coastal pressure gradient accompanying a
strong low-level inversion as well as 2) a shallow critical layer and shallow
Scorer Parameter discontinuity along the coastal mountains (e.g., Santa Ynez).
This low-level coastal jet results from: 1) an inland extension of the thermal
gradient between a cold near shore marine boundary layer and an elevated inland,
heated convective boundary layer and 2) a reinforcement of coastal high surface
pressure (to the NNW of this thermal gradient) by the right exit region of an
upstream polar jet streak. At the smaller scales (meso-gamma), wave development
involving an internal gravity wave (IGW) breaking develops along the westward-
facing slopes of the coastal (Santa Ynez) Mountains, triggering a short-lived
rotor above the marine layer. The rotor amplifies and breaks, mixing warmer and
drier air rapidly into the marine layer. This mixing represents the first
component of rapid Sundowner warming as the cold marine layer is dissipated and
replaced by relatively warm air from the residual continental boundary layer.
The second component occurs quickly thereafter as the trailing warm pool
accompanying the IGW descends the coastal mountains forming a meso-gamma scale
wake low resulting in 10-25CÂ° total warming.

The methods employed in this research activity primarily involve numerical
modeling, observational data analyses and theoretical analyses of several real
and idealized data case studies. The Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
model will be employed to simulate numerous Sundowner wind case studies ranging
from extreme to marginal to null case studies. The events will be classified
based on observed surface wind gust and heating intensities and the numerical
modeling will involve a complete spectrum of cases. The horizontal grids will
range in resolution from ~10 km regionally to ~666 m in the specific locations
of Sundowner wind genesis depending on terrain gradient shape and magnitude thus
allowing the scale contraction of simulated fields.

The intellectual merit of this research activity is to understand the multi-
scale mechanisms causing Sundowner wind events and their sensitivity to synoptic
and multiple mesoscale dynamics involving both the marine layer and very fine
scale terrain structure. In particular, more detailed understanding will be
derived of how larger scale jet adjustments establish the mesoscale wind and
temperature gradients that can be perturbed by terrain to generate meso-gamma
scale mountain waves, bores and wake lows. Furthermore, how the marine layer,
mountain wave, and larger scale jets interact in the Sundowner wind that occurs
in the fire-prone regions near Santa Barbara, California.

The broader impacts of this research activity will involve weather forecasting
advancements in this region, most notably predicting conditions that result in
extreme wildfire danger. The inability of operational computer models to
simulate the finer scale characteristics of Sundowner winds makes it much more
difficult for the National Weather Service (NWS), private forecasters and local
emergency responders to warn/prepare for fire events. The public is extremely
vulnerable in this region and improved forecasts derived from the knowledge
gained by this research may prevent the loss of life and property by educating
forecasters and emergency responders concerning key precursor conditions. In
addition, student interns from underrepresented communities will collaborate on
this project at the NWS Forecast Office in Oxnard, California.