* 1419391
* 2014 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference, April 11-13, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Jing Tao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ricardo Castano-Bernard
* 03/31/2015
* USD 21,851.00

This award supports participation in the Redbud Topology Conference, to be held
in the Spring and the Fall of 2014. The main subject of the conference is low-
dimensional topology, which includes the study of spaces in three dimensions,
using algebraic methods such as group theory. The aim is to investigate the
symmetries of 3-dimensional space, which in turn gives insight to better
understand the possible shapes and properties. This conference is part of an
ongoing series held at institutions in Arkansas and Oklahoma, which foster
interactions among young and senior mathematicians in the region. It features
two meetings: a graduate student and young researchers workshop in the spring,
and an advanced research conference in the fall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spring
2014 Redbud Topology Conference will be held April 11-13, 2014 on the Norman
campus of the University of Oklahoma. The theme of this conference is centered
on current topics in geometric group theory related to free groups, surface
groups, their automorphism groups, and free-by-cyclic and surface-by-cyclic
groups. The invited speakers are Matt Clay (U of Arkansas), Spencer Dowdall (U
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Daniel Groves (U of Illinois at Chicago),
Eriko Hironaka (Florida State U), Chris Leininger ((U of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign), Johanna Mangahas (Brown U), Jason Manning (U at Buffalo), Ben
McReynolds (Purdue U), Alexandra Pettet (U of British Columbia), Sam Taylor (U
of Texas at Austin), and Alden Walker (U of Chicago). The conference begins with
a workshop designed to enhance the experience of graduate students and junior
researchers. The meeting will foster interactions and strengthen research ties
among young mathematicians in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference
website: http://www.math.ou.edu/redbud/