* 1419745
* Collaborative Research:   Development of Hematite (U-Th)/He Chronology to Directly Date Fault Slip and Ancient Seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Peter Reiners, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,167.00

Dating brittle fault slip is a research frontier essential for characterizing
numerous upper crustal processes. Direct, robust, and efficiently obtained
timing constraints are necessary to reconstruct structural-tectonic histories,
mountain building processes, and landscape evolution, as well as to document
ancient seismicity histories to assess modern seismic hazards, earthquake
forecasting, and fault mechanics. However, direct dating of fault activity in
the upper crust is challenging due to limited applicable radioisotopic
techniques, and few robust geologic indicators of past seismic slip exist in the
rock record. This project tests a new potentially transformative method to
directly date fault slip by using the (U-Th)/He on iron oxide coatings on fault
surfaces collected from active and ancient faults as well as explores the
chemistry and physics underpinning the method. The project advances desired
societal outcomes through: (1) increased public scientific literacy and public
engagement with science and technology through contributions to traveling
displays for K-12 students, development and presentation of elementary school
educational modules, participation in university outreach activities, and
development of projects and lessons for northern Utah home-schooled students;
(2) development of a globally competitive STEM workforce through training of
graduate and undergraduate students; (3) increased partnerships with other
academic institutions and the U.S. Geological Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal research objective of this project is to develop hematite (U-Th)/He
geochronology as a method to directly date fault slip. (U-Th)/He dates from
hematite-coated fault surfaces record brittle deformation events by constraining
the timing of either synkinematic hematite formation or the rapid cooling from
frictional heating during faulting. In some cases, these dates may track
regional cooling, yielding a new tool to quantify tectonic exhumation or erosion
linked to broader fault zone evolution. This method is tested on three active or
ancient fault systems in the North American Cordillera: the northern Wasatch
fault zone in Utah; faults in the central Colorado Front Range; and the eastern
Denali fault zone in the Yukon. The project involves: (1) macroscopic
characterization and structural analysis of hematite-coated faults and
microscopic determination of hematite occurrence, texture, and grain size; (2)
characterization of He diffusivity from 4He/3He diffusion experiments; (3)
targeted (U-Th)/He dating of hematite-coated faults at each locale including
multiple samples from the same fault surface; (4) development of independent
constraints on fault surface thermal histories using transition metal
paleothermometry from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and 4He/3He
thermochronometry; and (5) establishment of independent constraints on fault
activity timing using U-Pb dating and existing 40Ar/39Ar illite age data of
related synkinematic calcite and clay-rich fault gouge, respectively, and
regional cooling patterns from host-rock apatite (U-Th)/He and fission track
data.