* 1419398
* Collaborative Research EaSM-3: Local and Remote Regional Climate Responses to Regional Forcings from Short-Lived Climate Forcers
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Shindell Drew, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2020
* USD 870,000.00

The goal of this collaborative project is to examine local and remote impacts of
regional perturbations in SLCFs (e.g., tropospheric aerosols, tropospheric ozone
and methane), that will be key drivers of regional climate changes over the next
several decades. There is evidence that the regional climate effects of SLCF
emissions can be significant, and this study will enhance understanding of the
magnitude, spatial pattern and statistical significance of these influences as
well as the processes responsible for these outcomes . Knowledge generated
through this study can inform the climate assessment community and decision-
makers about the consequences of additional actions to mitigate emissions of
SLCFs.

A long control experiment will be undertaken to provide the baseline and
statistical basis for significance analysis as well as study regional climate
responses to SLCFs and their precursors determined by a series of perturbations
from this control state. Using three state-of-the-art Earth System Models
(ESMs), robust estimates of the climate and atmospheric composition impacts from
regional perturbations in short-lived climate forcers will be studied.
Statistical emulators of the relationships between climate forcers and climate
impacts following a pattern scaling or statistical emulators approach will be
built. These emulators will enable integrated assessment and/or impacts studies
under a variety of future emission scenarios, allowing exploration of regional
climate impacts under alternative choices of future SLCF emissions.