* 1419415
* Broadening Participation in Visualization (BPViz) Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Vetria Byrd, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 03/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The objective of this project is to broaden participation of women and
underrepresented groups in visualization. The PI proposes to establish an annual
two-day workshop and other activities designed to increase the participation of
women and underrepresented groups in visualization.Visualization plays a
significant role in the exploration and understanding of data across all
disciplines with a universal goal: gaining insight into the complex
relationships that exist within the data. The need to diversify a field with
such far reaching influences by providing career mentoring advice, overviews of
past accomplishments, and future research directions in visualization is
important. The proposed workshops will inform, inspire and encourage
participants to engage in the multidisciplinary dynamics of visualization. The
first supported workshop is scheduled for February 10-11, 2014, and will be
hosted at Clemson University in South Carolina. A total of 20 participants at
the undergraduate, graduate, post-graduate, and early career faculty level will
be invited to participate in the workshop. The workshop will be organized as a
series of presentations, panels with networking opportunities, and mentoring
activities. To encourage collaborations, participants will present their work
and explore the work of others during a poster session. Participants will be
recruited via a number of different venues including, but not limited to: The
Anita Borge Institute/Grace Hopper listserv, association listservs (CRA, CRA-W,
CDC, AAPHDCS, Hispanics in Computing, and Women in Machine Learning), Broadening
Participation Communities (A4RC, EL Alliance) and discipline-specific mailing
lists (IEEE-Vis). Undergraduates will be recruited by on-campus organizations
(Women in Science and Engineering and The Charles H. Houston Center). The
inclusion of undergraduates will ensure the level of interest in visualization
spans across academic and professional domains. Outcomes of the workshops will
be assessed by surveying participants at the start and at the end of the
workshop.