* 1419225
* Social Network Analysis And The Reconstruction Of Past Events
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Hill, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 262,658.00

Social scientists need to better understand the processes through which social
interactions at multiple scales lead to the emergence and integration of larger
social groups such as communities and societies. These processes are not limited
to modern societies, and studying them in prehistoric contexts adds a deeper
understanding of these processes. Drs. Mark A. Hill, Kevin C. Nolan, and Mark F.
Seeman seek to understand the social world of prehistoric groups commonly
referred to as "Ohio Hopewell." Hopewell (ca. 50 AD-350 AD) has captivated
scholars and the public alike for over a century. This study applies Social
Network Analysis (SNA) to discover the differing scales and nature of
interaction that will allow a reconstruction of the texture of variable group
membership in Ohio Hopewell. This will not only help to understand the broad
sweep of prehistory and the specific social realities that molded the past, but
will also provide a better understanding of the integration of human social
groups in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no one "Hopewell"; the many
Hopewell-linked groups are characterized by variable participation in a variety
of information and goods exchange networks. Until explicit and robust methods of
classification and analysis are applied to understanding social interaction and
integration, researchers will be unable to grasp the complexity, detail, and
meaning of each overlying network. SNA has been successfully used in
ethnographic and archaeological research around the world, and is now the most
appropriate tool for beginning to disentangle the complex web that forms Ohio
Hopewell. SNA offers a robust and objective set of quantitative methods for
reconstructing connections among groups and its application here will be the
first in the region, and among the first in eastern North America. This study,
assumes that what falls under the "Ohio Hopewell" rubric is a series of
dispersed family clusters choosing to participate variably in networks at a
number of related, but distinct scales. Many divisions of Ohio Hopewell have
been proposed; however, there has been no consistent or replicated method or
conclusion of network classification. As a first step, the research focuses on
Ohio Hopewell communities within the Scioto River watershed of southcentral
Ohio. The project analyzes three explicit spatial scales of interaction through
a combination of micro- and macro-stylistic attributes, and raw material source
analysis. (1) The local/community level is targeted by a series of ceramic
production traits which would be learned through enculturation and
apprenticeships but not readily visible to outsiders (micro-style). (2) The
regional/intercommunity level is targeted by analyzing the distribution of
lithic raw material proportions and ceramic vessel elements that are externally
observable (macro-style) and can be transmitted among communities. (3) The
extra-regional scale of interaction is targeted by the sourcing of rare exotic
materials (copper, silver) via Laser Ablation Inductively Couple Plasma Mass
Spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be patterns (and potentially many)
at each scale. With this multi-scalar approach, the project will build a
detailed picture of how the larger Ohio Hopewell networks are constructed from
the bottom up, by families and communities.