* 1419323
* Collaborative Research:  EaSM-3:  Modeling, Understanding, and Prediction of the Decadal Variability of Productive Eastern Boundary Coastal Upwelling Regions
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Curtis Deutsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 739,760.00

The four main Eastern Boundary Upwelling Systems (EBUS) regions, i.e., the U.S.
West Coast, the Humboldt Current, the Canary Current, and Benguela Current, are
host to some of the most productive marine ecosystems on the planet. All four
are also characterized by large inter-annual to inter-decadal variability and
vulnerability to climate change through systematic changes in alongshore winds,
upwelling, cloud, and gyre-scale ocean currents. Unfortunately, the evolution of
these critical environments over the coming decades has received comparatively
little attention. This is partly because their essential characteristics
(alongshore winds and cloud shaped by local topography and upwelling ribbons)
are only tens of km in width and are not well-resolved by current climate
models. In addition, processes smaller in scale than the model resolution
mediate the relationship between key ecosystem properties and the physical
system, making it very difficult to understand consequences of changes in the
physical system for marine ecosystems based on model output alone. In this
project the team of investigators will address this gap by undertaking an
unprecedented suite of high-resolution regional earth system model simulations.
The result of this project will be a comprehensive understanding of the
consequences of climate change and its interplay with decadal variability over
the coming decades for all four EBUS regions. Members of a cross-disciplinary
team consisting of a climate scientist, two oceanographers, a marine
biogeochemist and a software engineer will train two graduate students. The
project will lay essential groundwork for further study of climate impacts on
upper trophic levels and prediction of fish populations in EBUS regions.
Moreover, the earth system model development work will lay the groundwork for
the scientific community to study higher-trophic-level response of marine
ecosystems to climate variability and change. Marine ecosystem variability has
profound implications for natural resource management, and it is anticipated
that this project will be of great interest to stakeholders and the general
public. With the help of an environmental communications expert, the team will
develop and execute an outreach effort that includes identification and
coordination of stakeholders for the U.S. West Coast EBUS. A stakeholder
workshop will be organized where the project team will present their research,
and stakeholders will present information needs to the project team. An outcome
of the workshop will be a white paper outlining research needs and next steps
for marine conservation and management in the context of a changing climate. In
addition, the project?s major results will be released to the public at the same
time as the scientific papers are published through formal press releases. The
project team will be available for interviews with select members of the local,
national, and international press. Non-Governmental Organizations operating in
the Humboldt, Canary, and Benguela EBUS regions with the capacity to conduct
corresponding outreach efforts there will identified and partnered with.

This project is focused on the future evolution of the four Eastern Boundary
Upwelling Systems (EBUS). Three interconnected research themes will be pursued:
(1) Air-sea-land interaction at the regional scale, (2) Climate change signals
in EBUS regions, and (3) Climate controls on marine ecosystems. A suite of high-
resolution regional earth system model simulations will be undertaken. They
involve: (1) Historical Reconstructions of the variations of the recent past in
all four EBUS regions. These reanalysis-driven simulations will be used to
validate the regional model against available observations and characterize the
substantial variability of the regions? physical and ecosystem states. All sets
of experiments will be performed for the U.S. West Coast and Humboldt EBUS
regions first, and then the lessons learned will be leveraged to perform the
same series of experiments for the two other major upwelling systems. (2) Mid-
century Future Climate simulations for all EBUS regions. These simulations,
driven by global climate model (GCM) output, will be used to quantify and
understand physical and ecosystem changes due to anthropogenic forcing. They
will also be analyzed together with the Historical Reconstructions to quantify
the importance of anthropogenic signals relative to the regions? natural
variability, and detect anthropogenic signals in the recent past. To maximize
relevance to decadal prediction, the Future Climate experiments will emphasize
the mid-21st-century time frame. However, we will also undertake one experiment
focused on end-of-century to have a more extreme climate change signal to
analyze. (3) Process Evaluation simulations in select EBUS regions. These are
also reanalysis-driven, but with key processes disabled. These experiments will
allow for a quantification and understanding of the key processes shaping
variability and change. The EBUS regions will be compared to one another to
understand processes driving upwelling variability and associated biogeochemical
responses. The major ecosystem dynamics of interest will include, controls on
magnitude and seasonality of upwelling and temperature; controls on magnitude
and seasonality of productivity; controls on intensity and spatial scale of
hypoxia, and its relationship to circulation and productivity.