* 1419809
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Slip Distribution over Multiple Timescales across the Central Walker Lane: Implications for the Evolution of an Active Tectonic Plate Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jackie Langille, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 112,214.00

The Walker Lane is an enigmatic zone of northwest-trending belt of deformation
that straddles the California and Nevada border and is nearly 700 kilometers
long. It is primarily characterized by northwest-striking faults that show
evidence of right-lateral shear. The faults of the Walker Lane have formed in
response to deformation related to relative motion of the Pacific and North
American tectonic plates as they slide past one another. The goal of this study
is to investigate the spatial and temporal distribution of fault slip and motion
along a set of active faults across the relatively narrow eastern part of the
central Walker Lane in Nevada. This research will yield the first fault slip
rates from right-lateral (dextral) faults using modern geologic techniques
collected over multiple time scales on these faults. The results will bracket
the timing of dextral faulting and will result in more accurate fault slip rates
during the Quaternary (i.e., from about 2.6 million years to the present-day).
The data obtained in this study will aid in developing improved estimates of
seismic hazards in the region. In addition to the scientific objectives of the
study, the project will contribute to strengthening and diversify the geoscience
academic workforce through mentorship of two early career scientists; it will
promote interdisciplinary research projects through collaborations among
students, faculty, and researchers from multiple institutions; it will
contribute to the training of the next generation of scientists by involvement
in research and high impact inquiry-based course activities; will disseminate
these activities to the teaching community for adoption in their own courses to
increase geoscience literacy; and will enhance scientific literacy of the public
by developing an outreach program of lectures and online land- and aerial-based
videos. The project represents collaboration and partnerships between
educational and research institutions of diverse scale and mission, as well as
with state and governmental agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators will investigate the spatial and temporal distribution of faulting
and fault kinematics along a set of active northwest-striking dextral faults
across the relatively narrow eastern part of the central Walker Lane, Nevada.
The research involves an integrated program of geologic mapping including
terrestrial laser scanning structural and kinematic studies, and geochronology
using 40Ar/39Ar, terrestrial cosmogenic 10Be and 36Cl, and U-series dating. The
research is motivated by: ongoing GPS studies of contemporary dextral strain
accumulation in the central Walker Lane; geologic studies of dextral strain
release across wider zones of deformation in the northern and southern Walker
Lane; and proposed changes in the forces driving deformation over time including
edge forces (related to changing directions and rates of relative motion between
the Pacific and North American plates) and internal forces (increased
gravitational potential energy as a consequence of recent uplift of the Sierra
Nevada). The Walker Lane is a zone of dextral shear that accommodates
approximately 25% of the Pacific-North American relative plate motion that is
superimposed on Basin and Range extension. Our proposed research program across
the central Walker Lane will yield dextral fault slip rates collected over
multiple time scales (millions to thousands) and brackets on the timing of
dextral faulting. Documenting the strain release patterns along faults in this
part of the Walker Lane will allow the principal investigators to characterize
the spatial and temporal patterns of strain release along faults in this part of
the Walker Lane. Combining these data with similar geologic studies ongoing
elsewhere in the Walker Lane, and studies ongoing throughout the Walker Lane
will allow the principal investigators to document the magnitude of strain
partitioning among the western and eastern central Walker Lane, the adjacent
Basin and Range, and the northern Walker Lane. Examination of these data will
allow assessment of whether patterns of strain in the Walker Lane have changed
in synchrony with known changes in potential driving forces the western U.S.
This project will support the continued development and application of U-series
geochronological techniques for dating late Quaternary landforms and deposits.
The combination of terrestrial cosmogenic radionuclide and U-series
geochronology used in this study will provide a comprehensive evaluation of its
application to dating late Quaternary landforms and deposits in the Great Basin
that will inform future slip-rate studies in this region and worldwide.