* 1419401
* Political Party Database Project: How Parties Shape Democracy in Parliamentary Systems
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Susan Scarrow, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 264,796.00

A key question in comparative politics and political science concerns how
established political parties can best cope with economic, social and
environmental problems while engaging citizens in the political process. Many
countries with parliamentary democracies are currently facing multiple crises of
representation. In response, citizens sometimes turn to radical new party
alternatives, or become disaffected and pull out of the political process
altogether. Such developments raise critical questions about how parties respond
to citizens' disaffection and discontent, and about how these changes affect
their links with citizens, and the political balances within and between
parties. These are not new questions, but the lack of readily available and
standardized cross-national data has hindered comparative research in this area.
This project aims to advance the understanding of representation in
parliamentary democracies by promoting the systematic cross-national study of
key political institutions and processes. In terms of intellectual merit, the
project will bring together scholars from twenty countries to analyze previously
collected data on over 160 political parties in those twenty countries. The
scope of the data will allow the researchers to analyze the impact of party
structures and resources on democratic representation. In terms of broader
impacts, a key outcome of the project is a free on-line Political Party
Database. The project members will promote awareness and use of the Database by
holding workshops in the United States and Europe which will be specifically
designed to introduce the data to potential beneficiaries, including democracy-
promoting non-governmental organizations, scholars in related fields, and
graduate students. The data and analyses produced for this project will
contribute to ongoing debates about how best to strengthen party-based
representative democracies in areas such as political party finance, intra-party
democracy, and female participation in politics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project not only brings together scholars from a large number of countries, but
also with diverse and complementary expertise, including expertise on electoral
systems, political finance, intra-party democracy, women's participation in
politics, and interest-group representation. This diversity is integral to the
project; it will allow the data to be structured and analyzed in ways so that
multiple research and practitioner communities will be able to make meaningful
inferences from the data. The undertaking will strengthen cross-generational as
well as cross-national research networks, with doctoral and post-doctoral
students playing key roles in the project. The project also consciously promotes
participation of female scholars in what was once a predominantly male subfield,
with women constituting over one third of the leaders of the project team.