* 1419672
* Chronological Change In Domestic Economy And Provisioning Strategy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Hauser, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 147,146.00

In many regions of the developing world millions of people live in rural
environments in highly stratified societies - India, for example, is a case in
point. As population size increases, pressure on the land grows and the land
itself becomes degraded, how can populations adapt over the long run? Through
the examination of historical cases researchers can examine such processes over
the course of decades. This project gains general significance within that
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an international team, Dr. Mark W. Hauser
will conduct two field seasons of archaeological excavations in Dominica,
British West Indies. The team brings together experts in archaeology, history,
and environmental research to study slave settlements following the introduction
of sugar plantation agriculture. The acquisition of new colonial territories,
including Dominica, by Britain in 1763, was one moment where an entrenched
population was confronted with new political and economic regimes. Within 20
years the primary colonial economy had changed, as population increased by a
magnitude of 10 and many plantations began to produce crops like sugar and
coffee destined for the European markets. Changes often degraded the island
environment and created a crisis in food supplies. The team hopes to understand
with a rich archaeological record of finds (both important and locally made
everyday objects and food remains) how enslaved Africans and their children
contributed and accommodated to new economic, political and environmental
regimes. Specifically the team will compare the diet, market activities, and
household architecture of slaves before and after Britain took over
Dominica.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The nature of the research questions requires
basic data principally in residential areas that allow the identification of
slave households, their diet, and the economic networks that were employed to
furnish their households. Once these data are recovered, dating on the ground of
the political transition into empire can be worked out by using time specific
objects known from many previous studies. With the rich and specific
archaeological collections, we hope to reconstruct the organization of
plantation settlements in which owners, slaves, and managers each had important
roles to play. Specific tasks are 1) completely survey map the region of
Soufriere and the surrounding rural settlements, 2) conduct test excavations and
larger excavations of house areas for a sample of houses at the settlements, 4)
complete the analysis of all artifacts collected, 5) to integrate the
documentary data with the survey and excavation data for academic publication
and popular presentations to both American and Dominican audiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The colonial slave life project will provide much needed substantive
information that will help investigate important theoretical topics of the
colonial experience. The intellectual merit of the research will be to test
social and economic theories of power and methods of identifying the material
contributions of ordinary people, two issues confronting contemporary
archaeology. The broader impacts of the study are that it will produce new
information about Caribbean history. Since no project has focused solely on how
environmental and economic changes associated with sugar cane production
affected common people, the substantial increase in knowledge will provide the
possibility major revisions in the scientific understanding of colonization and
slavery. Caribbean and U.S. students will participate in the project to enhance
their training and increase their knowledge of Caribbean history and the
material and intellectual contributions of Africans in the Americas.