* 1419196
* Making Big and Complex Data Easier to Assemble and Analyze in Distributed CI Environments: Expanding on Metagenomics Challenges Defined by CAMERA
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2016
* Mark Ellisman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 01/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The Community Cyberinfrastructure for Advanced Microbial Ecology Research and
Analysis (CAMERA, http://camera.calit2.net/) is a semantically enabled database
and distributed computational infrastructure that provides a single system for
depositing, locating, analyzing, visualizing, and sharing microbial biology
data. With the rapid advance of newer DNA sequencing methods, so called Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies, such as Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq, it
is becoming increasingly difficult for researchers using sequencing data to meet
the computing requirements for large-scale NGS datasets with existing methods.
In response to these aspects of the BIG DATA challenge, the CAMERA team is
developing new bioinformatics algorithms, high performance computing solutions,
visualization interfaces, and data resources to specifically address the NGS
data analysis challenges. Here, the group proposes a crosscutting methodology
for analyzing NGS data that marries innovative bioinformatics algorithms and
workflows with leading edge computational methods for managing large scale
distributed computing. The integration of XSEDE resources for BIG DATA analysis
will provide the scale and specification necessary to drive the development of
this system. This project will be conducted over two years. Year one will be
focused on the refinement of core CAMERA CI (e.g. Panfish) and the continued
development of core NGS workflows/algorithms. Specifically, CAMERA CI will be
extended to take full advantage of two new NSF XSEDE resources to be
commissioned in early 2015 (Wrangler at TACC &amp; Comet at SDSC). Year 2 will
be focused on the production integration of Wrangler and Comet and the
subsequent deployment of the NGS workflows (via CAMERA CI) to the entire CAMERA
community. These new software tools and pipelined processes facilitate the
processing and analyze very large-scale metagenomic data on the scale of tens of
GB per sample and provide comprehensive and unique functions such as 16S
analysis[7], taxonomy binning[8], assembly, rRNA finding, clustering, filtering,
function and pathway annotation, and visualization]. These next generation tools
enable orders of magnitude faster computational process, more comprehensive
analysis, integrated data output, and novel ways to investigate complex data,
once made to operate in extensible HPC cloud environments. The Broader Impact is
viewed as that currently, manual operations are necessary to complete analysis
with these tools due to the complexity of the process and the large number of
software tools involved. The goal of this project is to develop a series of
fully integrated and easy-to-use analysis workflows encapsulating these tools.
These new workflows of software tools will significantly improve NGS data
analysis for researchers who use metagenomics as an investigative tool,
researchers who are now impeded by challenges with regard to managing and
analyzing BIG DATA.