* 1419319
* EDU: Teachers' Resources for Online Privacy Education (TROPE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Gerald Friedland, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 319,962.00

Building on our previous research and educational work in online privacy, this
project proposes to develop a Teacher's Kit that supports high school educators
and undergraduate instructors in teaching fundamental principles and best
practices for online behavior to protect privacy. The proposal plans to develop
classroom-ready teaching modules to teach young people why and how to protect
their privacy online, and a Teacher's Guide with background information,
suggested lesson plans, and guidance on how to employ the modules in the
classroom. The project's 5- to 10-minute videos, featuring experts explaining
important concepts and effective protection techniques in accessible terms, will
be accompanied by classroom discussion guides and stand-alone activities in
which students explore how the structure of the Internet affects online privacy.
The team for this effort consists of privacy researchers, who have a track
record of privacy-related technical publications, curriculum developers and
hands-on educators. The project team will include educators and interns from the
Berkeley Foundation for Opportunities in Information Technology (BFOIT) that
nurtures computing talent in local minority and female high-school students. The
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program funds proposals that address
Cybersecurity from a Trustworthy Computing Systems perspective; a Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on
Cybersecurity Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the lack of
comprehensive set of field-tested teaching materials to meet current U.S.
curricular standards related to privacy. It grounds higher-level privacy
concepts and best practices for behavior by providing students with a solid
grasp of how the technical architecture of the Internet affects online privacy.
The project emphasizes individual protective behaviors sets as oppose to
government regulation or industry policy which dominate practical applications
of privacy research. The project will develop classroom-ready teaching modules
to provide students with an understanding of some basic technical and social
principles underlying how online privacy works, knowledge of effective
techniques they can use to protect their privacy, and the motivation to use
those techniques when they go online.