* 1419869
* CSR: Small: Split Virtual Machine Execution for Reliability and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jakub Szefer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 227,574.00

Data centers are the backbone of cloud computing, which has become an important
computing paradigm due to its economic benefits. Reliability and security
aspects of cloud computing, however, still need more investigation. In cloud
computing, virtual machines (also called virtual servers or VMs) are one of the
primary units of computation: customers lease VMs, each encapsulating an
operating system and a customer's applications. In cloud computing data centers,
many physical servers - each running hypervisor virtualization software -
provide compute resources needed to run the virtual servers. In emergency
situations like hardware failure or the security breach of a physical server, a
VM needs to be immediately moved away from the affected physical server on which
it is running. However, no single unaffected physical server may have the exact
resources needed to run the VM at that exact instance in time. Meanwhile, two or
more servers may collectively have the resources needed to run the VM. This
project aims to allow a VM to be split so it can be run on two or more servers
together in such a situation. This has promise of increasing the reliability,
security and utilization of private, commercial and government cloud computing
providers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore an innovative idea of
Split-VM execution, a new technique that will allow for a VM to be broken up
into smaller pieces and to continue executing as one, while the pieces are on
different physical servers. A particular focus of the project will be on
splitting a VM into two pieces and showing that such operation can be done
transparently and efficiently. Issues of memory coherency and interrupt
management among the split pieces of the VM residing on different physical
severs will be addressed in this research as well. New protocols for
synchronizing and controlling the two pieces of the VM will be developed so that
the underlying virtualization software running on different physical servers can
manage the VMs while they are operating in the Split-VM mode enabling both
pieces of a Split-VM to have same view of the memory, and events, such as
interrupts, to be seamlessly delivered between the two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project will offer insight into transparently splitting
a VM into parts that can run on separate physical servers. These splitting
mechanisms will be developed and prototyped on popular open-source Linux
operating system and on open-source Xen virtualization software, with new code
shared back to the community. Performance of the splitting operation and also of
the execution of the VM after splitting will be evaluated to give insights into
the performance of the proposed idea and to help quantify its reliability and
security benefits. The proposed work will also be a stepping-stone to guide
future research on splitting VMs into many pieces, not just two. This Split-VM
project is thus a first step towards improving cloud data center utilization,
reliability and security by enabling commodity VMs to be transparently split
among different physical servers.