* 1419322
* Gordon Research Conference (GRC) Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere: Interactions in a Changing World; Girona - Costa Brava, Spain; June 29-July 4, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Allison Steiner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

Atmospheric science researchers from international universities, government
laboratories, and private research institutes, will meet under the auspices of
the Gordon Research Conferences (GRC) to discuss information and ideas on topic
of biogenic hydrocarbons and the atmosphere. A Gordon Research Conference is not
only an arena dedicated to presentations and discussions of cutting edge
research but also traditionally an outstanding opportunity for junior scientists
(e.g., senior graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and assistant
professors) to interact with senior and world-leading scientists in diverse
fields. This workshop, "Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere: Interactions
in a Changing World" will take place in Spain from 29 June-4 July 2014.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together leaders and scholars
from several different scientific communities, including biologists, ecosystem
ecologists, and atmospheric scientists to report and discuss the latest research
findings on hydrocarbon emissions and biosynthesis, ecosystem-atmosphere
interactions, and transport and chemical processing of hydrocarbons in the
atmosphere. Discussions will take place to identify and address current gaps in
present knowledge about biogenic hydrocarbons and the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference support is focused on promoting the attendance
of U.S. participants who are postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and early
career scientists. Other federal agencies and private companies are providing
additional support. This meeting will be the 7th Gordon Research Conference to
address the topic of "Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere," the first of
which was in the year 2000.