* 1419886
* School for the Study of Earthquakes: nucleation, triggering, and relationships with aseismic processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 11,999.00

This proposal requests funds to help support a number of U.S. graduate students,
and postdocs to attend the School of "Study of Earthquakes: nucleation,
triggering, and relationships with aseismic processes" to be held at the
Institut d'Etudes Scientifiques de Cargese in France, from November 3 to
November 10, 2014. The conference website can be found at
http://isterre.fr/annuaire/pages-web-du-personnel/david-marsan/article/cargese-
earthquakes-2014?lang=fr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This school aims to provide an
intimate venue for a focused review of the current understanding of earthquake
related processes in light of the recent advances in quality and quantity of
data sets and in computational capabilities. The goal of the workshop is to
bring together the leading experts in earthquake processes from around the
world, and to provide back-to-back lectures with contrasting views on several of
these processes in order to stimulate a broader discussion, to explore new
datasets and ideas, to produce a much wider understanding of the issues, and
ultimately build consensus thus improving earthquake preparedness and
forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are requested to support living
expenses during the school for 14 U.S. students and post-docs. The proposed
funding will contribute to the development of the emerging earthquake
seismologists by providing them with the opportunity to meet and interact with
leading national and international researchers, gaining deeper understanding and
broader perspective of the issues related to earthquake related processes, and
forming the basis for future collaborations. All participants receiving support
are required to bring a poster and prepare a short presentation. The US
organizing committee will leverage over existing programs within the USGS, the
American Geophysical Union, and the American Geoscience Institute in order to
promote participations of underrepresented groups. Earthquake science questions
to be discussed at this meeting have significant societal and economic
implications, because of their implications for earthquake hazards.