* 1419362
* EDU: Collaborative: PicoCTF: Teaching Cybersecurity To High School Students through Scalable Challenges
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* David Brumley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,999.00

This project will help motivate students early to pursue Cybersecurity careers
by providing capture-the-flag (CTF) Cybersecurity contest that is scalable,
effective, and approachable for a large and diverse group of students. This
project will enhance PicoCTF 2013 organized by the Principal Investigator (PI)
Brumley with more than 10,000 participating students from over 950 schools,
making it the largest Cybersecurity competition ever held. The proposed research
seeks to leverage CTF events to provide an engaging education environment that
introduces middle and high school students to fundamental ideas in
Cybersecurity. In addition, the proposed work will investigate novel ideas,
including auto-generated problems and just-in-time teaching. The competition
will be built on an open-source platform, using extensive collected data to
evaluate the effectiveness of new techniques, and improve subsequent versions of
PicoCTF. This data-driven approach, combined with efforts to integrate CTFs into
the classroom will help expand the current scale of Cybersecurity education. The
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program funds proposals that address
Cybersecurity from a Trustworthy Computing Systems perspective; a Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on
Cybersecurity Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale Cybersecurity
education currently takes predominately two forms: online classes with
structured curricula and competitions with ad-hoc learning objectives. Massive
open online courses (MOOCs) can be a cost-effective way to educate students at
scale, but recent studies have found these courses suffer from extremely low
retention rates and mostly serve students who have already completed
undergraduate degrees. In contrast, large-scale CTFs succeed at engaging
students, but often fail to help them learn new concepts or gain deep
understanding. The proposed work will focus on a combined approach where CTFs
promote initial encouragement and problem-driven engagement, which is backed-up
by well-integrated learning materials. The project will have a considerable
impact by improving both the quality and the scale of Cybersecurity education in
the United States. By developing an integrated Cybersecurity curriculum, the
proposed research will supplement the engaging nature of CTF competitions with a
cohesive educational experience. PicoCTF will be provided as an open-source
platform for running independent CTF competitions, allowing others to experiment
with ideas of their own.