* 1419366
* Relative sea-level changes from near-, intermediate- and far-field locations and their implications for geophysical modeling and 20th century ice sheet-ocean interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Benjamin Horton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 03/31/2015
* USD 41,133.00

The goal of this research is to synthesize a database of sea-level observations
in a systematic and rigorous fashion for the Atlantic coast of North America,
Bermuda and the Caribbean for the last 20,000 years. The database will
facilitate the interpretation of relative sea-level (RSL) change on a regional
scale and enable the tuning and refinement of Earth system models that focus on
predicting RSL change and its spatial variability. The database consists of 60
study locations, permitting a suite of geophysical parameters to be constrained.
Earth?s lower mantle viscosity will be defined by near-field and ice-margin RSL
data from the Atlantic coast of Canada and northeastern United States while the
upper mantle viscosity will be reliant on intermediate-field RSL data from the
mid Atlantic. Far-field RSL data from the southern United States and Caribbean
will constrain ice-equivalent meltwater input. The database will be further used
to decontaminate 20th century rates of sea-level rise from tides gauges to
reveal spatial variability related to ocean mass and volume
changes.&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this project is a database of sea level from
North America (the Atlantic coast of Canada and the United States) and the
Caribbean that stretches back 20,000 years. This will be significant to a number
of disciplines in the Earth sciences. For example, careful reconstruction of sea
levels from the past will reveal the contribution from land-based ice to sea-
level change during deglaciation after the last ice age. In addition, the data
will provide vital constraints on key parameters in geophysical models of the
Earth that are used in a variety of other applications (e.g., plate tectonics,
glaciology and paleoclimate). Overall, the observations will extend the time
range of comparisons with historical and present-day changes. Consequently, this
research promises to increase our understanding of the driving mechanisms of sea
level change and enhance our predictions of 21st century sea-level rise. The
research will also provide an important and unique contribution to the
assessment of national hazards with respect to sea-level rise and coastal
responses.