* 1419379
* IDBR:   A Microscope Stage-Mounted Miniaturized Tissue Sectioning Device Enabling Automated, Extended 3-D Volume Imaging of Fluorescent Protein Labeled Biological Samples
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2014
* David Koos, Children's Hospital Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 09/30/2014
* USD 154,052.00

Genetically encoded fluorescent protein tags are excellent tools for directly
visualizing specific cell populations, ideally suited for studying multi-
cellular events such as tissue differentiation, organ growth and the
establishment of neural connectivity dispersed over large regions. Using
fluorescent protein technologies to study large samples in their entirety at
high resolution will provide unprecedented insight into the interactions and
interdependencies that occur throughout the sample. Unfortunately, the field of
view of current high-resolution imaging tools is severely restricted, making it
difficult to study large samples. Extended volume imaging techniques allow
multiple, overlapping regions to be imaged in order to reconstruct a high-
resolution, composite, three dimensional volume much larger than a single
microscopic field of view. However, the best currently available techniques are
not compatible with fluorescent protein signal, because they employ an organic
solvent-based embedding procedure that can denature fluorescent proteins that
ruins their fluorescence and prevents direct visualization.

To fill this unmet need, an automated, integrated aqueous tissue sectioning
microscope stage will be developed and deployed. Compatibility with fluorescent
proteins is maintained by eliminating all organic-solvent processing steps.
Furthermore, by miniaturizing the device, it will be made compatible with the
standard upright laser scanning microscopes that biologists, neuroscientists and
other practitioners are currently using.

The features, design and implementation of the aqueous tissue sectioning
microscope stage for three dimensional, extended volume imaging will be publicly
disseminated in both publications and on web pages of the Caltech Biological
Imaging Center. In addition, optimized protocols for mounting, sectioning and
imaging samples from a variety of model organisms will be freely distributed to
facilitate widespread adoption of the new device. The eventual widespread
availability of this modular microscope accessory will allow researchers from
all over the world to modify an existing laser scanning microscope to perform
three dimensional extended volume imaging of fluorescent protein labeled
biological samples. Undergraduate students will be involved in the
multidisciplinary instrument development project through the Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship program, and representation of
underrepresented students in science and engineering will be increased through
the Minority Undergraduate Research Fellowship program.