* 1419506
* Experimental Method Development And Applications Of Metabolomics In Residue Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jelmer Eerkens, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 204,972.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Shannon Tushingham, David Gang,
and Jelmer Eerkens will advance residue extraction and chemical fingerprinting
techniques to identify psychoactive plant use in the past. The research will
provide archaeologists with a new set of analytical tools that may be applied in
similar studies investigating the spread and use of ritual and medicinal
psychoactive plants in the ancient Americas and beyond. Development of least
invasive methods will increase the potential data set of archaeological
specimens. Application of metabolomics research is a new avenue in archaeology
that has the potential to develop a panel of molecular (metabolite) markers for
the analysis of archaeological specimens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary team of archaeologists and analytical chemists will employ
mass spectrometry (MS) analysis and metabolomics research tools to chemically
profile smoke plants and medicinal teas, develop methods where plant biomarkers
are identified from archaeological artifacts, and test assumptions concerning
use of psychoactive plants in ancient societies. Chemical analysis of alkaloid
residue extracted from archaeological artifacts provides a means to track past
plant use and has great potential. However, methodological development in
controlled laboratory settings is in its infancy. The purpose of conducting
laboratory experiments is to better understand how to extract residues from
ancient artifacts. A specific concern is to address basic gaps in methods and
understanding how the biochemical signature of a particular plant changes
through the cooking and/or smoking process as well as archaeological
preservation. The intent is to establish the least invasive chemical
profiling/analysis methods possible that can be used on artifacts, while at the
same time producing a sufficient amount of biochemical data where residues can
confidently be identified and contribute to archaeological
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers include three advanced
scholars, graduate students, and undergraduate assistants who will participate
in the experimental, evaluative, and publication phases and participate in
interdisciplinary seminars. They will disseminate results at the international,
national, and local level through professional and public publications,
presentations, a museum exhibit, a mobile display, and an educational website
including podcasts and videos.