* 1419973
* Generalization Across Multiple Mathematical Areas
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Amy Ellis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,499,908.00

The recommendation to make generalization a central component of mathematics
instruction from elementary school through undergraduate mathematics poses
serious challenges in light of the research base that identifies students'
difficulties in creating and expressing correct mathematical generalizations and
the challenges teachers face in supporting students' abilities to generalize.
Furthermore, although student difficulties are well documented, the
instructional conditions necessary for fostering generalization are not well
understood, particularly at the secondary and undergraduate levels. This project
addresses these challenges by developing a comprehensive framework
characterizing productive mathematical generalization in Grades 8-16 and
identifying instructional interventions that can support correct generalizing.
The project occurs within multiple mathematical domains extending from middle
school to undergraduate mathematics, including algebra, geometry, calculus, and
combinatorics. The project investigators will leverage student interviews,
teaching experiments, and design experiment methodologies in order to
characterize the processes of generalizing and to identify the instructional
conditions that support productive generalization. The results of the project
will identify specific tasks and activities fostering student generalizing in a
diversity of mathematical settings, which will be of practical use to teachers,
school districts, teacher educators, and university
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical generalization, the ability to
create general rules, formulas, and strategies, is a key aspect of doing
mathematics. Policy makers recommend making generalization a central component
of mathematics instruction at every grade level from elementary school through
undergraduate mathematics, with the Common Core State Standards highlighting
generalization as a major goal in both the content and the practice standards.
However, these recommendations pose serious challenges given students' pervasive
difficulties in creating and expressing generalizations. In a report on
performance assessments from more than 60,000 secondary students, findings
revealed only a 20% success rate in students' creation of correct general
statements. Students' challenges with mathematical generalizations also
contribute to difficulties in mathematics achievement in many domains, including
algebra, geometry, and combinatorics. This project will address these challenges
by investigating how students generalize productively and how teachers can
support more effective mathematical generalization. Through student interviews
and teaching experiments, the project investigators will explore these issues in
algebra, geometry, calculus, and combinatorics. Student participants will range
from middle school students through undergraduates. The diverse range of student
ages and mathematical domains will contribute to a robust model characterizing
how students generalize in Grades 8-16. These findings will also identify
instructional activities that can better support generalization in many
different settings, which will be of use to teachers, school districts, teacher
educators, and university instructors. The knowledge generated from the project
will support improved student performance in critical areas of undergraduate
mathematics, thus contributing to a diverse and globally competitive STEM
workforce.