* 1419053
* Collaborative Research: Phase-field models, algorithms and simulations for multiphase complex fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jie Shen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,998.00

Mixtures of two or more immiscible viscous and/or complex fluid components are
widely used in many science and engineering applications, in particular, in
designing advanced materials involving polymers, composites, gels, liquid
crystals, etc. It is expected that the proposed models and numerical
methods/simulations will contribute to a better understanding of the complex
physical and mathematical issues related to multiphase complex fluids, and
provide valuable information for the design of advanced materials and on the
rheological and hydrodynamic properties of complex fluids. The proposed research
will also provide valuable opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
to engage in interdisciplinary research with strong ties to biological and
engineering material systems, to learn critical skills of computational and
applied mathematics, and to develop state-of-the-art numerical tools for science
and engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flows of multiphase complex
fluid mixtures usually involve the coupling of microstructures, interfacial
morphology and macroscopic hydrodynamics. The complexity of these nonlinear
couplings presents many mathematical challenges for modeling and algorithm
development, numerical analysis and implementation. The proposed research aims
at overcoming these challenges to design efficient and accurate numerical
algorithms for nonlinear multiphase complex fluid systems that couple the
microstructure, moving material interfaces and hydrodynamics. Very few efforts
have been made to address these numerical challenges. This project will result
in numerical schemes which satisfy discrete energy dissipation laws, and which
allow large time steps and controllable error and capture the interfacial
dynamics accurately. In addition, the developed predictive tools and numerical
simulations will extend the applicability of mathematical analysis and numerical
codes to physical problems of current interest, and contribute to a better
understanding of pressing science and engineering applications.