* 1419744
* Status, Faction Sizes and Social Influence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,03/31/2016
* David Melamed, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2016
* USD 144,540.00

This project integrates psychological and sociological theories of social
influence into a single framework. Within psychology, the distribution of
opinions in task groups is one of the dominant factors explaining social
influence, with people being influenced by the majority in a group. Within
sociology, status characteristics, such as educational attainment, general
intelligence, and even gender, have been shown to be related to social
influence, with higher status people being more influential over group decision
making. This project examines how the distribution of opinions and relative
status combine to affect social influence. As such, it contributes to research
and theory in sociology and psychology, and also contributes to generalizable
knowledge regarding how the structure of task groups may shape their outcomes.

Two laboratory studies constitute the empirical component of this project. The
first uses highly controlled protocols to isolate the joint effects of status
and the distribution of opinions on social influence. The experimental
procedures ensure other factors are not explaining variations in social
influence. The second study applies the theory to groups of individuals that
will be recruited from the broader community. Specifically, groups of three or
six people will be invited to the laboratory to participate in an open
interaction session. They will be asked to form an opinion about a task, to
share that opinion with the group, and then asked for their final opinions.
Changes in initial opinions constitutes social influence, and is expected to
follow from status processes and the distribution of opinions in predictable
ways. These groups will systematically vary in their composition by gender, age,
occupation, and race. Statistical modeling will be employed to discern the
effects of status and the distribution of opinions on social influence.