* 1419313
* EDU: Enhancing Cybersecurity Education for Native Students Using Virtual Laboratories
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Brent Lagesse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 292,958.00

This proposal will develop an educational link between the Yakama Nation and the
University of Washington at Bothell to enhance Cybersecurity education for
Native students using virtual laboratories. The laboratories will use scenarios
to provide hands-on experience in the practical aspects of Cybersecurity. The
project will use a new approach to Cybersecurity education that focuses on
established success indicators for Native students. The project will focus on an
educational design that appeals to the students in areas that are defined as key
indicators of academic success. It will enhance students' experiences in these
key indicative areas and will develop an architecture and software that can be
utilized by other educational organizations to share resources via a virtual
laboratory. The expected outcome of this project is a program consisting of two
courses that can be taught at any level, but are focused on middle and high
school students. These courses will utilize the Structure of Observed Learning
Outcomes taxonomy developed by John Biggs to approach the material and validate
the educational progress of the students. The project will provide a community-
building and educational experience that will engage a diverse set of students
and teachers focusing on the opportunity for success for student groups that
have traditionally poor success rates in higher education. The Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program funds proposals that address Cybersecurity
from a Trustworthy Computing Systems perspective; a Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on Cybersecurity
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will reach groups of students that
have not had success in traditional higher education programs and will help to
establish a community between existing students and future students from these
groups. The courses and software developed in this project will be able to be
reused for other Native student communities that want to establish virtual
laboratories, regardless of their particular cultural backgrounds. This proposal
will develop a model for Cybersecurity education that can be used to provide
high quality and practical education at a low cost to Native students and is
designed to encourage them to continue their education pathways.