* 1419397
* Student Support for participation in a Penrose Conference - Linkages and feedbacks in orogenic processes: a conference honoring the career of Robert D. Hatcher, Jr
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Harold Stowell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal provides support for student participation for students to
participate in the Geological Society of America Penrose Conference "Linkages
and feedbacks in orogenic processes - a conference honoring the career of Robert
D. Hatcher, Jr, which will be held 30 March?4 April 2014 2014 in Asheville, NC.
The conference will provide a forum to synthesize our understanding of orogenic
systems, with specific emphasis placed on the consistent integration of multiple
datasets that characterize process linkages and reconciliation of theoretical-
numerical vs. field-derived models. For example, in many orogens, fault
kinematics control the redistribution of heat-producing material and drive
advection, which in turn sets up the thermal structure of the orogen. Thermal
structure controls lithospheric rheology, which determines the nature and
distribution of deformation and strain localization. The structural architecture
governs fault kinematics, which act in conjunction with climate to focus
erosional and exhumation processes. Therefore, explicit characterization of
these links and their associated feedbacks are critical for understanding the
evolution of orogenic systems. This conference represents a unique opportunity
for graduate students to present their own research results within a focused
scientific venue and to interact and network with scientists who are conducting
innovative research on collisional orgogenic belts. Support for students in the
conference will directly enhance science education through the participants
increased awareness and ability to integrate field, analytical, and model based
science. Participants will be in an excellent position to disseminate these
ideas to the research community and the general public, and the experience will
greatly enhance their future scientific careers.