* 1419422
* Workshop on Fostering Diversity in the Design Automation  for Emerging Computing Community
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Ian Harris, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

The proposed workshop will expose the underrepresented students to major
milestones achieved in research on emerging computing paradigms, and will
attempt to engage them in critical research issues. The plan is also to expose
them to the challenges of interdisciplinary research. Additionally, the workshop
will provide the attendees a platform for further networking and potential
mentoring opportunities. The inclusion of women and minority experts from
academia as well as industry laboratories in the workshop will make this latter
goal achievable. Furthermore, the workshop has the potential to foster a sense
of community among (underrepresented) students and researchers in fields related
to emerging computing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The national
need for including women, minorities and other underrepresented groups in STEM
areas e.g., in science and engineering, is well known and cannot be overstated.
This is particularly true in fields related to computing. The present proposal
aims to broaden participation and addresses the lack of representation of
minority and women in the particular area of emerging computing and
microelectronic design automation. Since the workshop will be attended by
underrepresented graduate students as well as by leaders in academia, industry,
recruiters and program directors from various federal agencies, it will create a
powerful networking, mentoring environment to enhance collaboration and further
opportunities.