* 1419036
* 14th National Conference and Global Forum on Science, Policy, and the Environment: Building Climate Solutions
* GEO,ICER
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Peter Saundry, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

This award to The National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) will
support the 14th National Conference and Global Forum on Science, Policy and the
Environment on Building Climate Solutions January 28-30, 2014 in Crystal City,
VA. The conference will advance strategies for how science can support decision-
making related to climate change and the built environment, agriculture and
natural resources. Topics will include mitigation solutions to minimize the
consequences of climate change and adaptation solutions for those consequences
that cannot be avoided. Over 1,200 participants from higher education
institutions, government, civil society organizations, research and policy
organizations, business, international organizations are coming together to work
across traditional boundaries to connect science to decision-making. The
conference will emphasize putting ideas into action by creating opportunities
for participating scientists to share the results of their research and receive
feedback on how they can more effectively advance knowledge that supports
decision-making. These interactions will strengthen the connection between
science and societal needs and achieves impact by engaging partnering
organizations who will connect science to decision-making through specific new
and ongoing initiatives, to be implemented and carried forward following the
conference. The conference program will feature 11 keynote addresses, 7 plenary
sessions, 30 symposia and 24 interactive breakout workshops. Over 200
distinguished thought leaders, scientists, government officials; policy experts
and international authorities will speak over the course of the three-day event.