* 1419278
* 2014 GRC/GRS Biointerface Science: Engineered Biomolecular Interfaces, June 14-20, 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Stefan Zauscher, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 11/30/2014
* USD 8,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research is
in support of the Gordon Research Conference/Gordon Research Symposium titled
"2014 GRC/GRS Biointerface Science: Engineered Biomolecular Interfaces" to be
held on June 14-20, 2014 in Il Ciocco, Italy. This award is cofunded by the
Nano- Biosensor program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG/CBET). The objectives of this
Conference are: 1) organizing a strong scientific program on Biomolecular
Engineered Interfaces; 2) bringing together a diverse group of speakers
comprised of both established leaders and young researchers with a focus on
underrepresented minority scientists and women; 3) promoting cross-disciplinary
fertilization of new ideas in Biointerface Sciences; and 4) creating a sense of
community by promoting interaction among scientists of junior faculty members,
students, postdocs with prominent senior investigators in the field. This
Conference will address physical science and engineering of surfaces that
interfaces with biology, and would provide new opportunities that will advance
fundamental understanding in building a model for synthetic cells "bottom-up,"
and rewiring of intercellular interactions. Devising novel and active material
interfaces that control and manipulate cellular behavior would be the other
outcome. The Conference would include presentations on engineering of
biotic/abiotic interfaces, avenues to control the cell machinery with
possibilities for biomaterial synthesis, and novel approaches to interface with
biology with potential for sensing and manipulation of cellular
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conferences (GRC) are
playing an important role in enhancing the development of researchers in early
stages of their careers. The format of these conferences is designed to foster
an environment of in-depth scientific discussions and to develop long term
collaborations among participants. The associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS)
would provide a venue for drawing in young scientists and researchers including
graduate students, post-docs, and will bring them together in a highly-
stimulating and non-intimidating environment to discuss their current research
and build informal networks with their peers that may lead to a lifetime of
collaborations and scientific achievements. These seminars are organized by
young investigators with the support of leading scientists from the associated
GRC. The majority, if not all, of the GRS participants are expected to
participate in this Symposium immediately following the GRC. The PI will make a
concerted effort for the participation of women, underrepresented minorities and
persons with disabilities, and other individuals who have been traditionally
underrepresented in STEM areas.