* 1419211
* Annual Conference of the National Society of Black Physicists
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Ethan Schreier, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2015
* USD 349,812.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;As the US becomes ever more diverse, it becomes
increasingly important that each field of science becomes more diverse. Physics,
broadly defined, not only lags behind other academic fields in its present level
of diversity, but ranks among the least diverse of the scientific or engineering
disciplines. This award provides support for 246 students to attend the Annual
Conference of the National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP) in the 2014-2015
fiscal years at a location to be determined. The principal goal of this meeting
is to increase the number of minority students (African Americans, Hispanics,
and Native Americans) that receive degrees in physics and to provide mentoring
for physicists at all stages of their careers. The award is to the Associated
Universities Inc. (AUI) which provides its expertise and staff to manage the
grant and work with the NSBP in organizing the meeting and the NSBP brings
recognized experience of hosting past conferences. The NSBP Annual Conference is
a scientific meeting that serves as an opportunity to discuss cutting-edge
science, to disseminate new results, and to spark the exchange of ideas among
students, post-doctoral fellows, and faculty. Through Conference discussions and
seminars that include students, faculty, professionals, and recruiters, it is
possible to learn more about the views and desires of minority physicists. These
insights are valuable to those who are working to increasing diversity in
physics. Abstracts for talks and posters are accepted from a wide range of
physics sub-fields including condensed matter, nuclear, astrophysics and others.
The NSBP Conference has an open abstract process for contributed talks just like
any other conference with invited and plenary speakers, as well as published
proceedings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;As the US becomes ever
more diverse, it becomes increasingly important that each field of science
becomes more diverse. Physics, broadly defined, not only lags behind other
academic fields in its present level of diversity, but ranks among the least
diverse of the scientific or engineering disciplines. This award provides
support for 246 students to attend the Annual Conference of the National Society
of Black Physicists (NSBP) in the 2014-2015 fiscal years. The principal goal of
this meeting is to increase the number of minority students (African Americans,
Hispanics, and Native Americans) that receive degrees in physics and to provide
mentoring for physicists at all stages of their careers. The award is to the
Associated Universities Inc. (AUI) which provides its expertise and staff to
manage the grant and work with the NSBP in organizing the meeting and the NSBP
brings recognized experience of hosting past conferences. The NSBP Annual
Conference is a scientific meeting that serves as an opportunity to discuss
cutting-edge science, to disseminate new results, and to spark the exchange of
ideas among students, post-doctoral fellows, and faculty. Through Conference
discussions and seminars that include students, faculty, professionals, and
recruiters, it is possible to learn more about the views and desires of minority
physicists. These insights are valuable to those who are working to increasing
diversity in physics. Abstracts for talks and posters are accepted from a wide
range of physics sub-fields including condensed matter, nuclear, astrophysics
and others. The NSBP Conference has an open abstract process for contributed
talks just like any other conference with invited and plenary speakers, as well
as published proceedings.