* 1419789
* Collaborative Research:  Neotectonics and Structural Development of the Northern Walker Lane
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lewis Owen, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 55,720.00

The Walker Lane is a major element of the North American-Pacific plate boundary.
This northwest trending zone of discontinuous active faults and disrupted
topography that sits between the Sierra Nevada on the west and the north-
northeast trending faults and ranges of the Great Basin to the east is
associated with a well-defined zone of northwest-directed right-lateral shear
based on GPS data. The Walker Lane has been suggested to mark the future site of
the primary plate boundary thus research on the zone is fundamental to gaining
an understanding of how a transform fault initiates and eventually becomes
organized into a through-going plate boundary. This project focuses on a portion
of northern Walker Lane in western Nevada where geologic evidence of this right-
lateral shear is not evident and there is a discrepancy between geologic and GPS
measurements of slip rate. LiDAR, geochronologic, and paleomagnetic data
collected in this study are used to resolve this mismatch, detect unrecognized
faults, and test if rotation of crustal blocks accommodates shear zone motion.
The societal and scientific impact of the research will be enhanced by inclusion
of both high school and undergraduate science students in the proposed research.
The results will aid in assessment of seismic hazards in the Reno-Carson City
corridor.

This project focuses on the portion of the Walker Lane in Nevada that
encompasses the Lake Tahoe, Carson, Smith, Mason, Antelope, Bridgeport and
Walker Lake basins and Carson and Wabuska structural lineaments. Here, geodetic
data indicate ongoing northwest directed right-lateral shear strain is
accumulating at about 5 to 6 mm/year and cumulative shear displacement of 20-30
km has enigmatically resulted in the development of a set of roughly en echelon
normal fault-bounded basins in the absence of any major northwest-directed
strike-slip faults. This project will collect and analyze LiDAR for evidence of
strike-slip along the major structures of the region, apply cosmogenic,
optically stimulated luminescence, and radiocarbon dating to identified offset
surfaces to better quantify the rate at which faults are slipping, and utilize
gravity and paleomagnetism to clarify the long-term structural development of
the basins. The project will test the hypothesis that the displacement field
across the region is taken up by a combination of vertical-axis rotations,
southeastward translation of crustal blocks approximately parallel to the Walker
Lane, and opening of the en-echelon set of basins. The goals of the research are
to: (1) locally clarify whether or not the mismatch in geodetic rates is real,
(2) assess whether or not the blocks bounding the basins record rotation and, if
so, related to observed basin asymmetry, (3) compare the collected observations
in the framework of prior hypotheses concerning the structural development of
this portion of the Walker Lane, and (4) and integrate the mode of deformation
observed here to elsewhere in the Walker Lane and the San Andreas fault system
with an aim toward understanding the processes associated with the structural
initiation of a continental strike-slip fault system.