* 1419199
* CloudLab: Flexible Scientific Infrastructure to Support Fundamental Advances in Cloud Architectures and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Kuang-Ching Wang, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2019
* USD 10,999,999.00

Many of the ideas that drive modern cloud computing, such as server
virtualization, network slicing, and robust distributed storage, arose from the
research community. But because today's clouds have particular, non-malleable
implementations of these ideas "baked in," they are unsuitable as facilities in
which to conduct research on future cloud architectures. This project creates
CloudLab, a facility that will enable fundamental advances in cloud
architecture. CloudLab will not be a cloud; CloudLab will be large-scale,
distributed scientific infrastructure on top of which many different clouds can
be built. It will support thousands of researchers and run hundreds of
different, experimental clouds simultaneously. The Phase I CloudLab deployment
will provide data centers at Clemson (with Dell equipment), Utah (HP), and
Wisconsin (Cisco), with each industrial partner collaborating to explore next-
generation ideas for cloud architectures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CloudLab will be a
place where researchers can try out ideas using any cloud software stack they
can imagine. It will accomplish this by running at a layer below cloud
infrastructure: it will provide isolated, bare-metal access to a set of
resources that researchers can use to bring up their own clouds. These clouds
may run instances of today's popular stacks, modest modifications to them, or
something entirely new. CloudLab will not be tied to any particular particular
cloud stack, and will support experimentation on multiple in parallel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of cloud computing outside the field of
computer science has been substantial: it has enabled a new generation of
applications and services with direct impacts on society at large. CloudLab is
positioned to have an immediate and substantial impact on the research community
by providing access to the resources it needs to shape the future of clouds.
Cloud architecture research, enabled by CloudLab, will empower a new generation
of applications and services which will bring direct benefit to the public in
areas of national priority such as medicine, smart grids, and natural disaster
early warning and response.