* 1419337
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Wireless Power Transmission Architecture for Devices Implanted in Human Bodies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Jinghong Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 12/31/2014
* USD 161,292.00

The objective of this program is to verify a distributed power transmission
architecture to deliver radio frequency power to devices implanted in human
bodies. The proposed architecture aims to construct efficient and reliable
wireless channels in complex in-body environments for power transfer. If proved
feasible, it would fundamentally resolve a few problems associated with the
state-of-the-art wireless charging technologies, including low efficiency,
potential hazard to human health, and large and heavy
apparatuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is the proposed
distributed power transmission architecture, which is potentially transformative
to enable next-generation systems for wireless power delivery. Specifically, it
has two major innovations. First, radio frequency power is transmitted via
multiple antenna elements physically attached to a large area of skin and
electrically matched to the skin. Second, the multiple antenna elements jointly
behave as a retro-reflective beamformer: guided by the pilot signal sent from an
implanted device, their radiations spatially converge to the target device with
power intensities at all other locations below safety levels regulated for
human.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include (i) promoting the
contemporary Body Area Networks to the next level of integration; (ii)
supporting both graduate and undergraduate students and provide them with
excellent research opportunities; (iii) making constructive impacts to the
science and engineering curricula at the three participating institutes; (iv)
offering local high school students and teachers to participate in the proposed
research activities; and (v) impacting both research and educational aspects of
North Texas' high-tech industries.