* 1419844
* Collaborative Research:   Heterogeneous Rupture of Great Cascadia Earthquakes Inferred from Coastal Subsidence Estimates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Simon Engelhart, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 122,836.00

Of the major subduction zones worldwide, Cascadia has not experienced rupture in
the historical period. For example, each of the Alaska, Chile, Sumatra,
Kamchatka, and Japan/Kurils subduction zones experienced multiple megathrust
ruptures greater than magnitude 8.5 during this time. A critical step toward
understanding Cascadia?s rupture patterns is reconstructing its land-level
history over the past few thousands of years, a history that is linked to past
earthquake cycles. This project uses a novel statistically-based microfossil
(foraminifera and diatoms) analysis coupled with computer modeling to quantify
coseismic subsidence in Cascadia tidal sediments to determine the rupture
patterns of the Cascadia subduction. This project will produce data that is
important to the assessment of seismic and tsunami hazards along the Pacific
coast of North America, as well as for sites subject to teleseismic tsunamis
produced by this region. The project has high potential to benefit society or
advance desired societal outcomes through: 1) full participation of women in
STEM; 2) increased public scientific literacy and public engagement with science
and technology through public outreach efforts; 3) improved well-being of
individuals in society through a better understanding of earthquake hazards in
Cascadia coupled with planned outreach resource managers, decision makers,
planners; 4) development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce
through development of early career researchers, mentoring of a post-doctoral
scholar, involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in research, and
activities for high school and community college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetland sediments fringing estuaries at the
Cascadia subduction zone harbor a record of plate-boundary earthquakes during
the past 5,000 years. These are inferred from stratigraphic evidence of
interbedded peaty and muddy sediment beneath tidal wetlands that are used to
reconstruct land-level changes. However, the precision of past measurements of
land-level changes at Cascadia is low and the measurements are spatially
limited. This makes past measurements insufficient for determining which
hypotheses of plate-boundary deformation are most valid. This project will re-
dress this deficiency by applying recently developed statistical transfer
functions to microfossils to reconstruct Cascadia's rupture patterns and timing
and magnitude of strain release over several thousands of years. This technique
will be employed to test three hypotheses regarding the nature of rupture during
the AD 1700 and three earlier megathrust earthquakes: 1) Coseismic subsidence
varied spatially and temporally during past Cascadia plate-boundary earthquakes;
2) Estimates of coseismic subsidence can differentiate between wide and narrow
rupture widths; and 3) More precise dating of earthquake evidence allows more
direct evaluation of megathrust segmentation. Field, laboratory, computational,
and theoretical investigations will focus on four earthquake events from six
estuaries from southern Oregon to northern Washington. These carefully selected
sites also include a strike-normal transect. A combined approach of
stratigraphic description of buried soils, AMS 14C dating and multi-proxy
microfossil transfer functions, supported by testate amoebae and geochemistry,
will result in the construction of land-level changes. A 3D dislocation model
with the 3D megathrust fault geometry will be used to compare coseismic
deformation to with paleoseismic estimates.