* 1419621
* Communicating appraisals and social motives (CASM): Interpersonal effects of regulated and unregulated emotion expression
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Jonathan Gratch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

All people have first-hand knowledge of the importance of emotional expressions
in our face-to-face encounters with each other. We trust others partly on the
basis of their expressed emotions and in turn, those expressions can help to us
to coordinate with different people's actions and intentions. Yet we also know
that expressions can be manipulated--people can mask or shape their emotion
presentations in order to conceal or disguise their motives, or to protect the
feelings of their social partners. Just as we are aware of the importance of
emotional expressions we also know they can be manipulated. This awareness means
we often refuse to take expressions at face value. This refusal is a double-
edged sword--it can protect us from exploitation but can also undermine the
effectiveness of communication, especially when misjudge authentic expressions
as inauthentic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends prior research on
emotional signaling by examining social situations with the potential for
emotion regulation. Specifically, the investigators believe that: a) emotion
expressions communicate information about the sender's motives; b) senders are
sensitive to these communicative effects and regulate their emotion expressions
in order to shape their impact on receivers (e.g., to communicate empathy or
exert social influence); and c) receivers are aware that these signals may be
regulated or inauthentic, and may factor this in when responding to perceived
expressions. Thus, the central aim of this project is to investigate how the
expression of emotion affects other people's perceptions of the motives guiding
behavior, and how the actual and perceived regulation of emotion expression
moderates these effects. These questions will be explored through a mixture of
naturalistic situations (e.g., doctor-patient interviews) and experimental games
(e.g., prisoner's dilemma) in which the respective roles of different
interacting individuals or groups can be manipulated, incentives for emotion-
regulation can be shaped, and modes of communication may be selectively
controlled. These questions will be approached from an interdisciplinary
perspective, combining traditional experimental methods in social psychology
with modelling and simulation approaches in computer science.