* 1419856
* SBE: Small: Collaborative: Modeling Insider Threat Behavior in Financial Institutions: Large Scale Data Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Kumar Korni, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 342,285.00

Insiders pose substantial threats to an organization, regardless of whether they
act intentionally or accidentally. Because they usually possess elevated
privileges and have skills, knowledge, resources, access and motives regarding
internal systems and data, insiders can easily circumvent security
countermeasures, steal valuable data, and cause damage. Perimeter and host-based
countermeasures like firewalls, intrusion detection systems, and antivirus
software are ineffective in preventing and detecting insider threats. Despite
the availability of abundant anecdotal information regarding insider threats,
research relying on field data to advance understanding of such threats is still
lacking. This proposal presents a theoretically driven approach to investigate
the risk of insider threat within financial institutions. It will utilize large
scale field data from two financial institutions to provide comparison and
improve the generalizability of results.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will use criminology theories and
extend them to the domain of insider threat. It will use both objective log data
from the enterprise single sign-on (eSSO) systems and subjective data through
surveys and focus groups to understand perceptual characteristics of
applications as well as perceptions of employees regarding attractiveness of
targets. Thus, this research will be among the first that takes both the
technical and human aspects into consideration in investigating victimization
risk and attack proneness associated with information assets within financial
institutions. In essence, the proposed study will utilize multi methods and
multi-source data to establish how information resources can be better protected
from misuse and abuse of access privileges. The study will initiate a new
perspective for analyzing existing behavioral log data to improve the practice
of risk management, which may have a transformative impact in terms of
mitigating risks from different user groups and informing interventions to deal
with the insider threat problem.

Broader Impact: This multi-disciplinary collaborative project will deepen
understanding of insider threat behavior in the context of financial
institutions. A PhD student will be funded at each university and the research
will result in a few Masters' independent studies in this area as well. The
findings of this proposal will be disseminated among the law enforcement task
forces, as well as banking organizations. The channels to be employed include
workshops with the local InfraGuard program in collaboration with the regional
FBI office. The outcomes of the proposal will not only provide an applied
understanding of insider threat, but also important implications for risk
management applications. It is important to note that the President's Critical
Infrastructure Protection Board identified the banking and finance sector as one
of the critical infrastructures to be secured. This proposal will help in this
regard by having an impact on public policy with respect to regulations for
financial institutions. The potential reduction in financial crime as a result
would have significant societal benefits.