* 1419553
* Collaborative Research: Development of bioinformatic methods for studying gene expression network inflammation and neuronal regeneration
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Yi Ren, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2015
* USD 283,650.00

New bioinformatic and statistical methods will be developed to study traumatic
central nervous system including spinal cord, which provokes an inflammatory
response that generates substantial secondary tissue damage and inhibits
neuronal regeneration. Anti-inflammatory treatment of human spinal core injury
and its&lt;br/&gt;timing must be based on knowledge of the types of cells
participating in the inflammatory response, the time after injury when they
appear and the nature of their actions. However, inflammatory cascades and
relationship with neurogenesis are complicated and consequence of central
nervous system injury including spinal cord injury is poorly understood.
Invading macrophages and resident microglia cells, the two major cell types that
are from monocytic lineage play major role in the inflammatory process. Due to
the lack of specific markers, the functional roles of invading macrophages from
activated microglia within injured&lt;br/&gt;spinal cord are not largely
unknown. We propose to use microarray techniques to investigate expression
profiles on microglia and macrophages in different time points and the
expression network between inflammation and neurogenesis. New methods are
proposed to label defined cell populations in microglia/macrophage deleted mice.
New statistical techniques will be developed to address directly
the&lt;br/&gt;challenges from our biological studies. These include removing
intensity effect of the Affymetrix data, identifying significant genes and
determining gene expressions patterns over time, identifying a small group of
genes that differentiate invading macrophages from activated microglia in the
spinal cord, among others. They involve the statistical estimation, testing,
variable selection, classification and network modeling in high-dimensional
feature spaces. These emerging problems will be confronted via developing new
statistical methods to address the challenges associated with high-
dimensionality. At the same time, the investigators also intend to provide
fundamental understanding, via asymptotic analysis and simulation studies, to
these problems and their associated methodologies. A distinguished feature of
the proposal is the combination the strengths of our expertise in statistics and
molecular biology to gain better understanding of
molecular&lt;br/&gt;disturbances in spinal cord and central nervous system
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal investigates molecular disturbances in
spinal cord and central nervous system injury. Our aims include identifying
genes that reveal the distinct functional profiles of resident microglia and
invading macrophages in spinal cord injury, and selecting the genes that are
uniquely altered during specific facets of the neuronal response to
inflammation. These approaches can not only help us understand the molecular
mechanisms of inflammatory responses in spinal cord injury, but also potentially
identify genes to be targeted for therapeutic intervention following spinal core
injury. In addition, our developed cutting-edging statistical techniques and
bioinformatic tools can be applied to other biological and statistical
researches. The project will also integrate research and education by working
closely with students and funding them in the form of research assistantships,
creating datasets, and developing publicly available computer code (both made
available through the web) for each of the main research endeavors funded by
this proposal. Various research findings and examples will be simplified and
taught in both undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, they
will be used in supervising undergraduate senior theses and Ph.D. theses.
Postdoctoral fellows and underrepresented groups will be trained as a part of
our research investigation. The results will be disseminated broadly through
presentations at seminars, conferences, professional association meetings, and
internet.&lt;br/&gt;