* 1419683
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating the Sedimentary Record of Differing Modes of Flat-Slab Subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Emily Finzel, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 280,000.00

The paradigm of convergent margins involves an oceanic plate of uniform
character that subducts at a relatively steep (30 to 45 degrees) angle. Oceanic
plates are not uniform, however, and instead consist of broad (plateaus) and
narrow (aseismic ridges) regions of thickened crust, as well as spreading ridges
where molten mantle material comes to the surface and creates new crust. An
increase in crustal thickness or heat flow associated with these features causes
the plates to be more buoyant than typical oceanic plates and to subduct at
shallower or nearly flat angles. Flat-slab subduction of buoyant oceanic
plateaus and aseismic and spreading ridges occurs along some of the world?s
major convergent margins. The response of sedimentary basins above a these zones
of flat slab subduction is not well understood. This project investigates the
response of the Cook Inlet basin in south central Alaska to changes in
subduction angle with special focus on the transition from steep subduction to
flat subduction. A significant impact of the proposed research will be to
provide a better understanding of the response of the upper plate and the
sedimentary record to flat slab subduction, results which inform future studies
of potential flat slab localities. The project will advance desired societal
outcomes through: 1) full participation of women in STEM through support of two
early career female PIs and outreach to minority high school students; 2)
increased public scientific literacy and public engagement with science and
technology through public outreach; and 3) development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce though activities at Cincinnati high school, a short
course for students and professionals in Anchorage, and training of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sequence, timing, and magnitude
of upper plate processes related to flat-slab subduction are still poorly
understood. Recognition of flat-slab subduction in the ancient geologic record
is based primarily on changes in volcanic arc magmatism and less frequently on
inboard migration of upper plate deformation, exhumation, and sedimentary basin
evolution. However, very few studies have attempted to quantify the spatial and
temporal patterns of surface uplift and erosion as it relates to subduction of a
buoyant slab, and which result in changes to the types and locations of major
sediment sources to adjacent basins. Here, a research team from the University
of Iowa and University of Cincinnati will investigate the Late Cretaceous-
Cenozoic sedimentary deposits of the Cook Inlet basin in south central Alaska,
which constitute a complete sedimentary record of forearc basin strata deposited
during three different modes of subduction. Normal subduction of oceanic crust
in the Late Cretaceous was followed by flat-slab subduction of a spreading ridge
(ca. 62-50 Ma), and later by subduction of an oceanic plateau (ca. 40-0 Ma). Two
hypotheses are tested: (1) subduction of a spreading-ridge in late
Paleocene?Eocene time resulted in a change in topography and a shift in sediment
sources from the adjacent arc to the retroarc region; (2) flat-slab subduction
of an oceanic plateau from Oligocene time to the present resulted in the
creation of topography above the flat-slab region and an overall contraction of
the forearc basin drainage area. The researchers investigate the sedimentary
record of flat slab subduction in southern Alaska by examining Late Mesozoic and
Cenozoic strata in core samples from the Cook Inlet forearc basin through
traditional stratigraphic analysis combined with provenance and
thermochronologic techniques of double-dating detrital zircons using uranium-
lead and fission track dating, rare earth element analyses of mudstones, and
sandstone petrography. The integration of these datasets enables the
investigation of the patterns of regional exhumation, magmatism, and sediment
transport across the area and interpretation these patterns in terms of regional
tectonics and changes through time. This study will provide a foundation for new
tectonic and provenance models of forearc basins that have been modified by
flat-slab subduction processes.