* 1419807
* MIT Materials Research Science and Engineering Center - Full Proposal
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2021
* Michael Rubner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 10/31/2021
* USD 16,450,000.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;MIT has an exceptionally strong and wide-ranging
effort in materials science and engineering that cuts across eleven different
academic departments in the schools of science and engineering. The MIT MRSEC,
locally known as the Center for Materials Science and Engineering (CMSE), is a
cross-school interdisciplinary center that plays the critical role of bringing
this diverse materials community together by encouraging and supporting
collaborative research and innovative educational and industrial outreach
programs. The mission of the MRSEC is to encourage high impact, fundamental
research and education in the science and engineering of materials in support of
existing and emerging technologies that will address the current and future
needs of society. To accomplish this mission, CMSE enables collaborative
interdisciplinary research among MIT faculty and between MIT faculty and the
researchers of other universities, industry, and government laboratories.
Another key objective is the development of state-of-the-art shared facilities
that provide and maintain critically enabling instrumentation for CMSE MRSEC
investigators and the broader MIT and US materials community. The center offers
several education and outreach programs including programs directed at middle
and high school students, K-12 teachers, women and minorities, undergraduates,
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
MRSEC research program supports collaborative, interdisciplinary research that
addresses important complex problems not easily solved without a diverse team of
researchers from different fields. This objective is realized through the
support of interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs), seed projects, and shared
experimental facilities (SEFs). In IRG-1, the focus is on detailed fundamental
studies of in-fiber fluid instabilities in multiple fluid systems. From this
fundamental research will arise new processing paradigms for creating
nanospheres of arbitrary size, geometry and composition with expected
discoveries, both fundamental and applied, spanning novel neuronal interface
devices, delivery vehicles for pharmaceuticals, and potentially in the chemical
and electronics industries. IRG-II focuses on unraveling the multi-faceted
interplay of structural elements in complex biological hydrogels. This group
seeks to understand the fundamental biology, chemistry and materials science
underlying the unique properties of biological hydrogels and use this knowledge
to design and create synthetic mimics that have the potential to revolutionize
the design of water purification technologies and a range of biomedical
applications. Finally, IRG-III focuses on a key unresolved issue in materials
with oxygen defects: namely, what coupling mechanisms exist between oxygen
defects and the transport of phonons, spin and charge at the interfaces of
complex oxides. The resultant basic science could provide the foundation for the
development of a new generation of high-efficiency energy conversion and storage
devices.