* 1419518
* Collaborative Research:  EaSM-3:  Understanding the Development of Precipitation Biases in CESM and the Superparameterized CESM on Seasonal to Decadal Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Pritchard, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2019
* USD 468,305.00

The issue of bias in state-of-the-art global models that are used to study
decadal climate variability and prediction has been a long-standing problem in
the field of climate science. Biases in tropical precipitation, circulation, and
sea-surface temperature (SST) affect simulations of seasonal to interannual,
decadal, and longer-time climate variations. Additionally, under this effort
three doctoral students will be trained for careers in climate modeling,
contributing to national scientific workforce
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to reduce
tropical precipitation biases in Community Earth System Model (CESM) and a new
version of the CESM that incorporated the superparameterized cloud scheme, SP-
CESM. Tropical precipitation biases have been attributed to poor cumulus
parameterizations, ocean coupling feedbacks, ocean eddy mixing deficiencies,
land-atmosphere interaction, and remote effects of insufficient low clouds.
Sources of error will be separated by looking at the initial development of the
biases over the first decade of simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cumulus
parameterization errors develop within days to weeks, local ocean coupling
errors develop in months, and the remote effect of midlatitude low cloud biases
may take years to affect tropical precipitation. This initial rainfall and SST
bias development will be used to test improvements to the cloud microphysical
parameterizations in CESM and SP-CESM, as well as changes to the cumulus
parameterization in CESM. Changes affecting Southern Hemisphere midlatitude low
cloud cover will be a focus. The goal will be to significantly reduce the
tropical SST and precipitation bias in both models for both initialized
multiyear forecasts and long-term projections while maintaining good ENSO
variability.