* 1419327
* University of Washington/R/V Thomas G. Thompson Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2016
* USD 7,025.00

A request is made by the University of Washington to fund additional and
replacement instrumentation for the R/V Thompson, a 274? general purpose, global
class research vessel, and R/V Barnes, a 66-foot coastal research vessel, both
operated as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
research fleet.&lt;br/&gt;These platforms provide facilities for conducting
oceanographic research funded by the National Science Foundation and other
federal agencies. The instrumentation they propose to acquire will provide
operational flexibility to projects that are embarked upon both vessels and will
increase their capacity to do useful science and data collection during transits
between funded cruises. Thompson completed 260 days in 2013; 120 of these days
(46%) were for NSF. On Barnes, 65 of the 95 days (68%) were for NSF. In 2014,
Thompson is scheduled for 295 days and 230 (79%) are for NSF. Barnes is
scheduled to sail 71 days in 2014, with 34 days (48%) funded by NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this proposal
includes:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Computer network switch and router upgrades $57,703
&lt;br/&gt; 2) Dosimat style titrator for on board oxygen analyses $ 7,025
&lt;br/&gt; $64,728 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.