* 1419298
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mobility, Cooperation And Emergent Political Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Elizabeth Carter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 24,028.00

One central question which archaeologists pose concerns the processes which gave
rise to the complex large scale societies in which almost all humans live today.
The roots of one major civilization lie in the Near East and the goal of this
research is to gain understanding into an early stage of this development which
was closely tied to the domestication of plants and
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hannah Lau, under the mentorship of Dr. Elizabeth
Carter, will employ data from animal bones from archaeological contexts (faunal
assemblages) to assess cooperation and interaction among settled and mobile
farmers and herders at the Late Neolithic Halaf (ca. 6100-5200 cal. BCE) site of
Domuztep in Kahramanmara Province, Turkey. Lau will combine data gleaned from
both zooarchaeological analysis and analyses of strontium, carbon, and oxygen
isotopes from teeth specimens of domestic animals to examine economic
coordination among people in both daily subsistence activities and in the
feasting events at Domuztepe. Through these analyses this study will reveal
ancient peoples? management choices regarding their livestock, an important
aspect of their political economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesopotamian case
studies are among the most frequently invoked in anthropological discussions of
the evolution of social complexity. This study evaluates the scale of
cooperative social and economic networks in the Halaf social system and will
clarify the processes by which political complexity arose in Upper Mesopotamia.
The extent and degree of political complexity during the Halaf period in
Northern Mesopotamia is strongly contested. The objective of this research is to
use zooarchaeological and isotopic data to explore several interrelated
processes: 1) to document resource and labor coordination at the site, 2) to
determine whether more mobile groups contributed to and participated in large-
scale feasting events, and if so, to determine if such cooperation differs or
mirrors day-to-day subsistence practices, and 3) to assess the elaboration of
communal rituals like feasts and their impact on animal management practices
among fulltime residents at Domuztepe and possible mobile components of the
population. Feasts provide a way to study Neolithic socioeconomic and political
organization since they entail explicit cooperation among participants and offer
an opportunity for social and political relationships to be reified, amplified
or even transformed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has implications beyond
the immediate project of clarifying resource and labor coordination at Halaf
Domuztepe, and in the region more broadly. The project contributes critical data
to broader discussions of how political complexity emerges, contextualizing
modern processes of political complexity and resource management. It will
contribute to the developing body of knowledge of heavy and light isotope
profiles found throughout southern Turkey, laying the foundation for future work
in the area. Additionally, this work will enable Lau to undergo essential
training to develop new analytical skills, including valuable laboratory
experience analyzing and understanding stable isotopes. These skills will
further her ability to interpret faunal assemblages, broadening the scope of
future research projects that will contribute to understandings of human-animal
relations. Finally, this project facilitates international scholarly exchange as
part of a longterm international research collaboration between institutions in
the United States, the United Kingdom and Turkey. The results of this study will
be made available to the public through open access data publication, public
presentations and traditional scholarly venues.