* 1419765
* Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 6,575,000.00

This award provides support for the Nuclear Science Laboratory (NSL) at the
University of Notre Dame for an experimental program in low energy nuclear
physics. The program is primarily focused on critical issues in nuclear
astrophysics, addressing questions about fusion reactions in stars and stellar
explosions, how they produce the energy that is released and how they build up
all the elements that are observed in our universe. A broad experimental agenda
is planned to measure these reactions in the NSL laboratory using a number of
different experimental techniques and accelerators. Nuclear reactions that drive
stellar explosions will also be studied at larger scale laboratories that can
provide rare ion beams that are not available at the NSL facilities. These
efforts will primarily take place at Argonne National Laboratory and at the
National Super Conducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second mission of the laboratory is the study of the
structure of the nucleus. Here the planned experiments focus on measuring the
behavior and characteristics of nuclear matter, ranging from mapping special
vibrational modes to the incompressibility of matter. These measurements will
primarily be done at the Research Center for Nuclear Physics in Osaka, Japan,
since no comparable US facility is presently available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third goal of this work is to further develop a broad
program of nuclear science applications by focusing on high sensitivity methods
such as Accelerator Mass Spectrometry and x- and gamma ray spectroscopy. These
techniques benefit a broad array of academic fields, including astrophysics,
geology, biology, archaeology, and history. Finally, the research provides a
rich, hands-on environment for training undergraduate and graduate students in
nuclear science, who will then have skills applicable to homeland security and
other critical areas.