* 1419175
* The Center for Turbulence Research Summer Program
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Parviz Moin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 12/31/2014
* USD 35,000.00

1419175&lt;br/&gt;Moin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to partially cover
travel and organizing expenses related to the workshop entitled ?The Center for
Turbulence Research Summer Program?, to be held at Stanford University during
July 6-August 1, 2014. This would be the 15th time that this biennial program is
organized by the Center for Turbulence Research (CTR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTR summer
school program is an immersive, hands-on meeting that focuses on developing of
new models and testing hypotheses proposed by the participants, utilizing large
turbulent flow databases. The meeting covers many important areas of turbulent
flow research, such as instabilities and transition, large eddy simulation,
Reynolds averaged modeling, multiphase turbulent flows, combustion, and
turbulent transport of mass and heat. New calculations to generate new databases
are often performed during the Summer Program. The participants, who are
competitively selected based on proposals for research, are divided into focus
groups based on their proposals. The meeting will be attended by both prominent
and young scientists in fluid dynamics from around the world, who will be
discussing future directions of research and research challenges in these
research areas. The meeting will also address modeling challenges involved in
advancing the field for the next two to five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTR Summer Programs involve participants from
inside and outside of Stanford, who join NASA scientists for over 20 days of
intense study. The previous workshop, in 2012, involved 93 participants from 14
countries, including participants from 10 U.S. universities and national
laboratories. The program affords opportunity for an intense collaborative
effort by about fifty advanced graduate students, their advisors, research
scientists, and engineers from industry and National Laboratories. The
experience gained from this event will have a positive impact in training
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main goals of the
conference is to frame the challenges in turbulence modeling for the next few
years. The findings of the program will be collected and published as a
comprehensive technical report. It is expected that the report will consist of
forty to fifty technical papers (about 500 pages), which will be delivered to
NSF and to other sponsors of the program, in addition to worldwide dissemination
at the end of the calendar year. The report, like the reports from the prior
workshops, will be available on the worldwide web for downloads,
(http://www.stanford.edu/group/ctr/). Many of the papers in the report will be
eventually published in high quality technical journals.