* 1419783
* Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 01/02/2014,09/30/2021
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Tunxis Community-Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 3,939,741.00

Since its establishment in 2004, Connecticut College of Technology's Regional
Center for Next Generation Manufacturing (COT-RCNGM) has contributed to the
development of an advanced manufacturing workforce with a doubling of
enrollments in COT programs. The goals of this center involve (1) student
recruitment and persistence; (2) faculty development; (3) curriculum
development; and (4) articulation and pathway programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The center goals are being informed by
advice from regional manufacturers, the National Visiting Committee, and
experienced faculty. RCNGM staff are implementing four new initiatives. (1) The
highly successful statewide Manufacture Your Future Expo is being modified to
provide local impact as highly effective Learning Symposiums. These Learning
Symposiums, already pilot tested, continue to refine techniques to increase
enrollment, particularly among underrepresented students. The new Symposiums use
a reconfigurable format that highlights the strengths of individual community
colleges where the symposiums are held. (2) Faculty externships that enhance
faculty understanding of advanced manufacturing and enable faculty and their
corporate sponsor to make presentations at Learning Symposiums as well as
provide career guidance to students. Faculty also complete professional
development for credentials recognized by industry. (3) RCNGM continues to
address the need for a skilled workforce by developing industry driven credit
courses, certificates, and options to support local and regional industries. The
center continues to respond to workforce needs by the review and implementation
of new courses, options and transferable, credit bearing credentials that are
delivered in a flexible, accessible platform. (4) A workable dynamic
articulation is being enhanced and expanded to new partners. New career pathways
continue to incorporate the COT's multiple entry and exit pathways for the
completion of credit certificates and degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The RCNGM achieves broader impact in a variety of ways. RCNGM
stakeholders have delivered papers and made presentations at local, regional and
national conferences, expositions, and student poster sessions. A robust web
site provides a digital avenue for dissemination of the RCNGM's activities, and
students and parents are engaged through social media. The RCNGM is now
expanding the successful models to community colleges and their industry
partners in neighboring New England States. A community college and industry
partner have been identified for Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire and
Vermont. In addition, the RCNGM is working with these new partners to assess the
educational programs offered and their inclusion of national credentials as
identified by the National Association of Manufacturer's Manufacturing
Certification System. Working with the New England Board of Higher Education
(NEBHE), interstate articulation agreements are being implemented using NEBHE's
reduced tuition program, offering New England students the ability to pursue
specific program options in neighboring states at their in-state tuition rate.
Finally, regional manufacturing summits, professional development activities,
and industry forums are being held involving all New England partners. The RCNGM
continues to provide leadership for New England and collaborating partners for
the establishment of manufacturing programs that prepare the highly skilled
workforce that is the foundation of the national economy.