* 1419836
* EAGER: Magnetometer Arrays to Map Brain Circuitry
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Massood Tabib-Azar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 04/30/2017
* USD 215,974.00

Proposal Title: EAGER: Magnetometer Arrays to Map Brain
Circuitry&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
Date:04/09/2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed room temperature magnetometer
arrays will enable innumerable applications in discoveries of new brain circuits
and understanding brain ailments. The ability to image brain activities in
behaving humans currently is carried out by functional magnetic resonance
imaging or electro-encephalography or magnet-encephalography in very constrained
environments. It will also advance the frontiers of biosensing to a much higher
sensitivity levels only accessible by superconducting quantum interference
devices (SQUID) and atomic vapor magnetometers. Magnetometer arrays with a fewer
devices can be used to detect the onset of epilepsy and will find numerous
applications in wireless health monitoring devices. The magnetometer array will
have enormous impact in relating brain circuitry and activity to behavior; it
will enable imaging the brain under stressfull conditions similar to the stress
test for the cardiovascular system. The research will be carried out by two
graduate students (one of the students is from an underrepresented group) and
the results will be widely disseminated and used demonstrating the principles of
bio-magnetism, bio-sensing and bio feedback.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; A novel
imaging method capable of whole brain imaging at 100 micron resolution and 1 ms
temporal resolution that is fully portable and wireless will be developed.
Arrays of small (200 micron), low power (&lt;10 nW/device) room temperature
micro-electromechanical multiferroic magnetometers with 10^-18 Tesla/Hz0.5
sensitivity will be designed and fabricated. These arrays will be shielded and
embedded in a cap and will enable imaging brain activity in behaving humans in
our natural environment. Prototypes have already been constructed that perform
at better than 10^-15 Tesla/Hz0.5 sensitivity and this project will improve
sensitivity by reducing sensor noise with passive and active (feedback)
shielding, construct rectilinear arrays of 10,000 magnetometers that can be
combined for full brain coverage, and construct telemetry system for wireless
communication with the array. Arrays will be validated by unprecedented
spatiotemporal resolution of visual cortex allowing high-speed imaging of
orientation and ocular dominance columns.