* 1419987
* Spatial variability of larval fish in relation to their prey and predator fields:  Patterns and interactions from cm to 10s of km in a subtropical, pelagic environment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2018
* USD 888,504.00

Background:&lt;br/&gt;The spatial pattern of organisms within pelagic marine
environments is of significant ecological importance, and this is particularly
true for larval fishes. Patchy prey and predator environments should lead to
variation in predator-prey interactions, and thus to variations in larval fish
growth and survival. These have proven very difficult to resolve in nature, due
in large part to the broad range of spatial scales involved and technological
challenges with adequately sampling the various processes simultaneously. This
study will use new technology (In Situ Ichthyoplankton Imaging System - ISIIS)
to simultaneously measure the fine-scale distribution of larval fishes in
relation to their prey, their planktonic predators, and the physical environment
of the Straits of Florida. This will be combined with targeted fine-scale net
sampling and analyses of individual recent daily larval growth. By sampling a
series of water masses at very high resolution, this study will address specific
hypotheses concerning: i) the drivers of aggregations and patchiness, and ii)
the biological consequences of predator-prey interactions at fine
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The primary
intellectual merit of the study is the unprecedented examination of plankton
processes at scales of relevance to biological interactions among larval fishes,
their prey, and their predators. This field study will further our understanding
of the predator-prey interactions contributing to spatially explicit larval
growth and mortality patterns. The focus on subtropical planktonic food webs
will enhance scientific knowledge of these understudied pelagic ecosystems and
provide valuable data for comparative analyses with pelagic food web dynamics at
higher latitudes. A deeper understanding of pelagic planktonic ecosystems over a
range of spatial and temporal scales is increasingly important as the oceans
undergo major environmental changes. Substantial increases in the relative
dominance of gelatinous organisms, for example, have the potential to cause
major shifts in pelagic food webs. A better understanding of the fine-scale
interactions of such food webs will help society anticipate and respond to the
consequences of such changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve traditional education and training
approaches, as well as several non-traditional efforts to extend the broader
impact of the study. The study will train undergraduate and graduate students
and a post-doctoral fellow, with a focus on interdisciplinary research,
integrating biological and physical oceanography with an added emphasis on image
analysis. Mentoring will include a focus on improvement in scientific
communication and outreach to under-represented populations in public schools. A
unique effort to engage a broad audience will draw on a partnership with Citizen
Science Alliance (CSA) by incorporating ISIIS imagery from this study into a
Zooniverse "Window on Plankton" web-based project, which will use volunteer
citizen scientists to help analyze the extensive imagery database generated
during the study. Finally, this project will provide advanced image analysis
capabilities to the plankton science community, as well as a permanent, complete
digital library of positively identified, geo-referenced data on plankton and
larval distribution.