* 1419445
* EaSM-3:  Land Use Change and Land Atmosphere Feedback Processes as Regulators of Regional Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Paul Dirmeyer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 779,965.00

Changes in land use and land cover, such as converting forests to cropland or
irrigating formerly dry areas, are known to impact climate on the local and
regional level. There is some indication from prior modeling studies that the
land-atmosphere interactions that cause these climate impacts will become more
pronounced in a warming world. In order to further study this concept,
researchers will perform simulations using advanced numerical models and compare
those results to observational data to assess how the models are performing.
This study will impact society by providing better information to policymakers
about the impact of future land use changes. The project would also provide an
opportunity to train the next generation of scientists through the inclusion of
a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher in the study.

The researchers hypothesize that the rate of climate change, frequency and
severity of extremes, and predictability of climate variations will depend on
the type of regional land use practices implemented in the coming decades. While
the study of land use land cover change (LULCC) impacts on climate are not new,
this project is starting from a point where the model consensus is that there
will be a strengthened coupling between land and atmosphere in a warming
climate. This result would mean that climate may become more sensitive to both
natural and anthropogenic variations at the land surface. Two main hypotheses
will be addressed: 1) Regions of strong land-atmosphere feedback in the physical
climate system will evolve significantly in a changing climate, and 2)
regionally, the rate of climate change, the frequency and severity of extremes,
and the predictability of climate variability will be dependent on the type of
land use practices implemented in the coming decades. To address these
hypotheses, the PIs plan to use the Community Earth System Model (CESM) with a
focus on the Community Land Model (CLM) and Community Atmosphere Model (CAM). A
variety of observational data would be used to validate the models.