* 1419866
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: State Authority and  Land Rights in the Americas
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Giorleny Altamirano Rayo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 17,567.00

The establishment of authority over a country's territory is a critical
component of stability and security. This project addresses how states in the
Americas have approached the issue of land rights. Internal threats to the
state's territorial control and targeted international pressure stimulate
executive action with state strategic interests being the crucial mediating
factor to explain the patterns. This research project is designed to explain why
the implementation of ethnic land rights varies by examining closely the cases
of Brazil, Honduras, and Nicaragua. The research involves fieldwork on-site,
including the construction of nation-wide databases for ethnic land claims and
resulting government decisions, original experimental data on political elites'
attitudes on the implementation question, archival documentation, and in-depth
interviews of state elites and non-elites, experts, and practitioners in ethnic
land claims.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits are associated with
the project's theoretical and empirical advances in the study of state control
over territory. Because ethnic collectivities are often minorities that claim
vast tracts of sparsely populated lands rich in energy, mineral, and natural
resources, scholars and policy makers have pointed to competing economic
interests, low administrative capacity of the state, or insufficient
socialization of state elites as factors that impinge on the implementation of
ethnic land rights. This project advances this discussion by seriously
considering the mediating effect of state interest and power in shaping the
implementation of multicultural legal principles in the Americas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the projects are two: providing
insights useful to international and national policymakers to improve policy
implementation strategies and producing original observational and experimental
data on ethnic land rights implementation. The data collected will help assess
the geographic patterns of ethnic land rights implementation over time and the
effects of key policy decisions on the ground. The findings should enhance
national security by clarifying how states can develop secure borders and
territories.