* 1419614
* Turbulent Flows and Scalar Transport in the Forest-Atmosphere Interface over a Complex Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Steve Edburg, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2018
* USD 449,942.00

Complex terrain poses significant problems to eddy covariance measurements above
forest canopies. Improving eddy covariance measurements over complex terrain
requires a better understanding of how complex terrain influences spatial and
temporal variability in turbulent flows above and within forest canopies. This
will lead to improvements in measurements of the exchange of momentum, heat, and
scalars between the atmosphere and vegetation, so that reliable
interpretations/assessments of the surface energy balance, water cycle, and
carbon budget over complex terrain can be made over various temporal and spatial
scales. Currently, there is no clear understanding of how the simultaneous
action of complex terrain, dynamic and thermodynamic conditions of inflows, and
plant canopies modulate turbulence structures and thus transport of momentum,
heat, water vapor, and carbon dioxide. In this research, turbulence in the
forest canopy-atmosphere interface over a complex terrain will be examined by
conducting analyses of the data measured in a European EGER experiment (ExchanGE
processes in mountainous Regions) integrated with large-eddy simulations (LES).
The Washington State University (WSU) research team along with six other
international groups participated in the EGER experiment that was conducted in
June and July of 2011 at the FLUXNET site in Weidenbrunnen Waldstein (DE-Bay),
located in North-Eastern Bavaria, Germany. Each group contributed different
instruments and research activities to map, to the fullest extent possible,
three-dimensional turbulence structures at the site. In addition to data
analysis, a multi-layer canopy module will be incorporated into the Weather
Research and Forecasting Model (WRF) - LES (WRF-LES) to explore spatial
variations and temporal evolutions of mean/turbulent flows and quantify relative
contributions of different mechanisms to momentum/heat/H2O/CO2 transfer.
Collectively, this research will examine:

1) How does the interaction of 'real' topography-induced pressure perturbations
and canopy alter turbulence structures, including coherent structures and high-
order turbulent statistics such as velocity variances, turbulent
stresses/fluxes, pressure variance, and production/loss of TKE above and within
the canopy, as compared with the structures observed over idealized hills? 2)
How do different atmospheric stability conditions alter spatial and temporal
variations in the main features of mean/turbulent flows within and above the
canopy, as compared with previous results under neutral atmospheric conditions?
The main features of turbulent flows include shear layer, inflexion point, TKE,
second-order statistics, skewness and kurtosis of u and w profiles, wake region
and wake depth (lee side only), and recirculation (lee side only). 3) How do
mean/turbulent flows as a result of the simultaneous actions of topography,
canopy, and stability, lead to spatial and temporal variations in CO2 fluxes,
horizontal and vertical advections, flux divergence, and CO2 sources and sinks?
What are the dynamic mechanisms for these spatial and temporal variations in CO2
fluxes and the implications for tower measurements of CO2 fluxes?

Intellectual Merit: Overall, the study will provide an improved understanding of
mean and turbulent flows and exchange of momentum, heat, and scalars (e.g., CO2)
between the canopy and the atmosphere over mountainous regions. Applications
include: 1) simulation of carbon cycling in complex terrain, 2) wind energy
predictions in complex terrain, and 3) pollutant dispersion in complex
environments.

Broader Impacts: Results from this work will improve our overall ability to
quantify carbon, water, and energy flows in complex terrain and thus improve our
understanding of important components of global carbon science. The results will
be beneficial to carbon cycle science and the FLUXNET community in helping
constrain the carbon budget and upscale CO2 fluxes from tower to landscape scale
and even to regional scale over complex terrain. The updated WRF-LES modeling
system with a multi-layer canopy module will be beneficial to a variety of
research communities in studying canopy flows and PBL flows over complex
terrain; wind energy applications in terms of identifying potential locations
for wind turbines; forest management in identifying locations of high risks of
tree damage in windy conditions; and forest fire behaviors in quantifying fire
propagation; The research will contribute directly to the educational research
training of Ph.D. students at WSU. The results will be disseminated to a broader
audience through the FLUXNET community, conferences, and seminars, and will be
used in courses and workshops related to WSU's undergraduate and graduate
curriculum as well as the summer REU program which is focused on atmospheric
chemistry, air quality, and climate change.