* 1419584
* Collaborative Research:  EaSM-3:  Regional decadal predictions of coupled climate-human systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Joseph Seneca, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

Coastal regions like New Jersey and its environs are highly susceptible not only
to the direct wind and rain effects of atmospheric storms, but also to related
oceanic responses like storm surges. Moreover, the area's large metropolitan
areas are particularly vulnerable to summer heat waves associated with
atmospheric blocking. The most extreme storm types include hurricanes,
atmospheric "bombs" (storms whose central pressure falls rapidly over a 24-hour
period), nor'easters and tropical storms that transition to extra-tropical
storms. Very heavy storm precipitation, fed in part by the neighboring ocean can
lead to inland flooding, which can combine with high sea level anomalies to
produce devastating coastal inundation, as evidenced recently by both Tropical
Storm Irene and Superstorm Sandy. Typical climate models with a resolution of
around one degree are too coarse to capture well heat waves or the high
precipitation and destructive near-surface winds generated by severe storms and
hurricanes. The overarching goal of this project is to predict economic and
other human system impacts of extreme weather events at regional and decadal
scales, while accounting for some natural climate variability, anthropogenic
influences. A multi-scale climate model in which a one-kilometer land surface
model was successfully incorporated will be extended to include a multi-scale
atmosphere model capable of representing cyclones and atmospheric blocking, a
coastal ocean model that can produce storm surge. The environmental and climate
outcomes for the target region will be integrated with existing regional
economic models and current economic valuation methodologies for present and
future climate conditions. This project brings together local (municipal and
county) decision makers with the academic climate and socio-economic scientists
to tackle some of the most urgent challenges facing society: How will our social
and economic systems respond to a changing climate? The project also offers the
opportunity for two graduate students to train in a highly interdisciplinary
team of climate and human systems scientist and between two leading institutions
preparing for challenges of the future. The expected legacy of this project is a
model framework that can be used in many regions of the world, the training of
next generation scientists, communication between scientists and local decision
makers in vulnerable areas and outreach to the general population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to predict some aspects of
the human and economic impacts of climate change, climate variability and
changing urbanized coastal environments of New Jersey and environs. It builds on
a multi-scale climate model that successfully incorporated a 1 km land surface
model within the framework of the Community Earth System Model (CESM) to
downscale weather events to the scales of socio-economic models. The latter
include models for electricity demand, land-use, decision making and macro- and
micro-economic activity. The driving hypothesis is that the dominant socio-
economic impacts will be responses to extreme events such as heat waves and
storms. Therefore, the project will advance the downscaling by employing
existing higher resolution models of the atmosphere and a regional ocean with a
demonstrated capability of producing such events as a function of climate state,
including related surges in sea level. Thus, with a greater degree of
confidence, the project will simulate the co-evolution of the coupled
climate/socio-economic systems in response to these events and will make decadal
predictions of the socio-economic responses. Rather than performing ensemble
simulations with the full coupled climate and socio-economic models time-slice
computations for future states (2050) will be performed. Asynchronous coupling
between the climate and social models will be carried out to develop uncertainty
measures for the socio-economic models. The time-slice approach can be regarded
as a proof of concept for the modeling framework, which can then be used in
future work to study the full evolution of the system based on a given scenario.