* 1419479
* Travel assistance for US university professors and students to attend the PIERS conference in Guangzhou, China (August 25-28, 2014)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIERS 2014 Conference will cover the latest
development in the area of energy related to photovoltaics and solid state
lighting (LEDs and OLEDs). The meeting will encompass advances in photovoltaics,
material sciences, optics, organic chemistry and semiconductors. In particular,
the conference will review the fields of thin film photovoltaics single crystal
quantum dot solar cells, tandem and multi-junction solar cells, colloidal
quantum dots and organic solar cells, light management techniques, spectral
splitting and concentrators. With NSF support, a special evening session will be
organized to discuss where the field is going and to determine the most
important research directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;A
wide range of multidisciplinary topics related to energy will be addressed at
PIERS 2014. The meeting will motivate participants to pursue new promising
directions which might have an enormous impact on alternative sources of
plentiful energy. This meeting offers a unique opportunity for the community to
share the exciting state-of-the-art technological developments and
explore/promote new collaborations. The special evening session will help US
students and young faculty to pursue new directions for future research.
Participation of student and young researchers will be fostered based on NSF
funds to partially cover travel expenses and registration fees.