* 1419223
* RAPID: Characterizing the response of a burned landscape to an unusual and extreme rain event
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Peter Nelson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,922.00

The project will examine how the area of Colorado burned in the 2012 High Park
Fire was affected by the September 2013 storms that caused rainfall with
estimated recurrence intervals of 200 to 1000+ years. The goals of the project
are to 1) characterize the post-flood landscape in two study watersheds burned
in the High Park Fire, 2) characterize the magnitude of the precipitation and
resulting peak discharge in the study watersheds, 3) quantify patterns of
erosion and deposition resulting from the flood in the study watersheds at a
variety of scales, and 4) relate these patterns of topographic change to
patterns of flood hydraulic forces. The project will utilize LiDAR datasets
collected prior to and after the September 2013 event, and will focus on well-
instrumented catchments in the burned area. Ground-based validation of the
LiDAR-based observations is critical, and it is necessary to make field
measurements before spring storms overprint or remove evidence of the rare
September event.

Wildfires and subsequent large rainfall events can exact a major one-two punch
to landscape evolution and to inhabitants of those landscapes. This project aims
to inform public understanding of the effects of fire and the post-fire storm on
the landscape and on regional water resources. The work will be communicated to
the community through presentations at regional events and seminars. In
addition, this project will provide a graduate student with research and
teaching experience. The student and PI will lead field trips to the study sites
for undergraduate and graduate civil engineering classes.