* 1419593
* EASM-3: Physics-Based Predictive Modeling for Integrated Agricultural and Urban Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Alex Mahalov, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,161,522.00

Mahalov&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1419593&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Challenges associated with a
rapidly rising global population that is increasingly food-insecure and lacks
fundamental awareness of how to build tomorrow's sustainable cities necessitate
urgent study in light of a rapidly urbanizing planet. Unrelenting urban
population growth -- an increase of more than 2.5 billion new urban inhabitants
is projected by 2050, relative to 2011 -- requires considerable conversion of
natural to agricultural (to meet increased food demand) and to urban (to meet
increased commercial, housing, and transportation demand) landscapes. Strategic
adaptation plans require development to increase production of agricultural
commodities, maximize land-use efficiency, enhance community engagement,
decrease reliance on outsourced food, reduce transportation costs while
enhancing profitability, and mitigate adverse impacts such as the urban heat
island effect. Localizing food strategies within urban areas can therefore
concurrently address concerns associated with food insecurity, environmental
degradation, citizen health, and socioeconomic well-being. Development and
refinement of physics-based predictive modeling and assessment tools used at
fine spatial resolution is necessary to effectively quantify co-benefits and
reveal tradeoffs prior to any strategy deployment. Firmly grounded in
mathematical sciences and high resolution data analytics, a collaborative and
interdisciplinary team from Arizona State University and the National Center for
Atmospheric Research jointly develops integrated agricultural and urban models
necessary to examine hydroclimatic impacts and economic and social
benefits/tradeoffs associated with agricultural and urban land use/cover changes
accompanying localization of food production within cities. Students and
postdocs are trained in the course of this project. In addition to university-
based investigators, the team includes investigators at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research who are an integral part of the project. The project is
funded jointly by the National Science Foundation and by the US Department of
Agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overarching goal of this team,
consisting of computational and climate scientists, mathematicians,
statisticians, geoscientists, and social scientists, is to develop high-
resolution physics-based, coupled, dynamic, and predictive capabilities that not
only characterize current multi-scale environmental and socio-economic impacts
associated with agricultural productivity within cities but also enable the
prediction of future impacts. Feedback loops and nonlinear interactions
interconnect physical and human processes. Understanding of emergent regional
climate modifiers (e.g., agriculture, urbanization, etc.) on decadal scales
cannot be realized simply by studying these components in isolation. Novel
computational methods to accelerate and improve accuracy of multi-scale nested
models are developed by the team and integrated within an interactively coupled
urban-climate-agricultural model utilizing high-resolution land use/land cover
data to examine scale dependency of simulated outcomes. The team develops a
conceptual framework to evaluate economic and social impacts of community
gardens, quantifies socioeconomic benefits, and recommends geographically
dependent strategies for sustainable integrated agri-urban development. The
advanced mathematical and statistical modeling tools are utilized to conduct
ensemble-based regional hydroclimate simulations, focusing on a set of rapidly
urbanizing and diverse megapolitan areas across multiple US climate zones.
Because the geographic focus spans emerging and expanding megapolitan areas
across the US, techniques, strategies, and prioritization for sustainable
integrated agri-urban development can be applied globally for comparable climate
zones. These studies advance scientific knowledge and develop next-generation
predictive modeling capabilities for linked agricultural and urban climate
dynamics on regional and decadal scales.