* 1419202
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Development Of Hierarchy In Emergent Complex Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Wendy Ashmore, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 24,940.00

The central goal of this research is to understand how, in traditional
societies, social structure is affected by warfare. When a society is under such
stress are class and economic boundaries emphasized and societal structural
differences increased or is there a leveling of difference? Archaeology provides
a means to gain insight by following the process across an extended period of
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, Kirby
Farah will perform archaeological excavations and analyses at an elite residence
in Xaltocan, Estado de Mexico, Mexico. Xaltocan is located in the northern Basin
of Mexico on a human-made island in what was formerly a shallow, brackish lake
(Lake Xaltocan). The ethnohistorical record indicates that Xaltocan was founded
in the 11th century by Otomí speakers and served as the capital of the Otomí
city-state until the end of the 14th century when it was conquered by an
alliance between Cuauhtitlan and the Tepanecs of Azcatpotzalco. Ms. Farah's
research will focus on identity formation and domestic spatial practices of the
elite at Xaltocan in the centuries leading up to Xaltocan's conquest (ca. AD
1100-1400). During this period Xaltocan was at the height of its power and
constantly entangled in regional conflict. Using methods and theory developed
for doing household archaeology, this research will determine how class impacted
everyday life practices at Xaltocan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The historical record
contains numerous references to the powerful rulers that controlled Xaltocan for
centuries, however to date there has been no intensive archaeological research
performed at elite spaces. This research will provide much needed insight into
the domestic practices of Xaltocan's elite and will help determine how these
practices changed over time in response to escalating regional warfare.
Methodologies for isolating activity areas including soil chemical and
microartifact analyses, in addition to more conventional macroartifact analyses
will enable a nuanced understanding of spatial practices. In addition,
radiocarbon and relative dating techniques (using the extremely refined ceramic
chronology from Xaltocan) contribute to our knowledge of how elite practices
changed over time. Data gleaned from this research will be comparable to extant
data on commoner households at Xaltocan and to other Postclassic elite
residences in the Basin of Mexico. Through these comparisons, this project
pursues new ways to examine how elites managed their dual roles as local leaders
and regional elites. This research is significant because it will provide a
comparative model for studying class relations and identity formation that is
pertinent for archaeological projects worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this project will have broader impacts beyond the topics outlined
above. This research is an integral component of Ms. Farah's graduate student
training and will also incorporate Mexican students from the Escuela Nacional de
Antropología e Historia. The project will provide these students with in-field
training (a degree requirement in Mexico) and fosters international cooperation.
Results of this project will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications
within the US and will be accessible to Mexican scholars in the form of annual
and final project reports to INAH. This project will also actively involve the
local community by providing site tours and lectures, curating museum exhibits,
posting weekly project updates at the local museum, and by distributing research
results in Spanish. Such efforts will empower residents of Xaltocan to learn
about their local heritage by making current archaeological findings more
accessible. This model, wherein the interest of local communities is a central
priority, is broadly applicable for archaeological projects worldwide, and for
any research endeavors that have implications for local communities.