* 1419219
* Conference on Nonparametric Statistics for Big Data, June 4-6, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Hao Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

The Department of Statistics at the University of Wisconsin at Madison will host
a Workshop on Nonparametric Statistics for Big Data (June 4-6, 2014, Madison,
WI). Nonparametric statistics is a fundamental area of statistics, at the
interface of mathematics, statistics, data mining, engineering, and computer
science. The complexity and scale of big data impose tremendous challenges for
knowledge discovery; they meanwhile demand more powerful and flexible analysis
techniques. In recent years, the field of nonparametric statistics has seen
significant development in theory, methods, and computation to address emerging
issues in big data analysis. New breakthroughs in nonparametric theory have
broadened the horizon of classical large-sample asymptotic inferences to
accommodate high and ultra-high dimensional situations. A variety of cutting-
edge statistical methodologies and state-of-art computational algorithms have
been created for big data visualization, geometric representation, dimension
reduction, and modeling and inference. These tools have made significant impacts
on sciences, engineering, and industry. A broad range of topics will be covered
in the workshop, including sparse nonparametric regression, regularization and
feature selection, high-dimensional inference and theory, spatial and
environmental statistics, image analysis, functional data analysis, as well as
related topics in statistical machine learning such as supervised learning,
clustering, network analysis, large-scale optimization, computational biology
and bioinformatics.

Due to recent technology advances, Big Data are collected ubiquitously in many
scientific investigations, such as in biological, genomic, medical, climate,
social, and environmental sciences. Given the complexity and huge range of
systems being measured, a wealth of new "nonparametric" tools have been emerging
that require few assumptions and that adapt to the patterns found in big data.
This workshop will bring together broad interdisciplinary expertise from
mathematics, statistics, computer science, machine learning, engineering, and
biomedical research to highlight cutting-edge research from nationally and
internationally renowned scholars and researchers. The workshop will use NSF
funding for travel awards to attract graduates students and young researchers,
with special attention to women and underrepresented minorites. It will create a
unique opportunity for young researchers to interact with leading scientists.
Through 30 plenary talks (expository, intermediate, and advanced), open floor
discussions, and two poster sections, the workshop will promote new connections
and collaborations. Further, this workshop provides an important review that
will highlight future research directions nonparametric statistics for big data
analysis.

Workshop web site: http://www.stat.wisc.edu/workshop-npbigdata