* 1419108
* A parallel algorithmic framework for flexible time discretization adaptive Cartesian grids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Donna Calhoun, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 194,987.00

Accurately predicting the weather, understanding global climate change,
designing novel materials, developing means of exploiting energy resources, and
modeling the effects of natural hazards increasingly rely on our ability to
efficiently solve mathematical equations on large scale computing platforms. To
exploit the emerging computing power now available on multi-core desktop
machines as well as at local and national supercomputing centers, numerical
algorithms originally designed to run on a single computing processor (e.g. a
CPU) must often be redesigned to operate efficiently (or "scale") in a
supercomputing environment with thousands of processors. This project focuses on
redesigning a particular class of numerical methods that dynamically allocate
computing resources to spatial regions of a computational domain where a
simulation is most demanding. For example, such methods would place many more
grid points (e.g. pixels) at a burning flame front, but leave the empty space in
an industrial burner only coarsely resolved. Or, to accurately track a thin
filament of volcanic ash, an adaptive method will update high resolution regions
of the simulation domain to follow the ash plume as it meanders through the
atmosphere, but will not waste computational resources in areas of the globe
where no ash has arrived. Many such adaptive methods now show modest scalability
in a multi-processor environment, but we propose a new software paradigm which
will allow these "adaptive refinement mesh" methods to scale efficiently to ever
larger numbers of computing processors as well as enable domain scientists to
more easily incorporate complex numerical algorithms into a high performance
software frameworks. Successful achievement of project goals will enable
researchers to take advantage of the national investment in supercomputing
centers and to make progress towards providing solutions to grand challenge
problems. As a particular demonstration of our adaptive mesh paradigm, we will
produce high resolution simulations of volcanic ash transport in the atmosphere.
Such simulations are critical for predicting aviation hazards associated with
volcanic eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single step, single stage multi-rate
schemes are routinely used for solving partial differential equations on
adaptively refined meshes. However, such methods are usually limited to second
order accuracy or may suffer from operator splitting errors. Higher order
temporal discretizations involving multiple stages or complex coupling
strategies are considerably more difficult to incorporate into existing adaptive
mesh software frameworks. The PI proposes a highly scalable algorithmic
framework that simplifies the task of implementing sophisticated time stepping
strategies into adaptive Cartesian mesh methods. The PI anticipates providing
functionality that allows the user to describe their temporal strategy in a
natural, method-of-lines setting. This will require designing an efficient,
scalable data pipeline that provides a vectorized view of spatial data
distributed across adaptively refined meshes and processors. Emphasis will be
focused on explicit multi-stage Runge-Kutta methods for hyperbolic and parabolic
conservation laws. Targeted applications of this work include the application of
the theory of multi-rate methods for ODEs to the method-of-lines setting, the
implementation of multi-rate, explicit Runge-Kutta-Chebyshev methods for
reaction diffusion equations in an adaptive framework, and a demonstration of
the effectiveness of the proposed framework on modeling dispersion of airborne
volcanic ash in the atmosphere. The work will be done using the ForestClaw
software platform, developed by the PI and her collaborator C. Burstedde (Univ.
of Bonn, Germany).