* 1419822
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Laurentia's Motion, Advancing Paleogeography and Constraining Rifting with New Paired Dates and Paleomagnetic Data from the Midcontinent Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Jahandar Ramezani, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 132,514.00

Throughout the Lake Superior region and the American midcontinent there is a
record of prolonged and voluminous volcanic activity that nearly split North
America apart 1.1 billion years ago. The resulting feature is known as the
Midcontinent Rift. As a result of failing to break North America into separate
continents, it preserves a rich record of tectonic history. This project will
use magnetic measurements of rocks combined with very high precision isotopic
dates on the rocks to determine how fast tectonic plates were moving in this
region 1.1 billion years ago. The principal investigators will accomplish this
by studying the lava flows in the field, obtaining new paleomagnetic data and
developing high precision dates of rocks through uranium-lead geochronology.
Overall, the research addresses a fundamental issue in understanding the nature
of ancient plate tectonics and the tectonic evolution of the North American
continent. In addition to the scientific goals of the project, the proposed
science matches well with California fourth grade science standards and the
principal investigators have partnered with an Oakland Elementary School to
develop an outreach plan with classroom visits that culminate in a field trip to
UC Berkeley and the Lawrence Hall of Science in both project years. Hands-on
activities will bring project science to life for these fourth graders from an
economically disadvantaged community in East Oakland and provide opportunities
for students from underrepresented groups to envision themselves involved in
STEM research and other careers in geosciences. The research is also supporting
graduate student training, the support of an early career researcher, and is
contributing to research infrastructure at the collaborative institutions.
Results of the research will be incorporated into research curricula and will be
widely disseminated through presentations at meetings and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The apparent polar wander path (APWP)
developed from the ~1.1 Ga North American Midcontinent Rift reveals a
progression in paleomagnetic pole positions consistent with significant
paleogeographic change during the ~25 million year history of rift development.
This progression implies fast rates for Laurentia's plate motion, but current
rate estimates have large uncertainty when the precision on pole locations and
ages are robustly integrated. Additionally, the rapid change in pole position
leads to significant flexibility in permissable relative paleogeographic
positions between Laurentia and other continents at the current level of
temporal precision. We propose to obtain new precise ID-TIMS 206Pb/238U dates
from Midcontinent Rift lava flows that we will pair with newly developed and
existing paleomagnetic data in stratigraphic context. "Proof of concept" data
demonstrate our ability to leverage recent advances in U-Pb geochronology to
obtain dates with nearly an order of magnitude improvement in precision in
comparison to existing dates on rift-related flows. By stratigraphically
bracketing paleomagnetic data with new precise dates, we will robustly determine
the rates of Laurentia's plate motion over 20 Myr, advance paleogeographic
reconstructions at this time period of Rodinia assembly and further constrain
the tempo of Midcontinent Rift development.