* 1419200
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration and State Regulation in the Wake of Economic Crisis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* James Ferguson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 24,645.00

People's ability to move is highly regulated, though often in ways they are
unaware of: vehicle registration, licenses, IDs, passports, permits, policing,
stop signs, the tarring of roads, etc. But economic and political crises can
suddenly harden these forms of regulation. How are people's conceptions of
mobility, governance, and citizenship expressed and transformed in the face of
constant and immediate regulation? This project, which trains a graduate student
in how to conduct rigorous, scientifically grounded fieldwork, examines what
factors contribute to effective citizen/state relations and governance in the
wake of economic crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University doctoral
candidate, Kathryn Takabvirwa, under the supervision of Dr. James Ferguson, will
explore how regulators and regulated navigate government regulatory projects
designed to restrict mobility following an economic crisis. Zimbabwe presents an
ideal site for the nexus of citizenship and legality in the context of
migration. The country is emerging from exceptional economic crisis which saw
its inflation hit over 89 sextillion percent in 2008, and where a staggering 10%
to 42% of the population exited the country and migrates regularly between
Zimbabwe and neighboring countries like South Africa. Issues of global concern
in an era of hyper-mobility are accentuated in such contexts. The researcher
will explore these questions through a 13-month ethnographic study. Taking a
multi-methods approach, the project uses both qualitative and quantitative data,
employing participant observation, in-depth interviews, survey methods, archival
work and material analysis. This study contributes to a better, more nuanced
understanding of experiences in post-crisis societies. It advances
understandings of how citizenship and sociality are forged in the spaces of
citizen/state engagement in everyday life. It goes beyond conventional
approaches that see developing countries as simply mired in corruption to
empirically examine how policies and practices are actually experienced, and
present a more nuanced understanding of citizenship and governance.