* 1419504
* Collaborative Research:   EaSM3 Integration of Decision-Making with Predictive Capacity for Decadal Climate Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Erwann Michel-Kerjan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2019
* USD 75,000.00

The need for climate impact predictions on regional and decadal scales is widely
recognized. Industry, government and society increasingly require predictive
information in decision-relevant terms to enable appropriate planning and
adaptation to future hazards arising from climate variability and change, both
to mitigate future costs and maximize potential benefits. Climate scientists are
engaged in significant effort to understand the decadal predictability of the
climate system and to develop models to predict the climate on 5-30 year
timescales. However, parallel efforts to understand predictive capacity of
climate impacts and realize the full societal value of decadal prediction
science has received little attention.

This collaborative project will utilize existing and developing dynamical models
combined with observed data using advanced statistical methods to understand our
predictive capacity for climate impacts on decadal timescales, and integrate
predictive methods so that they more directly meet the societal needs for
predictive information. The overarching goal is to transform how scientists from
multiple disciplines and practitioners conceptualize decadal climate prediction,
by enabling decadal predictions in decision relevant terms to improve planning
and adaptive capacity for climate variability and change.

The approach follows in two concurrent parts. Understanding of current
predictive information needs and usage will be developed in Part I across
multiple high-impact weather and climate phenomena and across multiple
stakeholder groups. The core research will take place in Part II and will
identify our predictive capacity for the needed information through development
of new combined statistical-dynamical modeling approaches that incorporate and
are robust to uncertainty. An iterative process between information needs and
information provision will promote effective integration of skillful predictive
information with decision-making. A key project contribution is the development
of a prototype generalized interdisciplinary research framework to integrate
predictive capacity with decision-making.