* 1419015
* EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop:  Science-Driven Cyberinfrastructure Needs in Solar-Terrestrial Research; Newark, New Jersey; Spring 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/28/2015
* USD 99,979.00

The purpose of this 1-year project is to organize a 2.5-day EarthCube Workshop
that brings together experts in observations, theory, data analysis, data-driven
3D modeling, data management and high performance computing of the Sun-Earth
system. The goal is to identify the current challenges and cyberinfrastructure
needs related the access, sharing, visualization and synthesis of the existing
and future large, multi-wavelength datasets covering solar-terrestrial
observations and modeling all the way from the surface of the Sun to the Earth's
upper atmosphere. The intellectual merit of this activity will materialize in
two ways. The workshop will introduce the solar-terrestrial community to the
general vision behind the EarthCube framework while providing consensus feedback
from this community to the EarthCube initiative. The scientific challenges and
related cyberinfrastructure needs identified during this workshop will drive
subsequent activities aiming to implement cyberinfrastructure solutions. These
activities will result in expanding the computing infrastructure of the
participating universities and accommodate postdoctoral and graduate student
involvement from a wide range of disciplines including physics, computer
sciences, and mathematics; thus, these activities will advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning, which will
directly impact the students' careers. Such activities will facilitate the
transfer of innovative data analysis, data visualization, and data-driven
modeling techniques to other fields of research that may benefit from a similar
framework.