* 1419141
* Collaborative Research: Chameleon: A Large-Scale, Reconfigurable Experimental Environment for Cloud Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Katarzyna Keahey, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,658,399.00

A persistent problem facing academic cloud research is the lack of
infrastructure and data to perform experimental research: large-scale hardware
is needed to investigate the scalability of cloud infrastructure and
applications, heterogeneous hardware is needed to investigate algorithmic and
implementation tradeoffs, fully-configurable software environments are needed to
investigate the performance of virtualization techniques and the differences
between cloud software stacks, and data about how clouds are used is needed to
evaluate virtual machine scheduling and data placement algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chameleon project will addresses these needs by
providing a large-scale, fully configurable experimental testbed driven by the
needs of the cloud research and education communities. The testbed, and the
ecosystem associated with it, will enable researchers to explore a range of
cloud research challenges, from large scale to small scale, including exploring
low-level problems in hardware architecture, systems research, network
configuration, and software design, or at higher levels of abstraction looking
at cloud scheduling, cloud platforms, and cloud applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chameleon will significantly enhance the ability of the
computing research community to understand the behavior of Internet scale cloud
systems, and to develop new software, ideas and algorithms for the cloud
environment. As the tremendous shift to cloud as the primary means of providing
computing infrastructure continues, a large-scale testbed tailored to
researchers' needs is essential to the continued relevance of a large fraction
of computing research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by the
University of Chicago and includes partners from the Texas Advanced Computing
Center (TACC), Northwestern University, the Ohio State University, and the
University of Texas at San Antonio, comprising a highly qualified and
experienced team, with research leaders from the cloud and networking world
blended with providers of production quality cyberinfrastructure. The team
includes members from the NSF-supported FutureGrid project and from the GENI
community, both forerunners of the NSFCloud solicitation under which this
project is funded. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chameleon testbed, will be deployed
at the University of Chicago (UC) and the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC)
and will consist of 650 multi-core cloud nodes, 5PB of total disk space, and
leverage 100 Gbps connection between the sites. While a large part of the
testbed will consist of homogenous hardware to support large-scale experiments,
a portion of it will support heterogeneous units allowing experimentation with
high-memory, large-disk, low-power, GPU, and co-processor units. The project
will also leverage existing FutureGrid hardware at UC and TACC in its first year
to provide a transition period for the existing FutureGrid community of
experimental users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support a broad range of
experiments emphasizing a range of requirements ranging from a high degree of
control to ease of use the project will support a graduated configuration system
allowing full user configurability of the stack, from provisioning of bare metal
and network interconnects to delivery of fully functioning cloud environments.
In addition, to facilitate experiments, Chameleon will support a set of services
designed to meet researchers needs, including support for experimental
management, reproducibility, and repositories of trace and workload data of
production cloud workloads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate the latter, the
project will form a set of partnerships with commercial as well as academic
clouds, such as Rackspace and Open Science Data Cloud (OSDC). It will also
partner with other testbeds, notably GENI and INRIA's Grid5000 testbed, and
reach out to the user community to shape the policy an direction of the testbed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chameleon project will bring a new dimension and scale
of resources to the CS community who wish to educate their students about
design, implementation, operation and applications of cloud computing, a
critical skillset for future computing professionals. It will enhance the
understanding and application of experimental methodology in computer science
and generate new educational materials and resources, with the participation of,
and for, Minority Serving Institution (MSI) students.