* 1419986
* Gene Flow and Divergence Across the Equatorial Tropical Marine Barrier: Past, Present and Future
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Peter Marko, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2015
* USD 167,251.00

The marine communities of the northern and southern hemispheres are kept
distinct by warm water and strong currents near the equator. Nevertheless, many
taxa have established "antitropical" distributions, occurring in temperate zones
on either side of the tropics but not within the warmest tropical regions.
Although paleontological studies and molecular phylogenies provide information
about the timing and direction of trans-tropical colonization, the existence of
single species with antitropical distributions provides an opportunity to begin
to investigate several fundamental questions about the recent history of and
future prospects for biological connectivity between the northern and southern
hemispheres. This project focuses on characterizing connectivity across the
tropics in the antitropical gooseneck barnacle Pollicipes elegans. This eastern
Pacific species is found in both hemispheres but is absent from the warmest
waters immediately to the north of the equator. Previously-collected data show
that mtDNA haplotype lineages are shared between northern and southern
hemisphere populations, and that the separation between north and south has been
relatively recent, within the last 160,000 years. This research has two main
goals. First, the investigators will use multi-locus sequence data and
microsatellite loci to estimate the time of separation of northern and southern
populations and how much gene flow has occurred since that split, both over
evolutionary timescales and across recent generations. The second goal is to
characterize larval thermal tolerance and performance as a means to test the
hypothesis that temperature is a barrier to larval dispersal across the warmest
tropical regions in P. elegans. Although several other hypotheses can
potentially explain what keeps P. elegans out of the tropics, such as the
isolating effects of the equatorial boundary currents or post-settlement
processes, assessing the temperature sensitivity of the dispersive larval stage
will provide the first important physiological test of how temperature limits
connectivity. Understanding the history of gene flow and the temperature
tolerance of dispersive larvae will provide insight into the impacts of recent
and projected increases in tropical sea surface temperatures on recent and
future patterns of connectivity between the hemispheres.

This project will provide financial support and training in fieldwork,
population genetics, and larval ecology for two graduate students and two
postdoctoral researchers. Undergraduate students will be involved with aspects
of the research through a hands-on lab class taught in Molecular Population
Biology and recruitment from courses taught at Clemson. The investigators will
also continue to engage a local school district (LaFrance, South Carolina) via
classroom visits by scientists (PI, graduate students, and postdocs). The
investigators publish actively in leading scientific journals and written
invited contributions for the fields of biogeography and life history evolution.
Research in the their labs is disseminated via web pages and previous work has
reached the public through a wide variety of media outlets.