* 1419355
* Conference:  16th Annual Rustbelt RNA Meeting to be held October 17-18, 2014 at the Marriott City Center Downtown in Pittsburgh, PA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Philip Bevilacqua, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,000.00

The 16th annual Rustbelt RNA Meeting will be held October 17-18, 2014 at the
Marriott City Center Downtown in Pittsburgh, PA. The meeting is an annual
regional conference that promotes sharing of new research in RNA science,
broadly defined. Recent years have witnessed breakthroughs in the identification
and characterization of RNA switches and enzymes, as well as genome-wide
approaches to RNA folding and regulation. A major goal of the meeting is to
provide opportunities for trainee professional development through presentation
of talks and posters; to meet that goal the majority of the talks and
presentations will be given by students, postdoctoral associates and early-
career faculty. These presentations are a key mechanism for trainees to interact
with senior researchers and fellow students in their field. These interactions
often form the foundation of long-lasting professional relationships and
collaborations. Meetings such as this one fulfill a key mission of NSF by
providing educational and development opportunities for the next generation of
science professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's meeting will draw
regional participation from the Midwestern and Mid-Atlantic United States and
provide students and PIs with the chance to learn and share RNA-related
research. The meeting will cover topics ranging from long non-coding RNAs to
tRNA modification to RNA structure-function studies. The meeting will feature a
keynote lecture by Professor Manuel Ares Jr. (University of California, Santa
Cruz), former president of the RNA Society and HHMI Professor. Unique features
of the meeting will include 1) oral presentations in each session from research
conducted by undergraduates, 2) featured poster area highlighting works from
undergraduate researchers and PUIs, 3) travel awards for undergraduate and
underrepresented minorities, and 4) a workshop on career transition for trainees
hosted by group leaders from industry and academic research institutions.