* 1419233
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Technological Analysis of Lead Glazed Ceramics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Brunella Santarelli, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 23,076.00

Innovation and new technologies, when properly applied, can serve as a driving
forces for human betterment. The human propensity to invent is not limited to
historic times and archaeology can provide insight into how it developed over
millennial time scales. This project does this as well as contributing to
writing the prehistory of America's past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the
supervision of Dr. David Killick, Brunella Santarelli will reconstruct the
technology of production of Pueblo I (ca. 700-850 CE) glaze paints from the
Upper San Juan region, southwest Colorado. These were the first glaze paints
invented in the Americas. Southwestern glaze paints are unique in that they were
used as decorative elements instead of as protective surface coatings. Despite
recent interest in the later Pueblo IV glaze paints of New Mexico (ca. 1275-1700
CE), the Pueblo I glaze paints have remained largely ignored by archaeologists
due to their limited temporal and spatial distribution. This research project
proposes the first analysis and technological reconstruction of the Pueblo I
glaze paints since the 1930's. It will examine the composition, microstructure
and isotope signatures of the Pueblo I glaze paints in an effort to reconstruct
the technology of their production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
analyze samples collected during the Animas-La Plata (ALP) project, a large-
scale CRM project carried out in the vicinity of Durango, Colorado. The ALP
project was selected for sampling because of the many glaze-painted ceramics
recovered and because the excavations were extensively documented and fully
published. This project will use a hybrid approach, coupling advanced materials
science techniques with a framework of social theory to understand the role of
these ceramics in the context in which they were produced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These early glaze paints have the potential to provide
important information regarding both technology of production as well as the
relationships and interactions of potters during this period in the Upper San
Juan region, and the data collected in this project will be used to understand
the social circumstances that promoted the spread and eventual decline of this
technological innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to have
broader impacts beyond the contribution to the technological knowledge of
Southwest ceramics. This project will provide an example of the exciting
research that can be done with the stored collections of large public projects,
which remain a woefully underutilized resource for intellectual inquiry. The
results of this project will be disseminated to both academic and public
audiences, through outreach at the University of Arizona and through peer-
reviewed publications. Additionally, the data produced in this project will be
submitted to online databases for public access. Finally, the research and
results will be shared with the Native Nations Advisory Board, and the findings
of this project may contribute to efforts for revitalization of glaze traditions
arising from recent interest of this technology in modern Pueblos.