* 1419517
* The Study of Social Structure, Identity, and Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Peter Burke, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2018
* USD 284,519.00

This research examines the broader scientific question regarding how social
structure and human agency interact to affect how people negotiate for resources
in small exchange networks as well as the ties that develop between individuals
in those networks. Specifically, this research studies how those in three- and
four-person networks bargain over resources, and how their bargaining is
modified to produce more (or less) equality and more (or less) solidarity when
their fairness identity (how fair they perceive themselves to be, ranging from
low to high) is activated in a situation. The research also will manipulate
whether the fairness identity is verified or not verified during the bargaining
situation to examine the negotiation strategies that individuals devise in
response to the identity feedback. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators conduct three experiments over two years. In two of the
experiments, they create a power-imbalanced network and examine how different
levels of power and different levels of fairness influence whether individuals
come to divide resources equally. They also examine how different distributions
of the fairness identity across positions in the network affect the division of
resources. In the third experiment, they create power-balanced networks of
three- and four-persons to study how structurally induced exclusion modifies the
effects of the fairness identity on how people negotiate. In all three studies,
individuals experience identity verification or non-verification to track how
this influences their behavioral responses. Additionally, the research tracks
the equality in outcomes and whether social bonds are forged among individuals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research have broad implications for
understanding inequality in our society. The results will tell us how aspects of
the individual (here, one's fairness identity) modify how resources are
negotiated (either exacerbating or suppressing the relative deprivation that can
result from these negotiations) as well as influence the development of positive
ties such as trust and solidarity. More generally, the results will lend insight
into how one's identity influences outcomes in a situation by modifying the
effects that emerge on the basis of one's position of power. These findings are
particularly valuable to social scientists, public policy analysts, and grass-
roots organizations that examine and want to reduce inequality in society.
Educationally, this research also advances undergraduate and graduate training
in research, as students gain expertise in experimental design and theory
testing.