* 1419976
* Student Travel Support for the 2014 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Hui Xiong, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2016
* USD 27,744.00

This award provides travel support for approximately 24 graduate students to
attend the 2014 SIAM Data Mining Conference (SDM 2014), and the associated
Doctoral Student Forum, that is being organized by the Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in cooperation with the American Statistical
Association. SDM 2014 is being held April 24-26 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Twelve students will present at the Doctoral Forum consisting of a poster
session for Ph.D. candidates in data mining or closely related areas who have
made significant progress towards Ph.D. candidacy. The Ph.D. student forum
participants will be able to present their work, interact with their peers from
other universities as well as hundreds of leading researchers in data mining
from around the world. In addition, they will attend the technical sessions,
plenary talks, and tutorials and workshops of their choice at the conference.
Each student will be assigned a senior researcher to serve as a mentor on a
variety of career-related issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in premier
research conferences is an integral component of the training of Ph.D. students
in data mining. The SDM 2014 Doctoral Student Forum is aimed at providing an
opportunity for Ph.D. candidates to present their work and receive constructive
feedback and mentoring from established researchers in data mining. Such
feedback and mentoring is expected to improve the quality of the students thesis
research. Similarly, student recipient of a travel award will be able to attend
technical sessions, plenary talks, panels, tutorials and workshops. They will
interact with peers who share similar interests from other universities, as well
as hundreds of leading researchers in data mining from around the world. This
experience will be extremely formative and fruitful towards the shaping of their
future research endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data mining is playing an
increasingly important role in many emerging data-rich sciences and application
domains, such as healthcare informatics, bioinformatics, computational biology,
link analysis, counterterrorism and security. The SDM 2014 Doctoral Student
forum will enrich the education and training of student researchers at early
stages in their careers. Attendance in SDM 2014 will expose students to cutting-
edge research and to relevant applications in a variety of domains. The travel
awards will help broaden the participation of women and members of under-
represented groups within the Data Mining research community.