* 1419009
* Conference:  25th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research to be held July 28-August 1, 2014 at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Keiko Torii, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2015
* USD 46,950.00

Intellectual Merit. The 25th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research
will be held July 28-August 1, 2014 at the University of British Columbia in
Vancouver, Canada. The conference will bring together scientists from across the
world to discuss results of research using Arabidopsis as a model plant system.
Knowledge gained from research on this model informs all aspects of basic plant
biology. The meeting will feature keynote talks from leaders in the field: three
who work on Arabidopsis and one who works on a non-plant system (yeast). As
always, the conference will cover a broad range of topics, ranging from
physiology to molecular biology. An emerging research area, Synthetic Biology,
will be featured in one of the sessions. A new feature to highlight research
from the posters will be the addition of two-minute "oral poster" talks (two per
session), selected from submitted abstracts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Meeting organizers have paid careful attention to encouraging
participation of minority and early-career researchers. A recently established
Minority Affairs Committee has formulated specific objectives for encouraging
networking and collaboration, both during the meeting and afterward. The format
of the meeting and the many types of events will ensure broad access and sharing
of results of cutting edge plant biology research, in keeping with the spirit of
free exchange that is a hallmark of the Arabidopsis community.