* 1419538
* IBDR: Workshop on Successful Approaches for Development and Dissemination of Instrumentation for Biological Research - May 1-2, 2014;  Rosslyn, VA
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 01/31/2015
* USD 49,990.00

This award is being made to organize a special workshop to discuss successful
approaches for development of novel instrumentation for biological research and
to realize the full potential of such instrumentation through broad
dissemination and outreach. The workshop agenda will identify successful
approaches for (1) Interdisciplinary collaborations of biologists and instrument
developers, (2) Inclusion of students and postdoctoral researchers in biological
instrumentation development, (3) Opportunities for U.S. interagency
collaboration to promote synergistic instrument development efforts (4)
Entrepreneurial activities that allow the first proof-of-concept prototype to be
transformed into commercial instrumentation (5) Best practices for education and
outreach, and (6) Feedback from current Instrument Development for Biological
Research (IDBR) program principal investigators (PIs) on the effectiveness of
the IDBR program. The workshop will bring together: 1) active researchers
representing diverse branches of biological sciences; 2) physicists and
engineers who are experts in relevant instrument development technologies; 3)
National Science Foundation and National Institutes of Health program managers;
4) successful entrepreneurs; 5) university personnel responsible for graduate
training and for technology transfer and commercialization; and 6) graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting organizers
and invited speakers are diverse in terms of career stage, gender, type of
institution, and geographical region. The PIs will recruit and actively
encourage participation of early-career investigators, students, and members of
underrepresented groups in the fields of engineering and biology. To do so, the
PIs will use email, word of mouth, society newsletters, announcements, and
advertising. The PIs will communicate/disseminate results of the workshop by
compiling in a detailed report the highlights of the presentations and
discussions as well as meeting outcomes and future directions and
recommendations. The report will be submitted to NSF and a modified version will
be submitted for publication in a biotechnology journal(e.g. Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Biotechniques, etc.). The goals of the
workshop are aligned with goals of the Instrument Development for Biological
research (IDBR) program, which seeks to develop and disseminate instrumentation
that is potentially transformative for biological research.