* 1419027
* Theory, Methods for Diffusive Optical Imaging, Graph Based Fokker-Planck Equations and Mass Transportations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Hao-Min Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,001.00

This research project concerns theoretical and computational aspects of inverse
source problems and mass transport equations. Inverse source problems have a
wide range of applications in science, engineering, and medicine. Among
different types of inverse source problems, diffusive optical imaging, such as
Fluorescence Molecular Tomography (FMT), is particularly important. FMT uses
harmless infrared light, instead of X-ray, to capture molecular specific
inclusions in biological tissues. It offers great potential in early cancer
detection and drug monitoring. However, diffusive optical imaging demands large
scale computation and careful treatment of the ill-posedness due to the
diffusive nature of light propagation in tissues. This project aims to develop a
new efficient and robust computation strategy for inverse source problems to
improve image resolution and speed up computation significantly. Optimal mass
transport theory plays a crucial role in many important applications, such as
logistics, transportation, physics, and chemistry, and the theory also has
potential application to study information propagation on social media. Despite
remarkable development in the theory in continuous settings in recent years,
much less is known concerning the problems on graphs or networks. This project
will conduct theoretical and numerical analysis of graph-based mass transport
problems, to design efficient and accurate simulation methodologies and to apply
them to data analytics. The research activities will be integrated with
education and training of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs
through seminars and courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
research in two areas: numerical methods for inverse source problems, and
theoretical and numerical analyses for graph-based Fokker-Planck equations and
mass transport problems. For inverse source problems, the research aims to
develop a new 2-stage methodology, called orthogonal solution and kernel
correction algorithm, to separate the competing requirements on regularity and
boundary data fidelity in the common regularization approach, so that both
requirements can be addressed more effectively. The method leverages an adaptive
multiscale basis, the finite element method, and the spectral method to gain
significant computation speed up and resolution improvement. The method can be
integrated into FMT data acquisition equipment. Understanding of the Fokker-
Planck equation and optimal mass transport theory that play crucial roles in
many important applications has undergone remarkable development in continuous
settings in recent years, but much less is known when one considers the problems
on graphs or networks. This project will conduct theoretical and numerical
analysis of graph based Fokker-Planck equations and mass transport problems, to
design efficient and accurate simulation methodologies and to apply them to data
analytics, which aim to understand and to optimize strategies to handle
information hidden in large scale, high dimension data sets.