* 1419020
* Discontinuous Galerkin Schemes for Fluid, Kinetic, and Multiscale Fluid/Kinetic Models in Plasma Physics Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* James Rossmanith, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 71,364.00

Plasma physics is the study of the dynamics of ionized gases. Because plasma,
often referred to as the fourth state of matter, is the most abundant form of
ordinary matter in the universe, there exist many important application problems
for which an understanding would be advantageous. The motivating application for
this research is high-energy particle acceleration using laser-plasma
interactions. The production of high-energy particle beams is important in the
process of creating synchrotron radiation, which is used for small scale imaging
in many application areas including materials science, biology, and medicine.
Laser-plasma acceleration is a mechanism for generating high-energy electrons by
hitting a plasma with a specifically-tuned ultra-short laser beam. This approach
provides the possibility to create high-energy particles with a device much
smaller than standard particle accelerators. The big challenge with this
approach is to be able to generate a relativistic electron beam with a small
energy spread. The objective of this research is to develop highly accurate and
efficient computational methods for simulating the acceleration of high-energy
electrons. This research aims to develop novel computational techniques for so-
called 'kinetic models' of plasma that achieve accuracy and robustness by
exactly conserving certain important properties (e.g., mass and energy
conservation and positivity of the solution). These methods will be implemented
in computer code that will take advantage of modern computer architectures. The
resulting methods will be used to simulate various scenarios of laser-plasma
interactions with the aim to elucidate the mechanisms of electron acceleration
and the features of the produced electron bream.

The primary objective of this research is to develop accurate and efficient
computational methods for solving nonlinear partial differential equations used
to model plasma dynamics. The mathematical models considered in this work arise
from an important application problem: laser plasma accelerators, which provide
a promising mechanism for generating high-energy electrons by hitting a plasma
with a specifically-tuned ultra-short laser beam. The research will focus on
developing efficient high-order discontinuous Galerkin schemes for kinetic
Vlasov systems. The two main challenges that will be addressed are the
development of (1) efficient time-stepping procedures that allow for time-steps
that are dictated by physically important time scales and (2) high-order
discretizations that numerically conserve important physical properties such as
mass, momentum, and energy, as well as properties such as the positivity of the
solution. One approach that will be explored in this research in order to
improve the efficiency of the kinetic Vlasov numerical methods is the coupling
of kinetic Vlasov solvers to fluid solvers to obtain a multiscale fluid/kinetic
method. Part of the work will be done in collaboration with an experimental
physicists, Prof. Dr. Malte Kaluza (Jena), who will help guide the mathematical
modeling in order to keep the models relevant to the important physics of laser-
plasma accelerators. Correspondingly, the resulting computational results will
be used to influence laser-plasma experiments. The software that will result
from this research project, along with proper documentation, will be made freely
available on the web as part of the open-source package DoGPack.