* 1419843
* Building the Precambrian Laurentian Core of the North American craton: Resolving the Age and Tectonic Setting of the Snowbird Tectonic Zone of Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 251,584.00

The Canadian Shield, the core of the North American continent, is one of the
great Archean (&gt; 2.5 billion year) cratons on Earth and one from which many
inferences have been drawn about the early evolution of Earth and the nature of
early tectonic processes. It is generally accepted that the core of the
continent consists of a number of relatively small Archean microcontinents (or
protocontinents) that were stitched together by Proterozoic (2.0-1.8 billion
year) orogenic belts. Many workers interpret the boundaries between these
crustal blocks in terms of modern plate tectonic processes. That is, it can be
argued that by approximately 2 billion years ago, plate tectonic processes were
beginning to resemble those that of the modern-day Earth. There is one major
crustal boundary that has remained enigmatic and might challenge interpretations
about the evolution of North America and of plate tectonics in general. The
Snowbird Tectonic Zone of central Canada is a 2,800-kilometer-long linear
discontinuity that roughly corresponds to the boundary between the Hearne and
Rae geologic domains (microcontinents?) of a mass of ancient rocks that forms
the Canadian Shield. This boundary has been interpreted by geologists and
geophysicists in terms of very different tectonic processes that have occurred
at widely different times in Earth history. This research is aimed at clarifying
the origin and significance of the Snowbird Tectonic zone by first constraining
the age of the feature itself, and then by comparing and contrasting basement
and cover rocks on either side of the enigmatic boundary. In addition to the
scientific goals of the research, the project involves a significant
intellectual collaboration between Canadian and American researchers from both
government and university organizations. The project will contribute to
education in a STEM discipline by the training of graduate and undergraduate
students and the development of research results into classroom curricula and
the creation of an online course for high school Earth Science students. Results
of the research will be widely disseminated through presentations at
professional geoscience meetings and the peer-reviewed scientific literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Snowbird Tectonic zone is the 2800-kilometer-long
boundary between the Rae and Hearn domains (proto-continents) in the western
Canadian Shield. It is widely taken to be one of the fundamental growth
structures, or sutures, within the core of Laurentia, but interpretations of the
age and tectonic setting of the zone vary widely with first-order implications
for the early Earth tectonics and the history of Laurentia. The purpose of the
proposed work is to build on region mapping and petrologic work near the zone
and to finally constrain the age and significance of the Snowbird tectonic zone.
Research will be carried out within the 600-km-long central segment of the
Snowbird tectonic zone. Building on regional mapping and petrologic/structural
analysis, new data will be collected and compiled from three transects across
the zone. Data will include: (1) the isotopic signature of basement rocks within
and on either side of the zone, (2) the age and character of cover sequences,
(3) timing and style of deformation and metamorphism within and adjacent to the
zone, and finally (4) the age and petrogenesis of the Chipman mafic dike swarm,
a ubiquitous component of the Snowbird zone. The working hypothesis is that,
unlike other boundaries in the Canadian Shield, the Rae-Hearne boundary is an
Archean (not Proterozoic) continental suture, a collisional boundary that may
provide an early record of horizontal tectonics in North America. The Snowbird
Tectonic Zone, however, is a Proterozoic feature, a rare deep crustal exposure
of an incipient and abortive rift and magmatic ?hot zone? that served to
localize deformation, metamorphism, and partial melting. Consequently, in
addition to placing critical constraints on the tectonic history of North
America, the Snowbird Tectonic Zone provides unprecedented exposures of the zone
of interaction of mantle magmatism, high-T metamorphism, and deformation within
the lower crust. It may provide a model for similar processes occurring on Earth
today.