* 1419604
* The Influence of Efficacy, Framing, and Political Orientation on Selective Perception and Selective Exposure: The Case of Atmospheric Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Philip Hart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2016
* USD 109,618.00

A persistent problem for science communicators is how best to discuss
controversial science issues. Communication is made especially difficult due to
biases that arise through selective exposure and selective perception -
individuals tend to selectively view and interpret messages in ways that
reinforce previously held values and beliefs. The result is that attempts to
communicate about science issues often amplify political polarization, and fail
to spur action to mitigate or adapt to the relevant risks. The case of
atmospheric change has been particularly rife with communication problems. This
research draws primarily from the extended parallel process model (EPPM), which
emphasizes the role of efficacy in effective risk communication, and the
literature on framing processes to investigate how the media has discussed
controversal science issues and what kinds of narratives may be effective in
overcoming selective perception and selective exposure. Through a media content
analysis and a series of experiments the project: 1) identifies how print,
television, and online news media have thematically framed the controversal
science issues and discussed the efficacy of efforts to address the issue, 2)
investigates how the EPPM may be applied to politically charged issues, with a
focus on how political orientation may moderate the impacts of changes in
descriptions of efficacy on individuals' perceptions of the issue, and 3)
explores how changes in media climate change frames and descriptions of
efficacy, respectively, may cause individuals with varying political
orientations to pay selective attention to media
stories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using atmospheric change as a case study, this
project will expand our understanding of how the news media represent
controversal science issues and test strategies for overcoming individual biases
in the selection and processing of science messages. It will advance risk
communication theory by increasing our knowledge of how to use the EPPM and
framing theory to develop messages that resonate across broad audiences and, in
so doing, will make novel connections across multiple disciplines. In addition
to its theoretical contributions, this research will provide new methods that
practitioners may use to create scientifically informed messages that more
effectively communicate controversal science issues.