* 1419915
* Constraining mantle flow between Samoa and the northern Lau and N. Fiji Basins with geochemistry and geodynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/02/2013,03/31/2014
* Matthew Jackson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/2014
* USD 392.00

Intellectual Merit Numerous geochemical and geophysical anomalies within the
northern portion of the Lau basin--the presence of high 3He/4He (up to 28 times
atmospheric), latitudinal gradients in trace element and isotopic (Sr-Nd-Pb)
enrichment, and trench parallel shear wave splitting near the Tonga arc--have
been attributed to southward flow of mantle material from the nearby Samoan
hotspot. However, both the total extent and the spatial distribution of any
intrusion of Samoan plume mantle into the region are poorly constrained. We
propose to use a combination of geochemical analysis and geodynamic modeling to
test two hypotheses regarding advection of material from the Samoan plume into
the northern Lau basin: 1. The observed North-South gradients in Sr, Nd, and Pb
isotopic ratios reflect progressive depletion of southward flowing Samoan-plume
mantle. 2. The western extent of the Samoan plume's influence in the region
extends into the northwestern Lau and North Fiji basins. We will perform
geochemical analyses on samples from 12 key sites within the northwest Lau and
northern North Fiji basins selected to fill important geographic voids in
existing geochemical data sets. This study will geochemically characterize (He,
Sr, Nd, and Pb isotopes and trace elements) a suite of 28 existing lava samples
along a swath covering the northern region of the Lau and North Fiji basins.
These data will greatly extend the western limit of geochemical observations in
the region while simultaneously improving the resolution of North-South
variations in isotopic ratios at the northern extreme of the northwest Lau and
North Fiji basins. He isotopic measurements, which are the most unambiguous
geochemical indicator of the presence of Samoan-plume mantle, will be
particularly important for identifying the (currently unconstrained) western
limit of Samoan intrusion. A series of numerical geodynamic experiments will be
conducted to characterize melting of isotopically enriched Samoan-plume mantle
by decompression as it flows southward across the boundary between old (>100
Ma), thick Pacific oceanic lithosphere and the young (<5 Ma), thin oceanic
lithosphere of the Lau basin in the vicinity of the Vitiaz lineament. The
resulting predicted spatial patterns in mantle depletion will be compared to the
observed North-South geochemical gradients in the basins and the data obtained
in this study to place constraints on the morphology of mantle flow in the
region. Broader Impacts This research will support two early career scientists
(Jackson, Hall), subsequently fostering interdisciplinary collaboration between
them. It will also support a BU graduate student who will have the opportunity
to work across disciplines by participating directly in all aspects of the
proposed work. Hall and Jackson have both incorporated undergraduate students in
their research in the past and will continue to do so with this project. This
proposal includes funding to allow a BU undergraduate to participate in the
geochemical aspect of the proposed research. The computational geodynamic model
developed for this project will be made freely available for download through
the BU Geophysics website. All data generated through this proposal will be
treated in compliance of EAR Data Policy and will be disseminated to the broader
community both through publication and archival in on-line databases.