* 1419076
* EAGER: US Ignite: Enabling Highly Resilient and Efficient Microgrids through Ultra-Fast Programmable Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 06/30/2017
* USD 298,978.00

Improving the resilience of the electric distribution control infrastructure is
an urgent issue not only to reduce the vulnerability of the power grid to
extreme events but also to facilitate the use of green or renewable energy.
Among different options, microgrids are an emerging and promising paradigm. A
microgrid is a small-scale network designed to supply electrical and heat load
of a small community (e.g., a shopping center, an industrial park, or a
university campus). It typically contains a set of distributed generators, load,
storage and protection devices that are controlled by a central controller. To
the main power grid, a microgrid is a single entity that may either produce
power for the larger grid or consume power. This dramatically simplifies the
interaction between a microgrid and the main grid, allowing for the easy
introduction and rapid evolution of new forms of computer control of
heterogeneous technologies within the micro-grid domain. However, microgrids
with a significant renewable energy component may experience rapid changes in
power generation. It is extremely important to achieve fast voltage and
frequency control during these swings otherwise the system may lose balance
between load and generation and may eventually collapse. Control of microgrids
relies on fast, reliable communications; in the most stringent cases messages
must be delivered within a few milliseconds. This project will integrate
Software Defined Networking (SDN) technology with microgrid control to stabilize
and optimize system operation. The project will demonstrate the techniques on a
microgrid at the University of Connecticut Depot
Campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project SDN technology will have three
general uses: route reconfiguration to avoid network performance issues and
improve network reliability, packet prioritization to provide Quality of Service
(QoS) in support of low latency delivery, and monitoring of data flows
associated with microgrid control. The project will use a two phase approach to
demonstration and evaluation both in close collaboration with UCONN Facilities
Operations and Schneider Electric, the microgrid contractor. In the first phase
it will use a virtual hardware-in-the-loop environment that receives real-time
measurements from the microgrid and closely mimics the actual microgrid status.
Specifically, the environment will contain real communication infrastructure and
(small-scale) energy sources and load, while the rest of the system will be
through trace-driven simulation using real-time measurements fed from the
operational microgrid. Once the first phase has demonstrated and evaluated the
techniques the PIs will work with Schneider Electric and UCONN Facilities
Operations to incorporate the developed techniques into a larger staging
facility for further evaluation and refinement and possible adoption by the
Depot microgrid.