* 1419035
* RAPID: Characterizing the overwash deposition of Super Typhoon Haiyan along the Philippine Coast with connections to long-term records
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Davin Wallace, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2015
* USD 29,987.00

Typhoon Haiyan had a historic impact on the Philippines. This rapid-response
project, led by a faculty member at the University of Southern Mississippi, will
use sediment cores in various sites in the Philippines, particularly locations
with the highest associated wind speeds from the event and sites preserving a
longer-term geologic record, to put this extreme event into a historic and
geologic context. Numerical models will be used to back calculate wind speeds in
order to compare Typhoon Haiyan to past events. Overall, this work will
contribute to a better understanding of the frequency and magnitude of extreme
storms in this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has strong societal
relevance, with the potential to place Typhoon Haiyan and similar tropical
cyclones in a long term climate context. The results of the study may contribute
to the rebuilding process and influence future management and policy decisions.
A Filipino collaborator and his student will play a essential roles in the field
work and in the interpretation of the results. Two graduate students will be
involved in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences, International Science and
Engineering, and the EPSCoR Program.