* 1419377
* GENI Engineering Conference 20
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Shyhtsun Wu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 03/31/2015
* USD 49,795.00

This project supports hosting the three day 20th edition of the GENI Engineering
Conference (GEC), including organizing and hosting the demo session, to be held
June 22-24, 2014 at the University of California, Davis. Both the conference and
the demonstration session for GEC 20 will make use of university facilities, the
UC Davis Conference Center , Buehler Alumni Center, and the Kemper Hall. There
are three GECs per year in which the entire GENI community meets to review
current status, and to decide on subsequent steps in GENI's evolution. These
GECs include community-based working groups leading GENI's design and planning,
and demonstrating progress with live experiments. About 250 to 300 leading
researchers and Ph.D. students from diverse US institutions will gather for GEC
20 to showcase their ideas and results. In the demo session over 35 live demos
will be provided with a wired connection to the GENI infrastructure. The demo
evening will be held Ballroom A-B-C (combined) in the UC Davis Conference
Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Global Environment for Network Innovations
(GENI) is a virtual instrument that is rapidly emerging in prototype form across
the United States. GENI is an instrument designed to address three issues:
&lt;br/&gt; - Science Issues: We cannot currently understand or predict the
behavior of complex,&lt;br/&gt;large-scale networks.&lt;br/&gt; - Society
Issues: We increasingly rely on the Internet but are unsure we can trust its
security, privacy or resilience.&lt;br/&gt; - Innovation Issues: Substantial
barriers to at-scale experimentation with new architectures, services, and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;GENI addresses these issues via scale (from federation)
and support for two kinds of experiments: 1) controlled and repeatable
experiments, which will greatly help improve our scientific understanding of
complex, large-scale networks; and 2) in-the- wild trials of experimental
services that ride atop or connect to today?s Internet and that engage large
numbers of human participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEC meeting and Demo
sessions provide graduate students with both an opportunity to demonstrate and
explain their work to the GENI community prior to formal publication. It is a
key part of helping new graduate students understand what is being done with
GENI and who amongst their peers at other institutions might be valuable
resources. It also supports outreach to new community members, including the
emerging US Ignite community. GENI is already being used as an instrument for
research. This project supports the development and use of the research
instrument.