* 1419433
* CAREER: Toward Discovering the 3D Geometrical and Semantic Structure of Objects and Scenes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Silvio Savarese, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2015
* USD 259,472.00

This project develops a novel framework for jointly understanding the 3D spatial
and semantic structure of complex scenes from images. The state-of-the-art
computer vision methods deal with these two tasks separately. Methods for object
recognition typically describe the scene as a list of class labels, but are
unable to account for the 3D spatial structure. Methods for scene 3D modeling
produce accurate metric reconstructions but are unable to infer the semantic
content of its components. This project seeks to fill this gap and creates the
foundations for a new framework for coherently describing objects, object
components and their 3D spatial arrangement in the scene's physical space. The
research of this project makes two main contributions. First, novel models for
representing the intrinsic multi-view nature of object categories and for
measuring critical object geometrical attributes are explored. Second, a new
coherent probabilistic formulation that is capable to use these measurements for
simultaneously estimating the most likely 3D configuration of scene elements and
the critical semantic phenomena of the scene are investigated. This research has
potential to play a transformative role in many strategic areas such as
autonomous navigation, robotics, and 3D automatic modeling of urban
environments. Moreover, it is crucial in designing technology for assisting
people with reduced functional capabilities. The project integrates research and
education by involving undergraduates or high school students in projects whose
primary application goal is to develop technology for people with disabilities.