* 1419029
* Development of superconvergent hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin methods and mixed methods for Korteweg-de Vries type equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Bo Dong, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 129,939.00

The project focuses on developing novel numerical methods for simulating the
Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) type equations, that model phenomena in areas such as
fluid mechanics, nonlinear optics, acoustics, and plasma physics. For example,
the KdV equation has been used in the modeling of shallow water waves and the
study of Tsunami waves. The new numerical tools developed under this project
will provide scientists with a better understanding of theoretically unresolved
issues on the mathematical properties of solutions to KdV type equations.
Furthermore, the proposed project will provide accurate and efficient numerical
algorithms for the simulation of nonlinear dispersive wave propagation in
various applications. These proposed research topics will have a positive impact
across the mathematical sciences and have significant applications in many
scientific areas that rely on the study of non-linear phenomena. This project
will involve undergraduate and graduate students and focus on involving student
from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. By working on the
project, the students will benefit from novel ideas for new algorithm design,
approaches for rigorous mathematical analysis, and advanced skills in
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to devise
and analyze the first superconvergent hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin (HDG)
methods and hybridized mixed methods for solving the KdV equations and their
multidimensional generalizations. The proposed project includes a comprehensive
coverage of new algorithm design that is backed up by solid analysis and made
practical by efficient implementation. The P.I. proposes to carry out a detailed
study of superconvergent HDG methods and hybridized mixed methods for KdV type
problems in the following steps: First, the P.I. will develop novel HDG methods
and hybridized mixed methods for stationary third-order linear equations,
focusing on the discretization of the third-order differential operator.
Superconvergence properties of the approximations will be computationally and
analytically investigated. Second, the P.I. would like to solve the third-order
KdV equations by using implicit schemes for time discretization to avoid
extremely small time steps and developing new HDG methods and hybridized mixed
methods for spatial discretization. Error analysis will be carried out, and
superconvergence and conservativity properties will be studied. Third, the P.I.
plans to extend these superconvergent methods to multidimensional KdV type
equations such as the Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation, and the hybridization
technique will make the methods efficiently implementable in multiple
dimensions.