* 1419139
* Collaborative Research:  Software Sustainability: an SI^2 PI Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Matthew Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 13,635.00

This award will support a 1.5 day workshop in Arlington, VA to bring together
the community of SI2 awardees with the aims of: 1) serving as a forum for
focused PI technical exchange, through an early evening poster session; 2)
serving as a forum for discussion of topics of relevance to the PIs from topics
emerging both from within NSF and from the broader community, by informing the
attendees of emerging best practices, and stimulating thinking on new ways of
achieving sustainability and of ensuring that the foundation laid by SI2 is
preserved into the future; and 3) gathering experiences and a shared sense of
best practice that results in a published workshop report. The workshop will
bring together researchers who are a proto-community of NSF open source software
developers. The meeting will examine the characteristics of the community, and
consider whether the products from the program can be enhanced by giving the
community a new identify and new way of looking at itself. The meeting will also
address citation, attribution, and reproducibility, which are three related
topics often discussed in the context of data, but less so in the context of
software. The attendees will consider practical steps that could be taken to
advance software citation and science reproducibility. Finally, sustainability
of software is a major topic for NSF and for the SI2 PIs. The meeting will
highlight new ways of thinking about software sustainability, drawing on experts
in the field and on recent SI2 EAGER funded projects that are studying the
community to help the workshop attendees in their thinking about sustainability.

The community outputs of the workshop will be: posters developed by the SI2 PIs
that will be shared amongst the attendees and shared more broadly on the
workshop web site; an experiences report (licensed under a Creative Commons
license) produced by the award PIs, distributed via the workshop web site, via
email to participants who will be asked to disseminate among their project
colleagues and peers, and via an archive repository through which it will be
accessible through a persistent ID; and attendee journalism during the event in
the form of a public Google doc and public Twitter stream.