* 1419751
* Collaborative Research:   Did the Pamir Gneiss Domes and Salient form by Northward Underthrusting of India or Southward Subduction and Rollback of Asia?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Bradley Hacker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 173,765.00

The aim of this project is to better understand how the moving plates that
compose the outer rigid shell of the solid Earth behave. These plates may be
composed of dense oceanic rock that underlies the deep oceans and/or more
buoyant continental rock that makes up landmasses. For decades, it has been
recognized that oceanic plates readily sink (subduct) into the Earth along
subduction zones, which produce planar zones of earthquakes at depth. More
recently, it has been appreciated that continental plates can also subduct deep
into the Earth, but how they do so and what drives this process are poorly
understood. The best example of active continental subduction is where the
Indian plate is moving northward and colliding with the Eurasian plate,
resulting in continued development of the Himalaya Mountains, Tibetan Plateau,
and Pamir Mountains to the west. East of the Pamir Mountains, there is growing
evidence that India is subducting northward beneath Eurasia, but there are only
rare earthquakes at depths commonly observed in oceanic subduction zones. The
only subduction-like zone of seismicity within a continent on Earth is located
beneath the Pamir Mountains, which is the focus of this study. Unlike the case
to the east, however, the seismicity is suggestive of southward subduction of
the Eurasian plate. In this study, the principal investigators will test two
hypotheses for why the Eurasian plate is subducting southward. The first is that
the Indian plate has inserted itself into the Eurasian plate, like a wedge
splitting a piece of wood, forcing the lower part of the Eurasian plate to
subduct. The second hypothesis is that one of several processes could have
abruptly increased the density contrast between the the Eurasian plate and
deeper Earth beneath it, causing it to subduct rapidly, perhaps initially at
rates greater than the rate of the northward motion of India. These hypotheses
make contrasting predictions for the geological history of the high Pamir in
Tajikistan, which we will test by quantifying the history of faulting,
determining the age of the rocks and when and how fast they were brought from
depth to the surface, and constraining where the rocks came from. Both of the
hypotheses are novel compared to those that have been raised previously for the
Pamir or India-Eurasia collision zone to the east. Validating either would thus
provide documentation of an underappreciated behavior of continental subduction.
In addition to the scientific goals of the project, the proposal contains
educational and outreach components that are multifaceted and of societal
relevance. They include the training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students in a STEM discipline, which will contribute to workforce development in
a field (geosciences) that is expanding to address important national needs and
challenges. The project is also facilitating scientific exchange between people
and institutions in the United States and Tajikistan?the most impoverished
country in central Asia whose stability depends heavily on foreign investment.
The project is promoting cross-cultural understanding between American and
Tajiks and geographic and scientific awareness by giving presentations in
multiple venues that encompass culture, geography, and Earth science to local
communities. The project will also support outreach activities aimed at
advancing scientific understanding and sustainability for Americans for the
local Tucson community, including lectures and field trips into the mountains
for secondary school students and teachers and constructing an exhibit to be
displayed at the University of Arizona's Flandrau Science Center, and for the
annual Tucson Gem and Mineral Show--the largest show of its kind in the world.

This project is investigating the metamorphic, structural, and magmatic
evolution of Cenozoic gneiss domes in the Pamir to test their potential linkages
with Miocene to Recent development of the Pamir salient, northward
underthrusting of India, and southward subduction of Asian lithosphere. The
Pamir orogen is distinguished by a pronounced, northward-convex salient and a
spatially extensive, orogen-parallel suite of gneiss domes. Both the salient and
gneiss domes are thought to have developed synchronously, largely since Oligo-
Miocene time. The thick crust (greater than 65 kilometers) of the Pamir is
underlain in the south by a high-velocity mantle interpreted to be northward
underthrust Indian lithosphere, and in the north by a southward-dipping zone of
intermediate-depth seismicity that has been attributed to intracontinental
subduction of Asian lithosphere. This project is testing two end-member
'tectonic drivers' that may genetically link all of these features: (1) A short-
lived phase of rapid northward rollback/retreat of a southward-subducting slab
of Asian lithosphere, during which the Pamir gneiss domes were exhumed by
significant North-South horizontal extension (approximately 140 kilometers) and
growth of the Pamir salient. (2) A protracted phase of northward
underthrusting/wedging of Indian lithosphere that forced vertical exhumation of
Asian mid-crust above it and southward subduction of Asian lithosphere beneath
it. These two end-member hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, nevertheless,
they make contrasting orogen-scale predictions that can be tested with geologic
investigations. We are testing the predictions for the kinematic, metamorphic,
and magmatic evolution of the gneiss domes. Our approach integrates geologic
mapping and structural analysis to constrain the kinematics of gneiss-dome
exhumation; metamorphic petrology, U/Th-Pb geochronology + trace element
analyses to quantify the history of prograde and retrograde metamorphism;
moderate- and low-temperature thermochronology to quantify the history of
exhumation; and U-Pb geochronology and isotope analysis of zircon (hafnium) and
titanite (neodymium) to constrain the history and sources of Cenozoic magmatism.