* 1419417
* Forum on Cyber Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project provides support for a National Academies Roundtable, the Forum on
Cyber Resilience. The Forum will facilitate and enhance the exchange of ideas
among scientists, practitioners, and policy makers concerned with the resilience
of computing and communications systems, including the Internet, critical
infrastructure, and other societally important systems. Resilience encompasses
not only security in the face of attacks, resistance to degradation, and the
ability to recover from adverse events but also the capacity for innovation and
adaptation and the ability to absorb rapid technological disruption in a way
that reflects the values, such as privacy, and needs of the infrastructure's
many stakeholders. Information technology systems are deployed at ever-
increasing scale and have an impact on nearly every area of human activity.
Cybersecurity has taken on increasing visibility and priority among policymakers
and federal research sponsors, as has the need for information and
communications infrastructure that can withstand other forms of damage,
disruption, and adverse events and that meet the other evolving needs and
demands of those who use them. The Forum would provide a unique venue for
stakeholders from academia, industry, and government to consider resilience and
these other attributes broadly along with the tensions that may arise among
them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Forum will convene senior representatives from
government, universities, and industry to define and explore critical issues
that are of shared interest; to frame critical questions and needs; and to
incubate activities of on-going value to participants. Discussions will
encompass such issues as research directions, emerging technologies, design and
engineering approaches, human-system interactions, policy and social
implications, education and workforce considerations, and institutional roles.
Modalities would include cross-sector and public-private dialogue about goals
and challenges; consideration of technical and/or policy means to achieve goals
shared by system owners, end users and other stakeholders; and exploration of
case studies to extract lessons applicable in other domains. The forum would
facilitate cross-sector exchange of ideas among scientists, practitioners, and
policy makers, joint exploration of challenges and opportunities, and enable the
early identification of promising approaches to improve cyber resilience and the
vitality of software-intensive systems and critical infrastructure.