* 1419971
* US-Denmark-Czech Republic-China planning visit to develop an integrative approach to understanding range expansions and biological invasions under global change regimes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Laura Meyerson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2015
* USD 9,319.00

US-China planning visit to develop an integrative approach to understanding
range expansion and invasiveness of plants under global change regimes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate change is predicted to have profound
effects on species range expansions within continents and species invasions
across continents. At present, few studies have examined the effects of global
environmental change (GEC) on the interactions between invasive plant species
and the native plants, animals and other organisms in the invaded community.
Moreover, no studies have attempted to integrate disparate scientific fields
such as genetics, physiology, geography and ecology, to determine the mechanisms
underlying the effects of GEC on native-invasive species interactions. Such an
integrated approach can lead to a greater ability to predict novel plant-
herbivore interactions (e.g., acquiring new herbivores during range expansion of
a plant) which may be one of the more serious consequences of global climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed projects involves a partnership
between Co-Investigators Cronin and Meyerson and Hans Brix (Aarhus University,
Denmark), Petr Pysek (The Institute of Botany, Czech Republic), and Renqing Wang
(Shandong University, China; SDU) to strengthen a network of global scientists
working to predict and address the effects of GEC on plant genetics, physiology
and interactions with native plants and herbivores. Collaborations already exist
between US and European partners, but inclusion of Professor Wang into this
collaboration is essential and would represent a new partnership. The project
will focus on a global network of experimental gardens (one at each of the five
partner institutions) containing specimens of the plant species Phragmites
australis collected from all over the world. P. australis is a model study
system because it has a global distribution, high genetic diversity, wide
latitudinal range (+/-60o), ready availability of both modern and historical
samples, and is invasive on some continents. The complementary resources and
skills (botany, ecophysiology, statistical modeling, ecology and genetics) and
international experience of the proposal partners and supporting organizations
will allow researchers to investigate the spatial, temporal and genetic patterns
in the distribution of P. australis resulting from past, present, and future
GEC. Overall, the collaboration will increase the scale, scope, and capacity of
research of all partners and offer opportunities for interdisciplinary research
efforts with fields such as economics, policy, and sociology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish a new partnership with Professor Wang and
SDU, Cronin and Meyerson, along with one student from each lab, will travel to
SDU to meet Prof. Wang and his research group. The objectives and associated
activities from this visit are four fold. (1) Initiate the establishment of a
complementary common garden at SDU. (2) With the assistance of Prof. Wang,
collect proof-of-concept data on P. australis physiology, genetics, herbivory,
defenses against herbivores, and plant growth. (3) Train and transfer knowledge
amongst partners and their students through field demonstrations and web-based
seminars. And (4) Foster long-term sustainable collaborative research amongst
partner institutions. This project will provide international travel, mentorship
and training for two graduate students. Students will have access not only to
world renowned scientists in their field, but also to five common gardens and
associated laboratory facilities to enable them to conduct cutting-edge
international research on important societal and ecological problems. Outreach
will include a general-public webinar series on invasion biology and global
change ecology.