* 1419262
* Workshop:  Engineering & Biology at the Frontier of Environmental and Organismal Sensing' Fall, 2014, Washington, D.C.
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* David Winkler, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2015
* USD 49,944.00

An award is made to the University of California Davis to host a workshop with
engineers and biologists from academia, industry, and government agencies. The
ability to monitor free-living, wild organisms using very small, automated
sensing devices will revolutionize our understanding of animal movement patterns
and their physiological responses to environmental cues such as predators and
weather. Monitoring animals while keeping investigators at a distance ensures
minimal interference with the animals' behavior. Although many sensing-device
technologies exist, insufficient collaboration between biologists and engineers
currently limits development of novel solutions to many pressing biological
questions. Participants in this workshop will develop a dialogue between
disciplines to generate novel, transformative technologies for the monitoring of
organisms in their environments. The inclusion of industry representatives will
help address the often fatal gap between prototype development and production.
Holding the workshop in Washington, D. C. will allow D.C-based departments,
agencies, and foundations that are promoting and funding multi-disciplinary
projects to attend as observers and to consider ways in which they could enable
production solutions.

The workshop is designed to impact, both directly and indirectly, a broad
spectrum of science, education, industry, government, and society. Development,
production, and application of new technologies will give us powerful new tools
for understanding global climate change, biology (with potential biomedical
applications), and data capture and conveyance. Many of the technologies likely
to result from closer collaborations between engineers and biologists are
ideally suited for use in K-12, university, and citizen computer-based learning,
allowing participants to track animals and their environments in near real-time.
The needs of other governmental institutions, such as Homeland Security, NASA,
and the Department of Defense, will likely overlap with those of academics and
private entities and be addressed by the workshop.