* 1419394
* REVSYS:  Systematic revision of onchidiid slugs (Mollusca, Gastropoda, Pulmonata)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Benoit Dayrat, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2016
* USD 274,565.00

This project will analyze the systematics and revise the taxonomy of onchidiid
slugs (Mollusca, Gastropoda, Pulmonata). Onchidiid slugs are unique within
gastropods for their ecological diversity - including species that live in the
sea, fresh water, and on land. As such, research on Onchidiidae will provide a
unique opportunity for this project to study general evolutionary transitions
between aquatic and terrestrial habitats and between closely related species.
Total species diversity and distribution are currently unknown (147 species have
been described worldwide, most of which in the tropical Indo-West Pacific), and
will be documented here with a new taxonomic revision based on both
morphological and molecular data. Field expeditions will provide fresh material
for systematic and ecological analyses. Results will be published as articles
and monographic revisions, as well as taxonomic identification
keys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and education will be integrated through a
series of innovative activities involving undergraduate students from the host
institution. One PhD student and at least two undergraduate students will be
trained in field collecting, anatomical dissection, Scanning Electron
Microscopy, molecular systematics, and theoretical issues in taxonomy. Enhanced
onchidiid systematics will be beneficial to scientists from different fields -
for example, physiologists using onchidiids as a model to study photoreception,
and conservation biologists using onchidiid slugs as a keystone indicator of the
diversity and ecology of heavily-threatened coastal habitats.