* 1419960
* EAGER: Developing epigenetic genotyping-by-sequencing in the non-model invasive Japanese knotweed
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Christina Richards, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2017
* USD 219,995.00

Biologists have long been interested in understanding the mechanistic basis of
adaptation. Epigenetic effects (e.g., methylation) can contribute to variation
in the traits of organisms even in the complete absence of differences in DNA
sequence information. Epigenetic changes in DNA can be induced by environmental
stress and lead to a more rapid response to natural selection but there is
little information on how epigenetic mechanisms function in natural populations.
This project will develop a novel next generation sequencing technique allowing
for the measurement of both genetic and epigenetic variation under different
environmental conditions in non-model organisms with no reference genome. The
technique will combine Genotyping-By-Sequencing and bisulfite sequencing to
simultaneously measure DNA sequence and methylation polymorphisms at tens to
hundreds of thousands of fragments across the genome. As a proof of principle,
the technique will be developed in Fallopia japonica, a highly invasive
polyploid plant with a large and complex genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques developed in this EAGER will be used in workshops with Hillsborough
County Public School teachers and students to allow for effective outreach of
the latest in innovative genomics approaches that will be applicable to a wide
variety of biological research as well as understanding of social issues like
personalized medicine, and genetically modified crops. At the University of
South Florida the project will include summer research for undergraduates, and
graduate student training.