* 1419569
* Collaborative Research:  "EaSM-3":  The Role of Ocean Eddies in Decadal Prediction
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,600,000.00

There is a growing demand for environmental predictions that include a broader
range of space and time scales and that include a more complete representation
of weather and climate processes. Meeting this demand necessitates a unified
approach that challenges the traditional boundaries between weather and climate
science, and requires a more integrated approach with much higher spatial
resolution models that resolve important dynamical processes and their
interactions. Estimates of predictability are likely to be sensitive to the
range of processes and phenomena captured by these models. This project seeks to
provide a comprehensive assessment of how ocean eddies affect decadal
predictability. One of the key questions this project asks is, do prediction
systems actually need to initialize individual ocean eddies or is simply
including ocean eddies in the prediction system sufficient? Answering this
question has profound implications in the design of decadal prediction systems.
This project will contribute to workforce development through the education of a
graduate student in important climate variability and change problems, and the
mentoring of a post-doctoral researcher. The decadal prediction and climate
services community will be advised regarding how ocean eddies impact decadal
predictability and how to initialize them in eddy resolving models. The new
capacity for high-resolution assimilation within the freely accessible Community
Earth System Model (CESM) and Data Assimilation Research Testbed (DART) modeling
frameworks will be available to the CESM climate modeling community. More
broadly, any model that interfaces with the DART ensemble assimilation system
can leverage the data assimilation infrastructure advances and tool development
that will be developed under this project. Ocean eddy-resolving simulations,
data assimilation products, predictability and experimental prediction results
that are of interest to the broader climate community will be also made readily
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is based on the hypothesis
that the dynamic and physical process associated with ocean eddies and the
accompanying interactions with the atmosphere have a large and robust impact on
decadal predictability. The proposed research seeks to quantify this effect
through diagnostic predictability research by analyzing long eddy resolving
simulations and prognostic "perfect" model predictability experiments. Tools and
capabilities that are necessary to initialize the ocean component of coupled
models at eddy resolving resolutions will be developed. The new eddy resolving
data assimilation system will be evaluated through experimental prediction. The
project also seeks to develop a data assimilation system appropriate for
initializing decadal prediction at ocean eddy-resolving scales. The current
ensemble-based ocean data assimilation method available at eddy-permitting
resolution will be applied to the eddy-resolving model. To support tuning the
new high-resolution data assimilation system, novel tools for estimating the
resolution-dependent observational error statistics used in the assimilation
will be developed. The specification of resolution-dependent observational error
statistics is of enormous importance for data assimilation, and tools to support
this are currently unavailable. The limitations of the high-resolution ocean
data assimilation system will be assessed in terms of its computational cost and
its efficacy at constraining the eddy field, and the project will develop
strategies for addressing these limitations that are aligned with the needs of
decadal prediction that are identified as part of the decadal predictability
research. Finally, the data assimilation system will be implemented at eddy-
resolving scales during the data-rich years of 2006-present, and evaluated with
experimental predictions.