* 1419667
* Linkages of Changes in Ozone to Arctic Climate Change in the Stratosphere and Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Susan Solomon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2018
* USD 592,472.00

Stratospheric ozone depletion is a well-known phenomenon, largely because of the
Antarctic ozone hole and concerns over adverse effects on ecosystems and human
health. But ozone depletion also occurs in the Arctic stratosphere, where
reductions of 10% to 20% can be seen in satellite data, for example in
differences between the means for years 2000 to 2005 and 1979 to 1984. Unlike
the Antarctic, where a single ozone hole extends from altitudes below 15km to
above 20km, Arctic ozone depletion has two distinct maxima, one in the upper
stratosphere between 35km and 45km (roughly 5mb to 1mb) and one in the lower
stratosphere between 10 and 15km (roughly 200 to 100mb). Research by the PIs and
others has produced compelling evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole has
produced substantial changes in the climate and atmospheric circulation of the
stratosphere and troposphere. These changes include stratospheric cooling and a
southward shift of the westerly winds around Antarctica that extends from the
stratosphere to the Earth's surface. However, analogous climate and circulation
impacts of the more subtle Arctic ozone depletion have not been identified,
owing partly to lack of research effort and partly to discrepancies in the
satellite-derived ozone estimates over the Arctic.

Work conducted here addresses the impact of Arctic stratospheric ozone loss by
combining three satellite derived datasets with stand-alone radiative transfer
codes and the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM), an atmospheric
circulation model with a well-resolved stratosphere and optional stratospheric
ozone chemistry. The first stage of the research is to use radiative transfer
models to calculate radiative heating rates from the ozone concentrations found
in the three observational datasets, in order to determine the magnitude of the
heating and the extent to which differences in ozone concentrations yield
differences in heating.

These radiative heating calculations are followed by WACCM simulations in which
the ozone concentrations from the three datasets are be imposed, using the
Specified Chemistry version of WACCM. Experiments will be performed using ozone
changes restricted to the stratosphere above and below 10mb, to determine the
extent to which ozone changes in the upper stratosphere affect the lower
stratosphere and the extent to which upper- and lower-level heating affect the
troposphere. These experiments are motivated by the dual-maximum structure of
the ozone depletion. Finally, WACCM will be integrated with interactive gas-
phase chemistry, so that the model can simulate ozone loss internally, allowing
the ozone chemistry to be affected by the temperature and circulation changes
which it produces.

The research seeks to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms driving
for climate variability and change in the Arctic, and the Arctic climate change
has broad linkages to societally-relevant impacts on ecosystems, the cryosphere,
and human activities in the Arctic. Moreover, changes in atmospheric circulation
over the Arctic can have substantial consequences for the weather and climate of
the middle latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. In addition, the project
provides support and training for a graduate student, thereby providing for the
next generation of scientists working in this area.