* 1419245
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reconstructing Prey Mobility Through Trace Element Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Kristen Carlson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 14,934.00

For over two million years humans and their immediate ancestors lived as hunters
and gatherers and basic elements characteristic of all human societies developed
in this context. Understanding subsistence practices and the social
organizations they fostered provides a valuable backdrop against which present
day social practices may fruitfully be viewed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the
guidance of Dr. Leland Bement from the University of Oklahoma Ph.D Candidate
Kristen Carlson will analyze the extent to which Paleoindian bison hunters
focused on migratory herds as opposed to resident herds in large-scale bison
hunting in North America. The Paleoindian time period of interest ranges from
10,800 to 9,000 years before present. Large-scale kill events conducted by
hunters without the aid of horses or guns began during this time and continued
until European colonization of North America. Large-scale bison kills enabled
the procurement of multiple animals (at times over 30 individuals) in a single
event. Large-scale bison hunting was an effective means of procuring resources
for thousands of years and much remains to be discovered concerning the early
methods of hunting large numbers of bison. This research focuses on the
relationship between the hunters and their prey. The evidence required for the
successful completion of this project will be obtained through new techniques in
trace element analysis of bison teeth from three northern Plains bison kill
sites and three southern Plains site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this study is to test the 3rd molar or 4th premolar of bison found in kill sites
in order to determine the range territory of the bison hunted. LA-ICP-MS is a
high precision microscopic sampling technique that allows minimally destructive
sampling at the microscopic level. Through this sampling an elemental signature
is obtained informing specific time intervals in the animals life and
representing the various places on the landscape visited by the bison. This
cutting edge technique will provide information on bison migration patterns from
10,000 years ago. These data can then be integrated with what is known of
archaeological sites to better understand the methods used by Paleoindian
hunters and how they interacted with their social organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The examination of migration and movement patterns of prey
species can further inform our understanding of prehistoric ways of life. Trace
element analysis is used in biological settings as well, providing an
opportunity for collaborative work between archaeologists and biologists. This
project will also lead to the dissemination of information through scholarly
works. In addition to the dissertation that will be completed with this data,
refereed articles, and conference presentations will result. All findings will
be published and made publically available. In addition to academic
presentations, the University of Oklahoma promotes the education of the
community through outreach programs.