* 1419913
* Professional Skills Development Workshops
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2020
* USD 411,721.00

Women now occupy approximately half of all seats in high school physics
classrooms, but fewer than one in four undergraduate physics degrees are awarded
to women. Worse still, only eight percent of full professors in physics faculty
positions are women. Women physicists often do not receive the same level of
support and mentoring throughout the various stages of their careers that men
do, even if they do not experience overt discrimination. Many small but subtle
acts of omission together with the isolation that comes from small numbers
frequently add up to create a playing field that is far from level in terms of
career advancement for women. The American Physical Society (APS) has run, for
nine years, a series of influential workshops designed to improve communication,
negotiation and leadership skills of female physicists. This award seeks to
evolve these workshops into a sustainable model that will reach many more
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund a continuation of the original
workshops that also offers two new aspects: (1) training physicists as
negotiation skills workshop facilitators who can conduct the Strategic
Persuasion Seminars (SPS) at their institutions and at scientific conferences
and (2) offering the traditional workshops on communication, negotiation and
leadership skills at the larger APS divisional meetings. Information will be
learned about what is of particular benefit to women in physics. Additionally
the project will compare the impact of the workshops - delivered by the
professional facilitators to the impact of the seminars - delivered by the
physicists trained by the professional facilitators.