* 1419826
* Fabric Evolution and the Development of Ductile Shear Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Laurent Montesi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 346,854.00

It is well known that deformation is localized to some extent at every depth in
the lithosphere in shear zones. The origin and overall mechanical behavior of
these shear zones remain poorly understood. To address their role in tectonics,
it is important to understand their origin, whether a scar of earlier tectonics
events or a spontaneously generated weak zone. A key is to constrain their
rheology, and for this, it is critical to understand deformation processes
active in ductile shear zones as well as their architecture. This project aims
at better constraining, from a theoretical and mechanical point of view, the
structure of the lithosphere beneath seismically active faults. Specifically,
the project will address the generation of ductile shear zones and their link
with the seismic cycle. Using a software developed specifically for this
project, the development of a ductile shear zone beneath a strike-slip fault
will be simulated, revealing in particular how the shear zone structure, width,
and strength are likely to change with depth. This project would address one of
the significant weaknesses in current computer models, which is that they do not
adequately incorporate deformation localization processes. The project has
potential to advance desired societal outcomes through: 1) development of a
globally competitive STEM workforce through training of a post-doctoral fellow;
2) increased partnerships through international collaboration; and 3)
development of research infrastructure through the development of new open
access software that would be available for reuse by
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop
numerical models of the lithosphere deforming in a strike-slip environment. The
model will include fabric evolution in the crust and grain size evolution in the
mantle to determine the conditions under which ductile flow may localize and
form a ductile shear zone. Three kinds of models will be developed in this
project: 1) a 1-D column model that couples a local shear zone evolution model;
2) a 2-D antishear model, using the finite element library deal.II, that will
follow development a shear zone below a brittle fault; and 3) the same model
subjected to episodic loading by earthquakes on the brittle fault. The project
will evaluate three different scenarios for localization through the
lithosphere. First, spontaneous localization is the only player throughout the
brittle as well as ductile levels of the lithosphere to determine how grain size
evolution and the development of a layered structure in the ductile upper mantle
and mid to lower crust interacts with strain-weakening in the brittle regime to
form a lithospheric-scale shear zone. Second, the study will impose a
preexisting brittle fault and determine how ductile shear may localize beneath
it, a scenario that includes both imposed and spontaneous localization. Finally,
the influence of the earthquake cycle, which periodically imposes episodes of
enhanced stress on the evolving shear zones, will be considered. These models
will provide basic knowledge on the structure, strength, and width of ductile
shear zones that may be expected at depth in actively deforming regions.