* 1419297
* Developing Age-Specific Computational Models of Web-Based Information Seeking
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Wai-Tat Fu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The ability to access the World Wide Web can be an important means of fostering
independence, reducing isolation, and increasing communication and wellbeing in
older people. Despite these benefits, many older adults do not use the internet
as frequently as younger individuals. There are some existing guidelines on
improving internet access for older people; these often focus on simple changes
to Web interfaces such as making the font size or buttons larger or adopting
easier-to-read color schemes. However, these modifications do not address some
of the more nuanced issues around how information-seeking behavior varies with
age. Some recent research has shown that older people often adopt very different
strategies compared to younger people when seeking information on line. They
tend to use their richer crystallized knowledge to compensate for age-related
declines in vision, cognitive abilities, and motor skills. This means that older
individuals can search for and use information from the Web as effectively as
younger people but -- in doing so -- they tend to use different search
strategies. Some of the areas where older adults fare better than younger
individuals are at interpreting the relevance of web links and adopting better
overall navigating strategies to reduce demand in memory (remembering and
keeping track of where they have visited) and motor (clicking and scrolling)
operations. In this project, the researchers will conduct empirical studies to
systematically understand these age-related differences and develop
comprehensive theoretical models of Web search and navigation that capture these
age-related differences. The chief broader impact of this research is improved
accessibility of web-based material for older adults. The researchers will
develop a suite of interface tools that are optimized for older Web users, as
well as theory-based guidelines for Web designs that are sensitive to age-
related individual differences. Other broader impacts include training graduate
and undergraduate students and integrating the research findings into teaching
materials so that results from the project will benefit students.

In this project, the researchers will use a combination of empirical studies
(experiments with individuals between 65 and 75 years old and with individuals
20 to 30 years old) and computational models to carry out this project. The use
of the two methods will allow the researchers to compare and test the strength
of the models against actual human behavior. Currently, the literature in this
area suggests older individuals have difficulties in the following areas when
seeking information online: formulating relevant queries to achieve the search
goal, evaluating results provided by search engines, and changing or adapting
search strategies to find information. The experimental data compiled and
analyzed here will help determine which of these underlying issues are most
critical in understanding age-related differences in Web search and navigation
strategies.