* 1419324
* The International Cognitive Ability Resource
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* William Revelle, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2018
* USD 286,425.00

Cognitive ability is strongly associated with many important life outcomes,
including longevity, physical health, well-being, employment, job success, and
educational attainment. Although research recognizes the importance of cognitive
ability, both the United States and the greater international research community
still lack the accessible and dynamic cognitive ability measures needed to help
advance cognitive science research and assessment. Thus, the fundamental goal of
this research is to develop a bank of public domain cognitive ability measures
for use in a wide variety of contexts, both applied and theoretical. This public
domain and open-source tool, the International Cognitive Ability Resource
(ICAR), will be developed by an international consortium of researchers. This
award supports the US portion of this international research consortium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICAR is a framework for international collaboration
between the US and researchers in Germany and the UK and has been structured to
allow additional international collaborators to participate. By encouraging the
use, revision, and ongoing development of ICAR measures among qualified research
groups around the world, ICAR will further our understanding of the structure of
cognitive abilities as well as the nature of associations between cognitive
ability constructs and important life outcomes. ICAR researchers will develop
open-source computer packages that will facilitate the automatic generation and
dissemination of large item sets. These item sets will provide scholars around
the world with a dynamic platform that is not restricted by proprietary
interests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of ICAR will benefit from the
expertise of each of the three psychometric research groups. These teams bring
unique skills to the project including prior experience with automatic item
generation, online administration of cognitive ability measures to large
samples, and computer adaptive testing in online environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include working toward
broader inclusion of cognitive ability assessment in social sciences research
generally; more tailored treatment of physical and mental health issues based on
cognitive ability assessments designed to gauge patients' capacity for self-
care; and a better understanding of the ways in which cognitive abilities change
over the lifespan, including study of the factors which exacerbate or protect
against cognitive aging.