* 1419787
* Collaborative Research: Incorporation of Metasedimentary Rocks into the Deep Levels of Continental Arcs: Insights from the North Cascades
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Robert Miller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 79,956.00

The research contained in this project involves deciphering what chemical
components are added into magmatic systems that form the roots of volcanoes at
great depths during their evolution and incorporation into the Earth's crust. In
some volcanic systems, magma derived from the Earth's mantle incorporates deeply
buried sedimentary rocks, which has important implications for understanding the
chemical composition of volcanic systems and the potential hazards associated
with their eruption. The goal of this study is to evaluate how and when
sediments rocks are transferred to deep levels beneath volcanic systems and how
they affect the chemical evolution of the crust. The North Cascades of
Washington represents an ancient magmatic system that has undergone collapse and
significant erosion, which has allowed deep levels of the system to be exposed
at the present-day Earth's surface. Using a variety of different radiogenic
isotopic techniques, combined with field studies, the principal investigators
will fingerprint the characteristics of source of the sedimentary rocks that
were located in the deep levels of the ancient volcanic system. Possibilities
for the origin of this material include sediments that were accumulated in front
of a down going oceanic plate and then buried and melted as the plate was
subducted. This information will provide crucial evidence for testing different
structural and chemical models for the incorporation of sedimentary crust into
magmas and will allow the PIs to fingerprint the material that feeds volcanic
systems and possibly leads to large-scale volcanic eruptions, which has
important societal impacts. Ultimately, this study is providing a more thorough
understanding of the processes that control the nature and timescales of
magmatism in modern and ancient continental volcanic arcs, which has
implications for how new continental crust is formed. In addition to the
scientific goals of this research, this project is supporting the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in an STEM discipline, is supporting the
research efforts of an early career scientist, and is contributing to research
infrastructure at both collaborating institutions. Outreach efforts include the
development of geologic brochures aimed at helping to educate visitors regarding
the geologic evolution of North Cascades National Park and a website that
summarizes research results. The principal investigators will also lead a field
trip for professional geoscientists and students as part of an international
meeting that will occur in Seattle in Fall 2017.

Only a few field-based studies have examined how metasedimentary rocks become
incorporated into the mid- to deep crust of continental magmatic arcs, even
though their presence has significant mechanical and geochemical consequences
for the arc system. Metamorphosed sedimentary rocks and their melts, produced if
these rocks cross the solidus, are weak and thus strongly affect the overall
rheology of the system. Emplacement of sediment into an arc via underplating may
also control the timescales of magmatism and thus the architecture of the arc by
driving the high-magma flux episodes noted in multiple ancient arc systems
(e.g., Sierra Nevada, Coast Mountains-North Cascades). The principal
investigators are evaluating how and when sediment is transferred into the mid
to deep levels of arcs by investigating the importance of a range of processes,
including 1) emplacement of subducted crustal material that rises buoyantly off
of the downgoing slab (relamination); 2) burial by underthrusting/imbrication of
forearc or backarc sediments; 3) gradual burial of sediments and volcanoclastic
rocks during arc magmatism; and/or 4) construction of an arc on thickened crust
that is already composed of voluminous metasedimentary rocks. The principal
investigators will carry out an integrated field and laboratory study of the
Late Cretaceous-Eocene crystalline core of the North Cascades. The principal
investigators will determine the origin of the metasedimentary rocks via field
mapping, bulk-rock Nd analyses, U-Pb and Hf-isotope study of detrital zircons,
and thermobarometry to determine the tectonic context of these rocks, maximum-
achieved pressures and source signatures. Analytical studies will also be
conducted on detrital zircons from units in the forearc and backarc, which
represent potential protoliths of the Skagit and Swakane metasedimentary rocks.
The results from this study can be extrapolated to active arc systems (e.g., the
Andes) to better understand the context of metasedimentary rocks: how they are
emplaced within the arc system, and what the consequences are of their presence
for the evolution of the arc and potentially for the overall production of
andesitic continental crust. Another important outcome will be a better
understanding of other ancient, potentially analogous arc systems, such as
Fiordland, New Zealand and the Sierra Nevada.