* 1419318
* EDU: This is Not a Game---Using ARGs for Teaching Security Concepts to First-Year Undergraduates
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mark Gondree, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 234,940.00

The project involves the design and development of a pedagogical alternate
reality game (ARG) teaching Cybersecurity and Computer Science (CS) concepts to
first-year, undergraduate students. The objectives of this project are to engage
undergraduates with authentic problems demonstrating the relevance of
Cybersecurity to the world around them; to highlight the role of computers in
both solving problems and constructing problems; and to challenge students with
creative puzzle-solving that exercises role-play and "adversarial thinking."
Designing an ARG with Cybersecurity topics will provide research data on how
essential Cybersecurity issues might be brought into introductory course
materials, and be communicated to audiences who are unfamiliar with programming,
networks, or operating systems. Since this audience has little prior CS
knowledge, the design of course materials and tools will be appropriate for
other introductory programs, such as high school clubs and extracurricular STEM
programs. Students enrolled in these courses will be tracked longitudinally,
providing a method to assess the long-term impact of these curricular materials.
The project will be an interdisciplinary effort, engaging stakeholders and
educators across campus, including the departments of Education,
Kinesthesiology, Liberal Arts, and Engineering Studies. The Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program funds proposals that address Cybersecurity
from a Trustworthy Computing Systems perspective; a Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on Cybersecurity
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two broad goals: to develop a
set of modules teaching security concepts that are accessible to a wide
audience, that foster curiosity in security topics, and that develop interest in
CS and STEM disciplines; and to explore the relationship between ARGs and other
types of cyber-competitions, finding evaluative strategies that enhance the
state of knowledge in both domains, and to explore these connections using a
case study. Understanding the relationship between pervasive games, ARGs,
capture-the-flag contests and other cyber-competitions will facilitate
scientific cross-pollination between those domains, helping to increase the
effectiveness of those events. The target outcomes of the project are: to design
and develop materials for a security-themed ARG to complement a set of learning
outcomes appropriate for an introductory computer science course; to integrate
the ARG with an introductory computer science course, as an evaluated case-study
measuring its acceptance and impact; and to disseminate curricular materials,
evaluation materials and lessons learned, and any software tools to other
educators, so they may be assessed, modified and re-used.