* 1419852
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Proterozoic Mountain Building and Collapse, Eastern Adirondacks, New York
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Timothy Grover, Castleton University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 59,713.00

Rocks of the Adirondack Mountains of New York represent a large dome-shaped
uplift of the Precambrian basement of North America. These rocks record the
assembly and breakup of the supercontinent, "Rodinia" that formed approximately
1 billion years ago. The formation and dispersal of this continent may have
played a role in the evolution of life on Earth, the evolution of climate and
the production of a snowball Earth, and in the development of important economic
resources, including Rare Earth Element deposits. New data are significantly
changing our understanding of the history of the Adirondack uplift. A major
period of mountain-building, the 1180 million year Shawinigan orogeny, was
previously unrecognized in the region, and one challenge involves recognizing
and distinguishing the effects of this tectonism compared to the 1050 Million
year Ottawan orogeny that was previously thought to dominate the geology of this
region. The latest stages in the geologic history of the Adirondacks involved
intrusion of extensive granite ("Lyon Mountain granite") and the development of
shear zones that were important in the collapse of the mountains and in the
uplift of the basement rocks. This research will involve modern structural,
petrologic, and geochronologic analysis to characterize the geologic and
tectonic history of the eastern Adirondack region, and further our understanding
of mid crustal processes during mountain building and collapse. This work
represents a new collaboration between the University of Massachusetts and
Castleton State College, a predominantly undergraduate state college nearly
adjacent to the Adirondack field area. In addition to the PIs, the research team
will consist of undergraduates from Castleton State College and a graduate
student from the University of Massachusetts. The graduate student will serve as
a mentor for undergraduates from Castleton and a link between the two
institutions. The collaboration will provide an ideal base for field research
during all seasons of the year and it will provide access for Castleton
undergraduates to a predominantly undergraduate state college nearly adjacent to
the Adirondack field area. In addition to the PIs, the research team will
consist of undergraduates from Castleton State College and a graduate student
from the University of Massachusetts. The graduate student will serve as a
mentor for undergraduates from Castleton and a link between the two
institutions. The collaboration will provide an ideal base for field research
during all seasons of the year and it will provide access for Castleton
undergraduates to a research-oriented university and to research equipment.
Finally, the eastern Adirondack Mountains are a popular destination for hiking,
camping, and vacations. Student researchers will work to develop outreach
materials and programs about the geology of the spectacular northeastern
Adirondack region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests the hypothesis that
there is a regionally extensive shear zone in the eastern Adirondacks in the
vicinity of Whitehall, New York that accommodated the eastward unroofing of the
Adirondack Mountains during orogenic collapse shortly after the culmination of
the Ottawan orogenic event (ca. 1050 Ma). Preliminary in-situ monazite ages
constrain the extensional shearing to 1050-1026 Ma, similar to those reported
for the extensional movement on the Carthage-Colton shear zone in the NW
Adirondacks. These data suggest that orogenic collapse following the Ottawan
orogeny resulted in the formation of a two-sided metamorphic core complex or
gneiss dome structure. This project will utilize in-situ high resolution
monazite geochronology, in conjunction with detailed field mapping, structural
and kinematic analysis, and metamorphic petrology in order to characterize the
extent, kinematics, and timing of East Adirondack shearing and to integrate the
shear zone into the overall tectonic history of the Adirondack Mountains. The
Grenville orogen marks the culminating collision in the assembly of the
supercontinent Rodinia. Post-collisional collapse of the Himalayan-scale
Grenville orogen signaled the start of a new phase of rifting, passive margin
development, and in the broadest sense, the Appalachian Wilson cycle. Major
changes have been proposed in the character and age of tectonic events involved
in the construction and collapse of the orogen. With the coming of Earthscope-
US-Array and GeoPrisms it is critical to evaluate new models for this orogen
that may have had a controlling influence on the geometry and character of the
proto-Atlantic margin. The proposed research will involve detailed field mapping
and structural/petrographic analysis in order to establish a chronologic
framework for the development and overprinting relationships of fabrics and
metamorphic mineral assemblages. Rocks related to each of the major stages of
Adirondack orogenesis (Elsevirian, Shawinigan, AMCG plutonism, Ottawan, etc) are
all in close proximity in the eastern Adirondacks. The project involves the use
of thermobarometry and psuedosection analysis to delineate the Pressure-
Temperature evolution of the crust during the orogenic events with particular
focus on the late-stage shearing. A major portion of the work will involve in-
situ monazite geochronology in order to place timing constraints on all parts of
the history. Our ultimate goal is to place new constraints on the tectonic
history of the Grenville Orogen, especially on the collapse and exhumation
stages, and also to add to the evolving understanding of monazite behavior
during metamorphism and deformation. This work will help to place the Adirondack
massif within the context of gneiss domes and provide evidence about the role
that this dome played in the collapse and exhumation of the orogen.