* 1419453
* IUPAP International Conference on Women in Physics August 2014 in Waterloo, Canada, August 5-8, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Sherry Yennello, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2018
* USD 128,400.00

Both nationally and internationally, women are greatly underrepresented in
physics and related fields such as engineering. These fields have to be able to
draw upon the full spectrum of the world's talent in order to meet the demands
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in addressing global needs.
To this end, this award to the American Association of Physics Teachers supports
the United States delegation to the Fifth International Conference of Women in
Physics in Waterloo, Canada. The overarching goals of the conference are to
provide an international opportunity for analysis of the current status of and
progress in promoting women in physics internationally; to provide an arena for
international women in physics to share their scientific accomplishments and
nucleate international research collaborations; and to build capacity in each
participating country to design and implement changes that improve the numbers
of and the advancement of women in physics. The International Science and
Engineering Section at the National Science Foundation co-funded this activity
because of the international activities and their expected broader impacts for
women in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. delegation will broaden
participation through its diversity with regard to gender, race/ethnicity,
disability status, research specialty, career phase and path, employment sector
and institution type, and geographic location. The strategies and insights
gained through this activity are expected to be useful in other fields where
women are severely underrepresented. Outreach and dissemination will maximize
the benefit of the conference in the U.S. The project will be informed by an
evaluation conducted by the Statistical Research Center of the American
Institute of Physics.