* 1419164
* Pacific Northwest Numerical Analysis Seminar 2014, October 18, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Dacian Daescu, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 8,000.00

The Pacific Northwest Numerical Analysis Seminar (PNWNAS) will be held at
Portland State University in Portland, Oregon on October 18, 2014. PNWNAS has
been an annual event since 1987, held on a Saturday each fall in the
northwestern states of USA and nearby Canadian provinces. The goal of this
meeting is to bring together researchers from universities, government research
labs, and industry from the Pacific Northwest region to share expertise in the
field of numerical analysis and computational mathematics. This conference will
enable computational scientists in the region to hear, consult, and possibly
collaborate with the outside speakers and members of other institutions in
disciplinary or interdisciplinary research areas. Meanwhile, it will also
facilitate interactions that lead to employment and internship opportunities for
postdocs, undergraduates, graduate students and members of underrepresented
groups attending the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be about 70-80
participants for the 2014 seminar, with 8 invited speakers from industry,
government, and academia. The talks will be mainly concerned with modeling
large-scale complex systems, construction of accurate and efficient numerical
schemes, energy sustainability, and software and hardware development, including
emerging computer architectures. The last two topics are popular research fields
in local government and industry. Poster sessions will be arranged for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to present their
research work so as to maximize their visibility to all participants. Meanwhile,
the inclusion of participants from national labs and industrial partners will
bring new potential internship and employment opportunities for the students and
postdocs attending the meeting. The seminar will be publicized through various
communication channels, including Portland State University student chapter of
the Society of Women Engineers, the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers,
and Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Program
to broaden participation from members of those underrepresented groups. The
exposure to topics and techniques not typically available at the home
universities and the opportunity for face-to-face collaboration will enhance the
research programs of faculty, student, and postdoc participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seminar web site:
http://faculty.washington.edu/rjl/pnwnas/