* 1419299
* IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) 2014: Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* YingLi Tian, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2015
* USD 16,000.00

This travel grant will provide partial support to about 10 U.S.-based graduate
students to participate in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) 2014, to be held be held July 14-18,
2014 in Chengdu, China. This is the first time the Doctoral Consortium is
organized at ICME. The selected students will have the opportunity to present
their work at the Doctoral Colloquium, receive feedback from senior researchers,
attend the conference sessions, and interact with other graduate students as
well as hundreds of other leading international researchers in the area of
multimedia information systems.

The IEEE International Conference on Multimedia & Expo (ICME) has been the
flagship multimedia conference sponsored by four IEEE societies since 2000. It
serves as a forum to promote the exchange of the latest advances in multimedia
technologies, systems, and applications from both the research and development
perspectives of the circuits and systems, communications, computer, and signal
processing communities. Multimedia data generally refer to audio, image, video,
3D, newer sensor data (e.g. depth) and related multi-modality data. In 2014, an
Exposition of multimedia products, prototypes and animations will be held in
conjunction with the conference. In addition, a number of workshops will be
organized by the sponsoring societies. To further foster new emerging topics,
ICME 2014 will also hold industrial exhibitions in parallel with the main
conference. More information about ICME 2014 can be found at
http://www.icme2014.org.