* 1419206
* EAGER: Initial characterization of the elasmobranch microbiome and potential roles in host physiology
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* William Nierman, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 04/30/2017
* USD 289,885.00

Beneficial relationships between vertebrates and bacteria have been the subject
of intense study, and it is now well established that bacterial communities
(microbiomes) of the skin, mouth and digestive system play critical roles in
host metabolism and overall health. However, in perhaps the most unique and yet
understudied vertebrate-bacteria relationship, evidence suggests that bacteria
reside within the blood and organs of healthy sharks, skates and stingrays
(elasmobranch fishes). To our knowledge the widespread presence of bacteria
within the tissues and organs of a healthy vertebrate is unprecedented, and
therefore characterizing the elasmobranch microbiome will provide valuable
insight into the evolution of vertebrate immunity and microbial symbioses. This
project will provide multidisciplinary graduate student training in elasmobranch
biology, bioinformatics and cutting-edge molecular techniques at both the
University of Southern Mississippi and the J. Craig Venter
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous studies were limited to the
identification of bacterial species that could be cultured, this project will
use 16S rRNA gene sequencing to identify bacteria present in the blood, kidney
and liver of two common species of elasmobranch, the Atlantic stingray and the
Atlantic sharpnose shark. The investigators will also validate for the first
time the existence and specific locations of these bacteria within tissues using
molecular methods as well as transmission electron microscopy. The amplified 16S
rRNA genes will allow rRNA gene library construction and bridge amplification.
Sequencing will be completed using the MiSEQ platform by Illumina. Analysis and
estimation of phylogenetic diversity of 16S rDNA sequence data will be
accomplished with clustered high quality trimmed sequences. It is expected that
results will verify the presence, location and identity of bacteria within
elasmobranch tissues, establishing a new and paradigm-shifting model for the
study of vertebrate-bacteria relationships including host metabolism, self-
recognition, and immune system function.