* 1419069
* Implicit sampling methods and their applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Xuemin Tu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 287,063.00

Data assimilation incorporates the observations, which can be real-time data,
into a computational model of a real system. The output of this process is the
adjusted states of the system based on both computational model and the
observations. These adjusted states are better than those that could be obtained
using just the data or model alone. Data assimilation is required in many fields
such as statistical signal processing, oceanography, meteorology, hydrology,
geosciences, econometrics, and finance. Due to the large-scale and nonlinear
properties of the models in those applications, commonly used methods rely on
unrealistic assumptions. The PI and her collaborators develop an efficient data
assimilation method without those unrealistic assumptions. As one example,
successful application of this method to reservoir history matching will greatly
benefit the reservoir management. This project involves undergraduate and
graduate students. The PI has outreach for successful participation of
underrepresented group in STEM-related disciplines.

Data-driven computations, such as data assimilation, need to identify the state
of a system and/or unknown parameters in the system from an uncertain model
supplemented by a stream of noisy and incomplete data. The Bayesian framework is
a standard approach for such problems and it involves characterizing the
posterior distribution of the state and/or parameters in terms of given prior
distribution and data. Commonly used methods, like ensemble Kalman filter-type
and variational methods, rely on assumptions of Gaussianity or near Gaussianity.
By contrast, the implicit sampling methods obtain high qualify samples of the
posterior density by using importance sampling with good proposal density and
can be applied to more general non-Gaussian situations. These samples are
independent and focus on the high probability regions. The first step in the
implicit sampling methods usually requires solving an optimization problem,
which is the most time-consuming part of the methods. The proposed research is
to develop and analyze preconditioners using domain decomposition methods, a
widely-used paradigm for parallel computation, combined with efficient nonlinear
solvers to accelerate this procedure and make it suitable for high performance
computation. The PI and her collaborators apply these newly developed implicit
sampling methods to data assimilation and uncertainty quantification in
subsurface flow applications including reservoir history matching.