* 1419306
* EASM-3:  Collaborative Research:  Quantifying Predictability Limits, Uncertainties, Mechanisms, and Regional Impacts of Pacific Decadal Climate Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 586,827.00

Climate in the Pacific region varies on decadal timescales, but the mechanisms
that control these long-term climate variations are still unclear. If the
mechanisms can be better understood, then the uncertainties associated with
making climate predictions on these timescales can be assessed more accurately.
Decadal variability over the Pacific is of particular interest in the United
States due to its downstream influence over the western United States and its
direct influence on climate in Alaska. This project addresses the fundamental
question of what are the predictability limits, mechanisms, and regional impacts
for decadal modes of the Pacific climate system using a hierarchy of climate
models and modern statistical tools. The results of this project will be
important in assessing how long-term changes in the environment drive changes in
economically important variables such as rainfall, soil moisture, snowfall,
temperatures, as well as oceanic temperatures, currents and sea levels, which
impacts fisheries, agriculture, and coastal infrastructure along the U.S. West
Coast and Asian Marginal Seas. The tools developed in this project should be
transferable to other global sectors that also exhibit decadal variability. The
project team will mentor graduate students and post-docs, whose educational
experiences will include cross-disciplinary exposure to ocean science,
atmospheric science, and societal impacts that will be unique in this context.
Community outreach will include lectures and educational presentations in public
forums, mentoring K-12 students, educating grass-roots climate action
organizations, informing the media, and posting research results on web pages.

There is clearly a large gap in our understanding of what controls Pacific
decadal climate variability, what limits the predictability of the flows, and
what practical skill might be useful in regional impacts on land and in the
ocean. The project team proposes a coordinated research effort to better
understand the basic physical dynamics of Pacific decadal variability and assess
the skill of Pacific decadal predictability, along with its uncertainties and
practical value. The research focuses on Community Earth System Model (CESM),
with its vast repository of archived runs supplemented with targeted
predictability experiments. The analysis focuses on using sophisticated
statistical models (Linear Inverse Models) to identify statistical relations
among variables, diagnose physical processes, and isolate potentially
predictable components of the flows. It also involves using regional coupled
atmosphere-ocean, along with uncoupled ocean and atmosphere models, to enhance
the understanding of regional response and its potential for practical use in
forecasting. The project brings together scientists skilled with developing
decadal climate diagnostics, making both statistical and dynamical predictions,
and executing regional coupled climate downscaling and regional high-resolution
ocean modeling.