* 1419865
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering Subduction Dynamics: Case Study of the Catalina Schist
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 41,727.00

Subduction zones, which occur where two tectonic plates converge and one plate
is thrust down into Earth's mantle, are the location of many important processes
on Earth, including the generation of some of Earth's deadliest earthquakes and
chains of volcanoes. At the interface between the subducting plate and the
mantle significant heat transfer and physical and chemical exchange occur. To
better understand how crustal and mantle materials move and interact within
subduction zones, it is critically important to study rocks exhumed from this
process. The proposed work will constrain how material moves within subduction
zones by determining the temperature and pressure histories that these exhumed
rocks experienced while in the subduction zone itself. For this work the
principle investigators will analyze the chemical composition of the minerals
rutile and titanite in rocks from a classic subduction locality, the Catalina
Schist of southern California. They will then compare the recorded histories
with histories predicted by different models for material behavior within
subduction zones. In addition to the scientific goals of the project, this award
is supporting the eduction of graduate and undergraduate students in an STEM
discipline, is contributing to broadening of underrepresented groups in science,
and the development of undergraduate course curricula in mineralogy and
petrology. The project is facilitating a new collaboration between the
partnering institutions involved in this effort, and is contributing direct
exchange of scientific methods and analytical standards between trace
element/geochronology laboratories. The results that derive from this project
are being disseminated to the scientific community through research publications
and presentations, and the data are being archived in appropriate community
databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit new developments in
thermobarometry and geochronology to better understand subduction zone
tectonics, using exposures of Catalina Schist on Santa Catalina Island,
California, as a type example. The work will provide new, high-precision
Pressure-Temperature-time (P-T-t) constraints that critically test tectonic
models with unprecedented geographic scope and precision. The proposed research
addresses broad geodynamic questions, e.g. to what degree does flow in the
subduction channel change temporally and affect subduction thermal evolution? In
addition, the principle investigators will continue to develop petrologic and
chronologic tools that broadly advance petrogenetic research in other fields.
This research will address two main issues in the tectonic evolution of
subduction zones: (1) What is the scale of melange flow as melange matrix
progressively metamorphoses? (2) What tectonic processes produced distinctive
high-Temperature subduction-related rocks? Numerous different models have been
generally proposed. Four basic sets of data will be collected: (1) Samples will
be collected over a well-mapped area of melange and along three key transects.
(2) Electron microprobe analysis will provide Pressure-Time estimates and
identify specific titanite and rutile grains and domains for trace element
analysis. (3) Laser-ablation Inductively-coupled-mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) on
a sub-grain scale (50-100 micron spots) will constrain temperature and time,
respectively. (4) Raman spectroscopy of mineral inclusions will constrain
entrapment pressures on the prograde Pressure-Temperature path. The resulting
data will be used to test tectonic models by characterizing the degree of
Pressure-Temperature-time homogeneity (scale of mixing) within a melange zone
and Pressure-Temperature-time trends across structure. All data will be
permanently archived with MetPetDB.