* 1419042
* Oceanographic Instrumentation CY2014
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Timothy Deering, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2015
* USD 21,760.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;A request is made to fund additional and back-up
instrumentation for the R/V Hugh R Sharp, a 146 foot Regional research vessel
operated as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS) research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Hugh R Sharp is a state-
of-the-art, coastal research vessel that is owned and operated by the University
of Delaware. The vessel can carry fourteen to twenty scientists on cruises up to
eighteen days in duration, and supports projects from all disciplines of
oceanography. The vessel is a regional asset, serving researchers from many
institutions throughout the mid-Atlantic. The vessel typically operates in the
coastal waters from Long Island, New York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as
well as the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays. Projects occasionally require the
vessel to work as far north as the Gulf of Maine, as far south as Florida, and
as far offshore as Bermuda. In 2013, the R/V Hugh R Sharp completed 210 days at
sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 33% of the total sailing schedule (70
days). In 2014, R/V Hugh R Sharp is scheduled for 190 days with NSF days
accounting for 28% (54 days) of the total sailing
schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Red Box Backblaze High Capacity Data Storage
$21,760 &lt;br/&gt; 2) Scanfish Upgrade $71,000 &lt;br/&gt; $92,760
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present
proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF
13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and
its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-
use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.