* 1420062
* CAREER: Getting the Most out of Secure Multi-Party Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 11/04/2013,02/28/2018
* Michael Rosulek, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 354,120.00

Our society is becoming increasingly reliant on powerful and interconnected
computing devices that store much of our personal information. These devices
present an ever-growing tension between the desire for our personal information
to be private, and the desire to put our personal information to good use for
our own convenience. In cryptography, problems that involve requirements of
useful computation and privacy are understood through the lens of secure multi-
party computation (SMPC). Specifically, SMPC refers to the problem of how
mutually distrusting parties can securely and collaboratively perform tasks that
involve private information.

In this project, the PI will develop new techniques for understanding and
overcoming the challenges and limitations posed by SMPC protocols. In
particular, the following major themes will be explored: (1) is it possible in
the real world to design protocols that remain secure regardless of other
concurrently running protocols? (2) what security properties can be embedded
into objects like ciphertexts and digital signatures? (3) how can shared data be
maintained persistently while remaining private? The PI will develop new
materials for undergraduate courses in cryptography and algorithms, based on
principles of pedagogically sound visualization. The PI will also create
resources for the cryptography research community, in the form of an online
database of cryptographic constructions and primitives.