* 1420136
* Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Woody Sutherland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2016
* USD 30,548.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on the R/V
Roger Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel; the R/V Melville, a
279?general purpose Global vessel; the R/V New Horizon, a 170?, general purpose,
Ocean/Intermediate vessel and the R/V Sproul, a 125? general purpose
Coastal/Local vessel. All four vessels are operated by Scripps Institution of
Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
research fleet.

Both R/V Roger Revelle and R/V Melville are Global vessels owned by the Navy.
They support multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all of the world?s
ocean basins. R/V New Horizon, owned by the State of California, focuses
primarily on offshore California but has been used for work throughout the
Pacific. The primary working area for R/V Sproul, also owned by the State of
California, has been the continental shelf and coastal environments off Southern
California. In 2013, R/V Roger Revelle completed 266 days, 73 (27%) of which
were for NSF. Melville completed 307 days, with 169 (55%) being for NSF. New
Horizon sailed 163 days and 57 (35%) were for NSF while Sproul had 31 total days
with 10 (30%) funded by NSF. The schedule for 2014 shows Revelle with 247 total
days with 62 (25%) of them for NSF. Melville is scheduled to sail 128 days with
80 (63%) of them for NSF. New Horizon has 144 total days with 62 (43%) for NSF
and Sproul has 13 days scheduled with no NSF days in 2014. Oceanographic
Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes: 1) Deadweight Tester $
15,425 2) H2000 ROV Spares $ 40,933 $ 56,358

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.