* 1420973
* The Fifth Module of the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andre Blais, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 646,449.00

The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) investigates how differences
in the design and practice of elections in different countries affect how
individuals in those countries think and behave. In 2014, twice as many
countries are democracies than just two decades ago. The CSES is well positioned
to study this unprecedented and continuing wave of democratization. The CSES
project provides coordination and leadership for the social science research
efforts of over 60 nations, and has established itself as the most-well known
data resource for this type of research. The project disseminates all of its
data for free to the public, and is being used by thousands of scientists,
students, policy makers, journalists, and citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSES is
arranged according to modules. Each module is a questionnaire on an important
topic of scientific interest, a topic identified by the research community and
selected by project collaborators. The questionnaires are included in high
quality, representative surveys that are conducted at the time of national
elections in countries around the world. Each module is in place for five years,
to incorporate at least one national election in each country during the time
span. The current proposal is to complete the activities of the fourth module of
the CSES, and to plan and design the fifth
module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Involving the collaboration of more than 200
scholars in the United States and internationally, CSES advances the
understanding of enduring and fundamental questions about elections, vote
choice, turnout, and citizens' attitudes about democracy and politics. The goals
of this unique research program are to understand how society, politics, and
economics shape the beliefs and behaviors of citizens, to examine and compare
the nature and quality of democracy and elections across countries, and to
understand how groups with different backgrounds, and living under different
political arrangements, interact with democratic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSES collects survey data from each country,
as well as background information about the social, political, and economic
conditions in the country. CSES designs, receives, cleans, checks, and merges
all of these data, combining them into a single dataset which allows for
comparison across countries. All of the data are then made freely and
immediately available via the project website. This is a unique resource for
researchers worldwide, and that is reflected in the large and growing number of
publications that make use of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSES data help in
examining issues that are crucial to national policy in the United States, in a
way that is not possible with other datasets. It encourages international
cooperation around issues of democracy, politics, and social science. The
project is a unique resource in studying, and building scientific capacity in,
developing democracies. CSES is widely used in training students through
university coursework, and students regularly serve as research assistants for
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSES-based research provides indispensable
insight on how democratic institutions actually work and contributes to the
debate about the virtues and vices of different electoral systems.