* 1420703
* CSR: Small:  Towards Blocking Resistant Network Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 461,435.00

Unfettered digital communication, as provided by the Internet, has fundamentally
changed the world in countless ways. Businesses, organizations, and citizens
have benefited from the Internet's global reach. However, the Internet was not
designed to be resilient to censorship, and governments have restricted
communication to advance their social and economic agendas. Worse, network
equipment providers have shown a willingness to commoditize and profit from
censorship by selling interception and filtering devices. The desire for
uncensored access to the Internet has motivated the development of techniques
such as one-hop proxies and anonymizing networks, but existing techniques have
multiple limitations, ranging from low performance and intermittent availability
to reduced levels of security and application flexibility. This project will
develop and deploy a censorship resistant peer-to-peer system that overcomes the
limitations of existing systems and provides unrestricted access to popular web
sites and Internet services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of social networks
provides researchers with an opportunity to take a fresh look at peer-to-peer
systems for censorship resistance. The focus of this project is to use social
trust relations as a foundation for achieving highly secure and blocking
resistant overlays for supporting network services, while also approaching the
ease of use, performance, and reliability typically associated with direct
communications. Specifically, the system will use social overlays wherein
participants form a peer-to-peer overlay network bootstrapped based on real-
world trust relationships. Participants of the social overlay would be able to
directly communicate and share content, without having to expose their actions
and without being blocked. A key design choice is also to develop the system to
operate completely within a web browser, leveraging newly developed technologies
that provide support for peer-to-peer communications inside the browser.
Browser-based end-user solutions are easily deployable without requiring
significant infrastructural costs. There are several key, interrelated
challenges that the system will overcome. Principal among these are:
performance, flexibility, trustworthiness, and robustness.