* 1420211
* Using Nonsymbolic Ratios to Promote Fraction Knowledge: A Neurocognitive Approach
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Edward Hubbard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,999.00

This project, to be conducted by researchers at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, will study knowledge of fractions in college students and eighth-
graders. The project will use behavioral and brain imaging measures. The main
hypothesis is that some kinds of visual perception ability (such as sensitivity
to the ratio formed by the lengths of two lines) are related to fraction
understanding. The project will develop a training method aimed at improving
knowledge about fractions. This project will advance the work of the REAL
(Research on Education and Learning) program in studying the cognitive and
neural basis of STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
learning.

The project will use fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) to study brain
activity, focusing on brain regions including the PFC (prefrontal cortex) and
IPS (intraparietal sulcus). In particular, the research will use an adaptation
method, looking at activation recovery when a novel ratio is presented in a
series of ratios. The project addresses a cognitive primitives account of
fraction magnitude processing, which posits that perceptual sensitivity to
nonsymbolic ratio magnitudes plays a major role in supporting the developing
understanding of symbolic fraction magnitudes. This account implies that
neurocognitive architectures tuned to the processing of non-symbolic ratio--such
as the relative lengths of two lines or the relative areas of two figures--are
present even before learners receive fractions instruction.