* 1420193
* CAREER: Identifying the Substrate Proteins of Nedd4 Family of E3 Ubiquitin Ligase by Orthogonal Ubiquitin Transfer (OUT)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Jun Yin, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 12/31/2017
* USD 318,523.00

The CAREER award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program (CLP) will support
work by Professor Jun Yin at the University of Chicago to elucidate the
mechanism of ubiquitin signaled protein degradation in the cell. Professor Yin
will develop new chemical methods to engineer protein ubiquitination enzymes and
use the engineered enzymes as tools to map the signal transduction pathways in
the cell that regulate the life span of proteins. Ubiquitin is a small protein
of 76 residues. It is attached to aged, unused or damaged proteins in the cell
by a class of enzymes known as E3 ubiquitin ligase. Cellular proteins attached
with ubiquitin are degraded by the 26S proteasome. Besides its housekeeping
role, ubiquitin also serves as a signal to control the biological activities and
subcellular locations of the proteins it is attached to. Quite often defects of
protein ubiquitination are implicated in cancer, virus infection and
neurodegenerative disorders. A major bottleneck in investigating protein
ubiquitination in cell biology is that there is not a good method to identify
the substrate proteins of E3 enzymes in the cell. Because of this, the
biological functions of E3 enzymes are unclear and the cause of disease by
defective E3s is hard to study. With the support of this CAREER award, Professor
Yin will engineer the E3 enzymes so that each engineered E3 will attach unique
chemical labels to their substrate proteins. In this way a E3 enzyme can be
paired with its ubiquitination targets in the cell and the signal transduction
networks that regulate protein degradation can be elucidated. In this work, E3
enzyme Nedd4-1, a key inducer of cancer, will be engineered in ordered to
profile its substrate specificity. By associating E3 enzymes and their substrate
proteins, this project will provide a general platform to define the biological
function of the E3 enzymes, to elucidate the pathological connection of E3 with
various diseases and to identify specific E3 enzymes as therapeutic targets for
drug development. &lt;br/&gt;The CAREER award will also support Professor Yin to
train undergraduate and graduate students to use protein engineering in
biological research. It will sponsor a freely accessible online database with a
comprehensive collection of methods and applications of protein engineering.
Furthermore it will provide an opportunity for the teachers and students from
the local high schools in south side Chicago to visit Professor Yin's lab and
get hands-on experience of modern research in chemistry and molecular biology.
Overall Professor Yin will establish an integrated research and educational
program to train future scientists at the interface of chemistry and biology and
to nurture the interests of K-12 students in science at the early stage of their
learning career.