* 1420386
* SimScientists Crosscutting Concepts: Progressions in Earth Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Daniel Brenner, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,499,881.00

Science is often taught not as a coherent body of knowledge, but as distinct,
unrelated topics. The Next Generation Science Standards aim to change this by
organizing science teaching around crosscutting concepts, which reflect the
coherence of science through their use in explanations of phenomena in different
scientific domains. This project will address the research questions of how
crosscutting concepts develop longitudinally, how this development can be
supported across different science topics, and whether the learning of
crosscutting concepts is improved. The project will create computerized,
simulation-based instructional modules for use in middle school earth science
that teach crosscutting concepts. This project not only will document student
learning of these important ideas, but also will analyze how this learning
occurs, what support is reliably related to this learning, and how these ideas
might develop in response to support across different earth science topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on learning crosscutting concepts
of scale, systems and cycles as they are supported across three middle school
earth science topics: ecosystems, plate tectonics and climate. The project will
leverage previous work by the PI and other team members by building upon the
SimScientists simulations already constructed, and upon their demonstrated
technique of embedding assessments in the simulations to inform what students
learn while simultaneously providing feedback on the simulation design. Initial
efficacy of the simulations will be established with 13 teachers and 1300
students. Results of this project will have impact not only through use of the
simulations by these and other middle school students, but also through research
on how cross-cutting concepts can be supported over time in multiple scientific
domains.