* 1420902
* Reconstructing Cretaceous Mean Climate and Seasonality using the Clumped Isotope Paleothermometer on Mollusks
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sierra Petersen, Petersen, Sierra V
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

During the Cretaceous period (66-144 Million Years before present), atmospheric
Carbon Dioxide (CO2) levels were elevated and global temperatures were warmer
than today, in particular at high latitudes. Current reconstructions disagree on
both the magnitude and spatial pattern of the warming during this period. This
award supports a Postdoctoral Research Fellow who proposes to develop new
temperature estimates for this interval - using the novel proxy method known as
carbonate clumped isotope paleothermometry - in order to help resolve the enigma
of climate during the Cretaceous, which is a key to understanding the Earth's
response to increasing CO2 levels. The Fellow will conduct her research over a
two-year period under the mentorship of Professors Kyger C. Lohmann and
Christopher J. Poulsen in the Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences Department at
the University of Michigan. She also plans to mentor both graduate students and
undergraduate research assistants in the Stable Isotope Laboratory and to
participate in the department's EARTH CAMP, a program for underrepresented high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will attempt to use carbonate
clumped isotope paleothermometry to produce the first spatial map of
paleo-&amp;#948;18Osw. This research could provide key insights into both the
hydrological cycle and ocean dynamics during the Cretaceous. The direct
constraints on Cretaceous &amp;#948;18Osw produced by this work will improve
temperature estimates made using traditional methods, and will demonstrate the
power of clumped isotopes to calibrate other proxy methods. In addition to
temperature, carbonate clumped isotope paleothermometry has the ability to
reconstruct the isotopic composition of seawater (&amp;#948;18Osw) in the past.
Measurements of paleo-&amp;#948;18Osw over a large spatial scale may reveal
differences in global circulation in the past and inform us about past ocean
dynamics. The proposed research includes: 1) production of new temperature and
seasonality data describing Cretaceous climate, an example of a high-CO2 world;
2) direct measurement of the isotopic composition of seawater (&amp;#948;18Osw)
across a range of latitudes that can test current assumptions about
&amp;#948;18Osw spatial patterns in an ice-free world and provide a basis for
future studies requiring past &amp;#948;18Osw values; 3) comparison of
&amp;#948;18Osw (a quantity highly correlated with salinity) within and between
ocean basins, potentially revealing information about global ocean circulation
patterns during the Cretaceous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also serve as a
mentor to minority undergraduates and to minority high school students and
involve them directly in the proposed research. Engagement in authentic research
that is of importance to society is a proven way to increase persistence in STEM
fields for all students, but is particularly important for minority students.
This will be an important contribution to efforts to broaden participation in
science.