* 1420757
* A Bioarchaeological And Isotopic Study Of Social Organization, Violence, Health And Diet
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Tiffiny Tung, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 152,546.00

This research examines what happens to people when social institutions fail. It
builds on theories of state collapse, which posit that the power void left by a
collapsed state leads to social unrest, the demise of social institutions, poor
health, and warfare. Recent theoretical frameworks, however, challenge the
notion of unmitigated collapse and argue for a more nuanced examination of the
afterlife of states and empires. That is, because illness, malnutrition, and
trauma are often seen as inevitable in a poor natural environment, other factors
are often overlooked. For example, health outcomes are also affected by social
relations, trade networks, and human decisions about how to manage the natural
environment and equitably (or inequitably) distribute resources. While climate
stress can contribute to serious deleterious effects on human health and
livelihood, these effects are mediated through historical precedence, political
decision-making, social networks, and social norms that may dictate or encourage
certain behaviors, all of which can impact community and individual
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tiffiny A. Tung and her international research
team of students and professionals will investigate how the prehistoric
PeruvianWari state decline and a subsequent period of climate stress affected
the health, diet, violence, and migration patterns of populations from the
ancient Peruvian Andes. Over 400 human skeletons from three sequential time
periods are examined: Terminal Wari (AD 1000-1100); 2) Late Intermediate Period
I (LIP, AD 1100-1275); and 3) LIP II (AD 1275-1400). The skeletal remains from
each era are examined for trauma and pathological lesions, excellent proxies for
documenting levels of violence and community health; changes in social identity
are examined through cranial modification; dietary practices are reconstructed
through a study of carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios and dental disease;
migration patterns are documented through strontium and lead isotope ratios; and
estimates of precipitation and climate are reconstructed with oxygen isotope
ratios from human and animal dental apatite. The data from each time period are
compared to evaluate the distinct effects of state decline and the subsequent
period of incipient drought and later severe, persistent drought.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project gives students from the US and Peru hands-on
experience in osteological analysis and archaeological studies, while also
fomenting international collaborations and mutual respect. Unidentified human
bodies from the Peruvian conflict of the 1980s also means that the PI's
bioarchaeological team can coordinate with the local forensic teams in certain
human rights/forensic cases, especially as it relates to documenting and
interpreting skeletal trauma.