* 1420753
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Exploration of Maritime Commerce
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Liisa Malkki, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 8,352.00

Maritime transport is an essential dimension of globalization as ninety percent
of all internationally traded goods are transported at sea. Despite all of the
significant commercial and scholarly interest in the implications of
globalization over the last twenty years, the oceans upon which the vast
majority of the world's commerce takes place are a surprisingly understudied
scientific terrain. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to
conduct rigorous, scientifically grounded fieldwork, explores the sea as a
socially, economically, and politically important
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Johanna Markkula, under the supervision of Dr. Liisa
Malkki from the Department of Anthropology at Stanford University will explore
how the sea, often seen as a natural space outside of society, is a social space
that is produced by specific human practices. The project asks how maritime
workers and institutions shape the global mobility of goods, labor, and capital,
and what impact processes as globalization and global governance have on
commercial maritime activity. With ninety percent of all internationally traded
goods being transported at sea, maritime transport is a key component of
globalization, and Filipinos are the by far largest national group (1/3) in
today's seafaring labor force. Coastguards, for their part, are in charge of
policing and governing the maritime space on behalf of nation-states. A study of
their practices as workers who have to navigate the limits of the national and
the non-national will provide important insights into the blurred boundaries
between different forms of sovereignty. The researcher will carry out
ethnographic research among merchant seafarers using a range of inductively
oriented data collection techniques, including participant observation, and
interviews with a range of actors and stakeholders.