* 1420214
* Moving the Needle: Women in Engineering and Computing
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Catherine Hill, American Association of University Women
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2016
* USD 374,376.00

Notable progress has been made in US girls' participation and achievement in
science and math education, yet women still make up just 14% of the engineering
workforce and 25% of the computing workforce--occupations which comprise more
than 80% of the STEM workforce. The American Association of University Women
(AAUW) will conduct a synthesis project to capture and disseminate what is
currently known about the factors that contribute to the underrepresentation of
women in the engineering and computing workforce, and develop a research agenda
for the future. This project will synthesize and publicize what we know, what we
have yet to understand, and what we can do to attract and retain more women in
these fields. In the first phase of the project, AAUW will publish a report that
synthesizes the research on the underrepresentation of women in the technical
workforce from multiple disciplines and make evidence-based recommendations for
change. In the second phase of the project, AAUW will publish an agenda for
future research on the underrepresentation of women in engineering and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With assistance from an advisory committee of
experts, AAUW will select 5 to 10 top research findings to feature in the
report. Featured findings will be both widely regarded within academic circles
as well as relevant to organizational practices and social policy. AAUW will
work closely with researchers to translate key findings into simple, compelling
prose that will spark the attention of journalists, decision makers, and the
public. Building on its network of media contacts, policy makers, AAUW members,
and technical employers, AAUW will broadly disseminate the report findings. To
form the future research agenda, AAUW will convene a working meeting of
prominent researchers in the field. The resulting research agenda will identify
questions that are yet to be answered and promising directions for future
inquiry. The agenda will be widely disseminated to interested stakeholders.