* 1420175
* SHF: Small: Relational Parametricity for Program Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Patricia Johann, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,474.00

Title: SHF: Small: Relational Parametricity for Program
Verification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software market is currently estimated at
$500 billion per year, and this figure is likely to grow significantly in real
terms as software becomes ever more ubiquitous. One crucial aspect of software
is that it be correct, i.e., that software does what's intended and does not go
wrong. Even failures of everyday devices like iPods and mobile phones are
inconvenient and frustrating, but software leaking credit card details or voting
records, causing an airplane to crash, launching nuclear weapons without
authorization, or compromising the global financial sector can lead to
unprecedented and clearly unacceptable global uncertainties. The ever-growing
size and sophistication of programs makes formal verification methods --- which
use mathematical techniques to ensure that programs actually perform the
computations they are designed to carry out and do not perform unintended ones
--- increasingly critical for building truly secure and reliable software. The
broader impact of this research is to make possible the development of better
and more widely applicable formal program verification methods, and, thereby, to
help ensure that even large and sophisticated software systems are provably
correct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relational parametricity is a key technique for
formally verifying properties of software systems. Logical relations, upon which
relational parametricity is based, provide a means of proving properties of a
software system directly from the system itself. Logical relations have by now
been developed for core fragments of many modern programming languages and
verification systems. However, this has been accomplished by way of an enormous
constellation of complicated and non-reusable logical relations, rather than by
appealing to their uniform construction and transferrable development from
fundamental principles. This research aims to improve the current state-of-the-
art by providing an axiomatic framework for the construction of logical
relations. The framework is principled, conceptually simple, comprehensive,
uniform, and predictive. The intellectual merit of this research lies in its
exposition and use of essential structures from category theory ("fibrations")
to address the significant technical problems of constructing logical relations,
and conceptualizing relational parametricity in sophisticated settings. It also
lies in the novel and uniform formulation of parametricity to which this
research will lead, and the application of this new framework to specific state-
of-the-art computational problems. To ensure its uptake, a logic and tool
support for the new framework will be provided. While the tool will permit users
to experiment with the framework, the feedback from their practical experiences
will further fortify the new foundations for parametricity.