* 1420102
* Can Practical Knowledge Modeled in a Teaching Simulator Support Mathematics Teacher Learning?
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Patricio Herbst, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 515,755.00

This project is an early-stage research study in the Research on Education and
Learning program to develop and study intelligent, virtual simulations of
teaching proof in high school geometry to improve the preparation of future
secondary mathematics teachers. A major concern in the preparation of teachers
is bridging course-based learning with practice in real classrooms. However,
regular classrooms do not provide controlled situations where beginning teachers
can focus on developing specific, important aspects of their teaching practice.
The simulations are based on realistic classroom situations and guided by
theories on teacher knowledge, but controlled via the virtual nature of the
learning environment. This learning environment allows teachers to explore and
rehearse new strategies for teaching with virtual students without the higher
consequences of this exploration in real classrooms. This study builds on the
prior work in intelligent tutors for student learning of mathematics to
generalize to teacher learning. The simulation-based approach also has the
potential to provide a practical framework to conduct similar studies of
teaching and learning to teach in instructional situations and subjects other
than the one studied here, and of learning to practice in professions other than
secondary mathematics teaching. Upon completion of the study, the online,
simulation-based learning environment will be available at LessonSketch
(www.lessonsketch.org) for both teacher educators and teacher candidates to
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to test the operational
capacity of practical rationality, a theory of teaching knowledge, by designing
and exploring the use of an intelligent teaching simulator whose knowledge model
is based on that theory of teaching knowledge. The project will develop two
versions of the simulator: a simple version whose knowledge model uses
mathematics knowledge of teaching and an advanced version that adds to the
simple version elements of practical professional knowledge specified by
practical rationality. The research team will explore the specific contribution
of practical rationality by comparing preservice secondary mathematics teachers
learning with the simple version of the simulator and preservice secondary
mathematics teachers learning with the advanced version. The project will first
explore where the comparison is done using paper versions of the simulators
using pairs of teacher candidates and teacher educators to refine and specify a
more fine-grained model of teaching knowledge and a model of scaffolding in
practice-based teacher education. Then, the project will study the comparison of
the two improved versions using teacher candidates. This work helps understand
the added value of the practical knowledge model in supporting learning to teach
in, from, and for practice.