* 1420578
* Understanding the Effects of Mathematics Teacher Preparation on the Quality of Classroom Teaching and Students' Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* James Hiebert, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,024,679.00

One of the most urgent problems in U.S. education is how to provide more
effective teaching in school mathematics. A major question facing Schools of
Education today is whether and how their teacher preparation programs matter in
addressing this problem. The field lacks research that would inform teacher
educators and policy makers about critical variables in mathematics teacher
preparation that influence the nature of beginning teachers' practices and the
quality of students' learning. This project, funded through the Research on
Education and Learning program, builds on empirical evidence that K-8 teacher
preparation in mathematics can make a substantial difference in the nature and
depth of graduates' knowledge and skills for teaching as well as their actual
teaching practices. The researchers will study the links among details of K-8
mathematics teacher preparation, the nature and quality of graduates' classroom
teaching, and the nature of their students' learning. Using a longitudinal
design following a cohort of teachers as they transition from mathematics
teacher preparation into their first two years of classroom teaching, the
project will identify the details of the preparation program that enable
effective classroom mathematics teaching and influence students' learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to (1) refined theory that
connects mathematics teacher preparation, teaching practice, and student
learning, and (2) empirical data that test key hypotheses regarding the links
among these variables. Hypotheses to be tested include: (a) instructional
approaches used in teacher preparation that help prospective teachers acquire
conceptual understanding of both mathematics and pedagogy similar to those used
to help develop conceptual understanding of mathematics influence the nature of
beginning teachers' instructional practice; (b) a focus on unpacking the
mathematics into usable knowledge through, for example, multiple representations
of problems and solution methods, will yield detectable improvements in
graduates' teaching and their students' learning; and (c) a threshold of
intensity in studying a mathematical topic is needed for prospective teachers to
internalize and then later use this knowledge to plan and implement high quality
lessons on the topic. This longitudinal study will follow all seniors in an
undergraduate teacher preparation program, approximately 120 preservice
teachers, into their first years of teaching. Using a combination of surveys,
classroom observations, and measures of student achievement, the project will
test the hypotheses using a mixed method study combining case studies and quasi-
experimental tests of impact.