* 1420007
* Integrated Experimental and Modeling Studies of the Chemistry of Organic Aerosol Formation from the Atmospheric Oxidation of Hydrocarbons
* GEO,AGS
* 12/31/2013,07/31/2016
* Paul Ziemann, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 295,377.00

The overall objective of this proposal is to develop quantitative chemical
mechanisms for the gas phase and heterogeneous/multiphase reactions involved in
the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) from the hydroxyl (OH) radical-
initiated reactions of selected classes of alkanes and alkenes and their
reaction products over a wide range of conditions, and to use these mechanisms
with information on gas-particle-wall partitioning to develop comprehensive
models of SOA formation and oxidative aging. The approach will involve
experimental studies of OH radical-initiated reactions over a wide range of
carbon numbers. These compounds contain most of the basic structural features
present in atmospheric volatile organic compounds (VOC) and SOA. Reactions will
be conducted in a large, Teflon environmental chamber under conditions
representative of polluted and clean air, and the effects of relative humidity
and particle chemical composition, acidity, and mass loading on the reactions
will be explored. Reaction products present in the gas and particle phases will
be identified and quantified using real-time and offline methods including
thermal desorption particle beam mass spectrometry, liquid and gas
chromatography coupled to a variety of detectors, and spectrophotometry without
and with the aid of functional group derivatization. Experiments will also be
conducted in the environmental chamber and in smaller reactors with authentic or
surrogate reaction products to investigate gas-wall partitioning, vapor
pressures, and activity coefficients of reaction products, as well as the
kinetics and equilibria of their potential heterogeneous/multiphase reactions.
The results will be used to develop comprehensive kinetic models of these
processes that incorporate gas phase and heterogeneous/multiphase reactions and
gas-particle-wall partitioning.

Broader impacts of the data obtained on reaction products and branching ratios
for gas phase reaction pathways, heterogeneous/multiphase reaction kinetics and
equilibria, and gas-particle-wall partitioning will be their application to many
other VOC-oxidant systems because of the similarity in fundamental reaction
pathways, products, and functional groups. Because of the widespread use of
Teflon chambers, the results will be useful for evaluating and improving
methodology and interpretation of environmental chamber studies, which provide
valuable data that is widely used by the atmospheric chemistry and aerosol
modeling community, as well as improving chemical reaction mechanisms and SOA
models that serve as modules in 3-dimensional air quality models. These models
are used to evaluate potential effects of gases and particles on regional
visibility, human health, ecosystems, and climate. This project will also
educate two or more graduate students and serve as the basis for their Ph.D.
dissertations, and provide research opportunities for undergraduate students.
Students will be trained in the areas of organic analysis, kinetics, and
atmospheric gas phase and aerosol chemistry, and, depending on their degree
program, will also be educated more broadly in chemistry, environmental
toxicology, or environmental science. Students will publish research results in
scientific journals and attend and present results at local, regional, and
national conferences. As a result, students will be well prepared for future
careers in industry, academia, or a government agency working on environmental
problems. Data and results will be disseminated through publications, conference
presentations, and a website, which will expand the value and use of the data.