* 1420374
* Analyzing Student Usage and Outcome Data from a Randomized Experiment of Cognitive Tutor Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Adam Sales, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 10/31/2017
* USD 359,521.00

Algebra addresses mathematics that is crucial for further study of STEM concepts
and for work in many technical careers. Yet many high school students struggle
to pass Algebra. Cognitive Tutor Algebra 1 (CTA1) is a curriculum that includes
both textbook components and an automated computer application that is designed
to deliver individualized instructions to students. This project will build on
the findings of a randomized control experiment that examined the effectiveness
of CTA1. The researchers will study the mechanisms by which CTA1 achieves its
effect by examining patterns in logs of students' actions and progress while
they use the program, teacher survey data and student achievement data. The
project will employ Bayesian statistical models to infer if causal models exist
that explain the relationship between positive learning outcomes and the use of
the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use a specific form of
mediation analysis, the Rubin Causal Model, to develop and test hypotheses about
what the students would have experienced with CTA1 versus what they would have
experienced in its absence. This analysis methodology supports the
identification of mediating variables on the relationship between a treatment
assignment (CTA1) and an outcome (student achievement). The study also tests the
use of a particular form of mediation analysis, principal stratification, to
determine its utility in conducting such analyses. Multiple mediation models
will be examined to determine how educational researchers might develop better
experimental research studies.