* 1420866
* SHF:Small: Crash Scene Investigation - Debugging Programs that Fail Unexpectedly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Liblit, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 477,833.00

Computer systems are pervasive in all aspects of modern society. The software
running on these systems, however, is difficult to implement correctly, and many
failures occur after software is already released to the public. Unfortunately,
these "post-deployment" failures are often the most difficult to fix. Failing
runs are difficult to reproduce and analyze, as information about these failures
is much more difficult and costly to obtain than failures occurring before
software release. The PI's research will address this problem by making post-
deployment failures more informative without sacrificing the end-user
experience.

Specifically, the project will tackle this problem on two fronts. First,
deployed programs will perform low-cost, customizable tracing to enhance core
memory dumps produced by failures. The project will investigate methods using
both static and dynamic analysis to reduce the cost and improve the utility of
traced information. Second, the enhanced memory dumps will require development
of powerful new automated postmortem analyses to partially automate the process
of debugging and program understanding. These analysis results can then be used
to further inform useful tracing strategies via dynamic feedback from previous
failures. Thus, information about a particular post-deployment fault could
continually improve as more failures are observed. This automated iterative
improvement of postmortem analyses has the potential to substantially reduce
effort required to fix post-deployment faults, thus leading to faster and more
accurate patches, resulting in greater reliability for the software we all rely
upon in our daily lives.