* 1420570
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2022
* David Weitz, Harvard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 09/30/2022
* USD 13,490,856.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Harvard MRSEC focuses on
highly collaborative multidisciplinary research with participants drawn from
five departments across the university. The overarching goal of the Center is to
perform transformative research that significantly advances the state of
knowledge in several areas of soft matter science, and to educate the next
generation of leaders in materials science and engineering. The MRSEC has three
interdisciplinary groups focused on very large deformations in soft materials,
creating new materials for 3D printing and creating novel forms of soft
machines. An essential contribution of the Center is to increase diversity of
participants in its science at all levels, from undergraduate through graduate
and postdoctoral to faculty. The Harvard MRSEC also sponsors a robust suite of
activities to share the excitement of its science with the broader scientific
community, and with the public at large. By combining soft matter science with
cooking the Center elicits exhilaration through a public lecture series that
combines science with talks by famous chefs; these are also posted online where
there is an avid following, with the videos already attracting over 1.5M hits.
The MRSEC is also developing special initiatives to bring returning veterans
into STEM fields. By pooling resources for shared experimental facilities, the
MRSEC supports a more extensive research effort. The resultant teamwork enables
the Center to address problems that are larger in scale, and to produce results
that are truly transformative. The MRSEC sets a standard of excellence for
highly collaborative, multidisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Harvard MRSEC supports highly collaborative, interdisciplinary research in
several areas of soft matter science. These include investigations of the
properties of soft materials subjected to very large deformations; development
of fundamental knowledge essential to create and rapidly transform diverse
classes of soft materials into 3D functional architectures; and development of
the science of soft, non-linear unstable elastomeric materials and the use of
these material instabilities to develop devices with high-value performance at
lower cost. The Center also supports seed projects to enable rapid response to
new developments; currently it supports an effort in developing tough fabrics to
elicit interest among returning veterans, a group targeted by the MRSEC to help
integrate into STEM careers. The MRSEC establishes a culture of innovation and
entrepreneurship, enhancing the competitiveness of the national economy through
industrial partnerships and formation of numerous start-up companies, creating
more than 350 new high-tech jobs based directly on NSF support. Graduates of the
Harvard MRSEC continue to be leaders in materials science and engineering, both
nationally and internationally.