* 1420602
* Travel Support Request for Institute for Advanced Study Workshop on Physics Approach to Simplifying Complexity in Biology; Hong Kong University, China; December 15-19, 2014.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Robert Austin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2019
* USD 36,000.00

The December 15-19, 2014 Workshop on Physics Approach to Simplifying Complexity
in Biology will bring together physical scientists together with biologists to
address basic science problems in biology. Phyicists and biologists are working
together to further our progress in the development of predictive, quantitative
biology and this workshop is essential in this direction. The organizers bring
scientists to examine both the origins of living matter and the complexity that
has evolved with time. The emergent phenomena of life is hardly predictable from
the fundamental laws of physics or the theorems of mathematics. Emergent living
organisms form a unique state of complex adaptive matter; this complex
adaptability presumably has its roots in natural selection because the
adaptation of natural selection gives rise to ever increasing
fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers will bring together the physics and
condensed matter communities in Asia with those in the US and Europe and merge
them with biologists and ecologists to form a frontier effort that spans
multiple disciplines. The range of subjects will be wide, in the hopes that
unifying, quantitative themes can be mapped out. The workshop will cover areas
ranging from The Origins of Complexity to The Emergence of Collective Behavior
to Instability in Complex Adaptive Matter, which has connections to many ill-
understood topics such as the dynamics of protein dis-function, collective
conflicts in communities, and the fundamental origins of diseases such as cancer
viewed from a deep perspective. The impact will be to find unifying, simple but
deep principles which can tie together the bewildering complexity of biology
from the unified perspective of physics which has been so successful in the
past.