* 1420609
* Knowing What Students Know: Using Educational Data Mining to Predict Robust STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bruce McLaren, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,567,345.00

Student understanding of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
concepts frequently suffers from students applying shallow problem solving
strategies to STEM content areas. Shallow problem solving skills are skills that
apply to a specific instance of a problem but do not generalize to similar
problems. This research project will study how deep understanding of STEM
concepts can be supported in a computer based learning environment -
specifically genetics problem solving. The learning environment will support
both genetics process-modeling understanding and genetics abductive reasoning -
that is reasoning from empirical data to the genetic processes that could
generate that data. Both process modeling and abductive reasoning models are
relevant to many STEM domains. Developing computer-based activities that support
learning of genomic analysis, and understanding robust student knowledge of this
topic promise to yield large societal benefits by improving STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will combine cognitive modeling and
educational data mining to develop and evaluate a multi-component model of the
depth of student learning during problem solving. The proposed research
addresses a well-documented shortcoming in student problem solving, observed
across STEM domains: some students develop shallow problem-solving knowledge
that they have difficulty applying in new situations. The proposed research will
develop a multi-component, yet parsimonious, model of students' depth of
knowledge that predicts individual differences in direct transfer of knowledge
to, and future learning of, successive topics in a problem-solving curriculum.
This research will occur in the domain of modern genetics problem solving.
Genetics is a fundamental, unifying theme of biology and is viewed as one of the
most challenging topics in biology by students and instructors, in part because
it relies heavily on problem solving. Genetics problem solving relies on two
types of knowledge: genetic process-modeling knowledge, and abductive reasoning
skills - reasoning backwards from empirical data to the genetic processes that
generated the data. The proposed research will focus on student understanding of
genomic pathway analysis, a foundational topic linking classic Mendelian
genetics and molecular genetics that is key to understanding advances in 21st
century biology. This project will model 4 components of students' genetics
knowledge: (1) verbal declarative knowledge of gene action; (2) genetics process
modeling knowledge; (3) abductive reasoning skill; and (4) metacognitive skills.
The research will examine hypotheses about how to integrate these measures into
a unified model that predicts individual differences in future learning
processes; that is, which components of student knowledge affect the intercept
(direct transfer), and which affect the rate, of students' learning functions in
successive topics across the curriculum. The project will employ the Genetics
Cognitive Tutor, an intelligent learning environment that provides students
step-by-step support as needed in solving problems. The project leverages
existing problem-solving modules, will build some additional modules, and will
bring the accompanying instructional text for all modules on-line to incorporate
student reading-time measures into a robust learning model. Recent student
modeling efforts have yielded preliminary, promising results that lay the
foundation for a complete model: (1) models that infer students' knowledge from
step-by-step accuracy in basic problem-solving reliably predict both basic
problem-solving posttest performance, and robust learning posttest measures
(transfer and preparation for future learning; (2) models of students'
metacognitive skills more accurately predict these robust learning measures; and
(3) models of automaticity accurately predict "shallow" learning. This project
will integrate these components and declarative knowledge measures into a
comprehensive framework that models students' robust learning in problem-solving
and predicts not only time-slices of student performance on robust-learning
tests, but predicts individual differences in entire learning functions as
students complete successive problem-solving curriculum units.