* 1420517
* Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2014
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2015
* USD 12,800.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on R/V
Atlantis, a 274? general purpose Global vessel and R/V Knorr, a 279?general
purpose Global vessel, both of which are operated by Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;Both vessels are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-
of-the-art instrumentation and support all disciplines of oceanographic
research. They are considered Global vessels and can accommodate a scientific
party of up to 32 persons for as many as 60 days. The vessels work in all the
world?s oceans supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies.
R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the
human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep
Submergence Facility (NDSF).&lt;br/&gt; In 2013, the R/V Knorr completed 253
days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 89% of the total sailing schedule
(226 days). R/V Atlantis completed 229 days at sea in 2013. NSF funded projects
accounted for 97% of the total sailing schedule (223 days). In 2014, R/V Knorr
is scheduled for 248 days with NSF days accounting for 52% (129 days) of the
total sailing schedule while R/V Atlantis is scheduled for 301 days with NSF
accounting for 276 of those or 92%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic
Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Valeport 500
kHz Altimeters $12,800 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.