* 1420600
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive and Neural Indicators of School-based Improvements in Spatial Problem Solving
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Robert Kolvoord, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2019
* USD 449,784.00

This project, to be conducted by James Madison University, Georgetown
University, and Northwestern University, will examine learning spatial thinking
skills by high school students (who are studying geoscience), looking at
educational outcomes as well as behavioral and neurological measures. There is
already considerable evidence linking spatial ability and future STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) attainment. The project will focus on
a high school course, the Geospatial Semester, that is designed to improve
spatial thinking. The project will look for changes in patterns of brain
activity as a result of the course, as well as relations among the educational,
behavioral, and neurological measures. Prior research indicates that spatial
training in the laboratory may reduce gender differences in performance; this
project will seek to measure this effect in real world high school spatial
learning, and to identify neural mechanisms that help explain how and why the
gender gap closes. This project will advance the work of the EHR (Education
&amp; Human Resources) Directorate in studying the cognitive and neural basis of
STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
develop a mechanistic theory of change for spatial STEM education at the
behavioral and neural levels. To achieve this goal, the project will measure a
combination of outcomes: educational (e.g., coursework), behavioral (e.g., core
spatial ability on standard tests of mental rotation and embedded figure
identification, use of spatial language), and neurological (e.g., neural
efficiency and grey matter volume in brain regions that support spatial thinking
ability, interconnectivity networks across brain regions). Students in the
spatially-based Geospatial Semester will be compared to peers receiving standard
(non-spatially-based) STEM education in other advanced science courses.
Neurological measures will be obtained by functional and structural magnetic
resonance imaging performed at pre- and post-test time points. In general, the
project will address the issue of brain plasticity in a high school STEM
education context. The project will use machine learning techniques to discern
neurological effects of spatial learning in both hypothesis-driven and data-
driven ways, and examine gender differences in the effect of spatial STEM
learning on cognition and the brain. Analyses will focus on relating changes
across neural, behavioral, and educational levels toward an integrated
understanding of the mechanisms that make spatial STEM learning effective.