* 1420749
* Assessing Science Engagement Through Social Media - NOVA scienceNOW season 7
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Julia Cort, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 10/31/2019
* USD 2,400,000.00

This early-stage design and development, integrated media and research project
will contribute important new understandings to the informal science learning
literature by exploring science engagement on social media when integrated with
broadcast television. It will help answer questions including: What does such
engagement look like? Who participates? How and why does it happen? and What is
the degree or depth of engagement? The project builds on the previous successful
work by WGBH nationally distributing the television series NOVA scienceNOW and
the research expertise of EDC. WGBH's NOVA scienceNOW program will collaborate
with EDC to develop new metrics to understand how and why learners engage with
science on social media. Deliverables will include six one-hour episodes of NOVA
scienceNOW, short online videos, moderated online discussion events, and an
online film festival. A new social Media Initiative will develop six live
broadcast microblogging events, six post-broadcast online discussion events,
daily social media updates, and an online film festival that will feature user
generated videos. A range of STEM content in the videos and online posts will be
framed around big science and engineering questions such as animal communication
and survival systems, the biology of sleep, climate change, new technologies,
energy, genetics, and natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The continued
innovations and expansion of social media channels provides significant new
opportunities for providing learner's access to high quality science content,
researchers, and opportunities to participate in science. In the first phase of
this work to deepen the evidence based understanding of how social media
supports informal science engagement, NOVA and EDC will collaborate to develop
new measurement instruments: (1) a Network Profile to quantitatively represent
the size and activity of NOVA's social media network; (2) an Informal Science
Engagement (ISE) index to measure the degree of engagement by coding and
analyzing conversations and posts; (3) a Follower Profile to assess the degree
of activity and the nature of the engagement; and (4) a Science Social Media
Engagement survey instrument. They will then use these measures and data
collection protocols to explore whether and how the initiative might influence
science engagement. External expert reviewers with content and methodological
expertise will review all aspects of the project at critical junctures. This
project will contribute important new knowledge and research instruments and
methods to better understand how the learning opportunities of social media
channels can be realized most effectively. This has significant potential for
broad and lasting benefits to society as well as advancing the informal science
learning field.