* 1420689
* OCE-RIG:   Improving Climate Records Through a Mechanistic Understanding of Sub-Micron Proxy Heterogeneity in Spinose  Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Alexander Gagnon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,958.00

Calcite shells of planktonic and benthic foraminifera incorporate minerals and
stable isotopes from the surrounding water into their shells as they grow, so
the shells provide records of the environmental conditions in which the
organisms lived. These shells are often preserved in sediments and are used to
provide estimates of paleoclimates. However, many basic questions still remain
about the relationship between foraminiferal shell composition and environmental
conditions. A better understanding of foraminiferal biocalcification, in
particular the relation between changing environmental conditions and the
incorporation of trace and minor elements in the carbonate shells, will allow
scientists to interpret paleoceanographic records more accurately. This award
will support the work of the PI and a graduate student who will investigate
biomineralization of foraminiferal shells at a sub-micron scale. The student
will also participate in the University of Washington's Project COOL: Chemical
Oceanography Outside the Laboratory, a science outreach program for middle
school students. This research on the basic mechanics of biomineralization may
also be useful for the field of material sciences and for medical applications
related to bone growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use new in situ
analytical approaches such as SIMS, nanoSIMS, laser-ablation ICP-MS, and new-
generation EPMA with advanced element-mapping capabilities to investigate
heterogeneous biomineralization of foraminiferal shells at a submicron scale,
including apparent diurnal cycles in the Mg/Ca and Na/Ca banding within
foraminifera tests. A mechanistic understanding of submicron-spatial scale
elemental partitioning within foraminifera should improve our ability to
interpret these elemental proxies in the context of paleoceanographic
reconstruction.