* 1420162
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER--Evaluating Fluid Inclusion Geochemistry of U-Th Dated Speleothems as a Tool for Resolving Paleoclimate Controversies in the American Southwest
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2015
* USD 15,439.00

Global hydrologic reorganization throughout the Northern Hemisphere occurred
synchronously with repeated large, sub-millennial-scale climate changes in the
northern North Atlantic region during the last deglaciation. However, how this
reorganization affected the continental hydroclimate in the drought-prone
American Southwest remains poorly resolved. Continental-based paleoclimate
reconstructions for this region are contradictory in large part due to two
sources of discrepancy: (1) uncertainty in age constraints, and (2) fundamental
ambiguity in speleothem-based proxy records.

This project-- a collaborative effort between scientists from the University of
California at Davis and Harvard University-- seeks to resolve the apparent
contradictions in the inferred glacial-interglacial climate reconstructions for
the American Southwest using cave deposits from the Sierra Nevada in California.
The researchers will employ novel techniques to generate both a robust
chronologic framework (using U-Th dating via laser ablation MC-ICPMS) and a
record of precipitation (using temperature-dependent noble gas concentrations in
fluid inclusions as a temperature proxy independent of other climate processes
and stable isotopic composition of inclusion fluids as a more direct proxy of
precipitation composition and source region) over the past ~20,000 years at the
study site. Successful proof-of-concept of these innovative approaches would
open the door for applications to a wide variety of questions in paleoclimate.

The outcomes of this work should lead to better understanding of how climate
change impacts the hydroclimate of the American Southwest, an area that is
vulnerable to water resource limitation. Additional broader impacts include
development of a new facility for routine high-precision U-series dating (of
which there are only a handful in the US), development of the noble gas proxy in
carbonates, and training of graduate students at two institutions.