* 1420900
* OCE-RIG Canary on the coral reef: ecophysiology of tropical crustose coralline algae across latitudinal gradients
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Nichole Price, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2016
* USD 109,482.00

In this project, the investigator will study the effects of increasing
temperatures and acidification on the physiology of tropical crustose coralline
algae (CCA) - mineralogy and net calcification - with the objective of
identifying which species can serve as bioindicators of, or are acclimated to,
reef impacts related to global climate change. To achieve this outcome, the
investigator will conduct field research at established sites with on-going
ocean acidification research across a broad geographic range. The broadening
participation activities involve education and outreach to Pacific islanders at
the remote field sites where students will engage in hands on research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rising sea surface temperatures (SST) and ocean
acidification (OA) threatens the ability of calcified organisms to build
carbonate reefs. Current understanding of the effects of OA on coral reefs
originates from static laboratory studies largely focused on growth of corals.
But tropical crustose coralline algae (CCA) have been proclaimed as the "canary
on the coral reef" because some species dissolve in these OA "shock"
experiments. The exact physiological mechanism is unknown, but may be related to
the magnesium content of the skeletal tissue, which renders the calcite more
soluble in acidified conditions. The mole fraction of Mg in CCA in situ is
subject to temperature and salinity and is positively correlated with warmer
SST. This relationship has been exploited for climate reconstruction studies,
but has not yet been considered in the context of OA. If CCA are not
phenotypically plastic for Mg fractionation, then warming may exacerbate the
response of these species to OA. The overall objective of this research is to
examine the ecological importance of Mg content in recently deposited skeletal
tissue of common, pantropical CCA across a wide latitudinal range that
encompasses natural spatio-temporal gradients in carbonate saturation and SST.
The project includes three specific objectives: 1) Describe the biogeographic
and fine-scale patterns of Mg content in the carbonate skeleton of several
species of common tropical CCA. 2) Explore the relationships of temperature and
seawater carbonate chemistry with Mg content in several species of CCA. 3) Test
whether Mg content alters the biological response (e.g. species-specific net
calcification rates and community composition) of CCA to global warming and/or
ocean acidification. Both powdered X-ray diffraction analysis and laser ablation
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry will be used to quantify Mg2+
content relative to Ca2+ in the calcite lattice of CCA skeletal tissue; growth
increment patterns will pinpoint the timing of deposition. High frequency time-
series seawater pH or pCO2, salinity, and SST data, complimented by discrete
sampling for the remaining carbonate parameters (from established OA monitoring
programs), will resolve daily, tidal, and seasonal cycles and be related with
coincident biological data (calcification and production rates and Mg content)
in situ.