* 1420784
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Entrainment and Task Success in Team Conversations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2019
* USD 371,856.00

Teams, rather than individuals, are now the usual generators of scientific
knowledge. How to optimize team interactions is a passionately pursued topic
across several disciplines. This research hypothesizes that linguistic
entrainment, or the convergence of linguistic properties of spoken conversation,
may serve as a valid and relatively easy-to-collect measure that is predictive
of team success. From the perspective of developing interventions for team
innovation, organizations could unobtrusively measure team effectiveness using
entrainment, and intervene with training to aid teams with low entrainment.
Similar interventions would be useful for conversational agents that monitor and
facilitate group interactions. The work could also support the development of
browsers or data mining applications for corpora such as team meetings or
classroom discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, most studies of entrainment
have focused on conversational dyads rather than the multi-party conversations
typical of teams. The technical objective of this research is to develop,
validate and evaluate new measures of linguistic entrainment tailored to multi-
party conversations. In particular, the first research goal is to develop multi-
party entrainment measures that are computable using language technologies, and
that are both motivated and validated by the literature on teams. The second
goal is to demonstrate the utility of these measures in being associated with
team processes and predicting team success. The supporting activities include 1)
collection of an experimentally-obtained corpus where teams collaborate on a
task where they converse, and where a team process intervention manipulates
likely entrainment, 2) development of a set of entrainment measures for multi-
party dialogue, 3) use of standard psychological teamwork measures for
convergent validity and random conversations for divergent validity, 4)
exploration of how the team factors of gender composition and participation
equality impact group entrainment, and 5) evaluation of the utility of measuring
entrainment for predicting team and dialogue success.