* 1420881
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Unleashing Spectrum Effectively and Willingly: Optimization and Incentives
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Dejun Yang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2017
* USD 248,000.00

An intriguing fact emerges during the study of spectrum usage. On one hand, the
proliferation of wireless devices, e.g. smartphones, laptops, and tablets, and
bandwidth-hungry applications has resulted in the problem of spectrum scarcity.
On the other hand, a recent report by FCC reveals that the licensed users are
extremely underutilizing the allocated spectrum. To remove the barriers to
efficient spectrum utilization, this project aims to 1) design effective
spectrum allocation algorithms to allow as many secondary users (SUs) to coexist
with the primary user (PU) as possible while taking into account the
interference generated by both SUs and PU; and 2) develop incentive mechanisms
for enticing spectrum licensees to share or license their under-utilized
spectrum for better utilization. While designing spectrum allocation schemes,
the physical interference model is adopted to characterize the interference
closely to reality. Joint optimization of spectrum allocation and power control
is explored to further improve the spectrum utilization. This can lead to
efficient approximation algorithms with guaranteed performance comparing with
the optimum, as well as effective heuristic algorithms. Another major task of
this project is to design incentive auctions for enticing spectrum licensees to
share their spectrum with unlicensed users in exchange for the proceeds from the
auction. Three different application scenarios are investigated: 1) the spectrum
holder is willing to coexist with the unlicensed users under the condition that
the cumulative interference caused by them does not interrupt its own
transmission; 2) small network operators are allowed to form groups for
collective buying power to increase their chances of winning the spectrum; and
3) the competition among multiple spectrum licensees is considered.

This research can help ensure wireless networks in the USA keep pace with the
continuously increasing demand for spectrum, so that they can support activities
that increasingly rely on them, including public safety and health-care. The
designed group-buying based incentive auctions can provide opportunities for
small businesses to compete against big brand companies and win the access to
desired spectrum that is essential to the success of their business. These small
businesses are the engines of job creation and economic growth for the country.
This project involves under-represented and minority students, as well as K-12
students to inspire their interests in science and engineering.