* 1420181
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Predicting Eyewitness Identification Errors: Studies Using a Unique Set of Materials from Actual Lineups
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gary Wells, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 07/31/2018
* USD 263,377.00

Forensic DNA testing has freed hundreds of innocent people in the U.S. and
approximately 75% of these convictions involved mistaken eyewitness
identification. The need to identify reliable ways to sort between accurate and
mistaken identifications is readily apparent. Theory and data from laboratory-
simulation experiments indicate that accurate and mistaken identifications
differ in measurable ways (e.g., identification speed, confidence, witness
verbalizations). Lab research also shows that lineup biases (e.g., innocent
suspect stands out or administrator unintentionally steers the witness) can
inflate mistaken identifications. Lab simulation participants, however, know
that the crime is not real and fail to capture potentially important dynamics of
actual witnesses (e.g., fear, justice motivations, concern for consequences).

The researchers have unique materials from actual cases involving 855 photo-
lineups where only one person in each lineup was a suspect. The other lineup
members were known-innocent fillers. Filler identifications, which constitute
mistaken identifications, comprise 34% of all identifications. Software provided
by the researchers made audio recordings of witnesses' verbalizations, speed of
identifications, and other relevant information for each lineup. A majority of
the lineups were administered double-blind; thus, lineup administrators were
unaware of which was the suspect's photo and hence could not steer the witness.
Four studies were conducted. Study 1 tests whether lineup bias predicts mistaken
identifications. Study 2 tests whether witness verbalizations predict mistakes.
Study 3 tests whether mistakes are slower and made with less certainty than
suspect identifications. Study 4 tests whether double-blind lineup procedures
evidence less steering by the lineup administrators. Data analyses involve
hierarchical, mixed model log-linear analyses or ANOVAs. This work can help
translate lab simulation findings to actual cases and thereby help the justice
system sort between mistaken and accurate identifications. Results will be
shared broadly with scientists, police and prosecutors. Undergraduate students,
including first-generation and those of color at a small undergraduate college,
will receive research training in this project.