* 1420453
* Collaborative Research: Hominid Response To Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Michael Benedetti, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 88,572.00

Researchers wish to understand what are the basic cognitive and social
adaptations which define "humanness" and which have been responsible for the
success of our species. One way to address this question is through comparison
with our nearest counterparts and these are "Neanderthals." Modern humans and
Neanderthals met in Europe about 45,000 years ago and the result was the
disappearance of Neanderthal culture and their distinct physical form.
Neanderthals survived longest in Iberia and the goal of this research is to
examine possible interaction between these two groups. If successful the
research will shed light on those biological and cultural factors which gave
modern humans their competitive edge.

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Jonathan Haws (University
of Louisville) and Dr. Michael Benedetti (University of North Carolina
Wilmington) will lead a three-year study of Neanderthal extinction and
replacement by anatomically modern humans in central Portugal. The project
brings together an international team to recover high-resolution archaeological,
geological and paleoecological records from the excavation of Lapa do Picareiro,
a cave in central Portugal. The research is designed to test three possible
scenarios: 1) southern Iberia was abandoned by both Neanderthals and modern
humans; 2) Neanderthals existed in southern Iberia; and 3) modern humans were
present, spreading into the region soon after they arrived in northern Iberia.
The ultimate goal is to test replacement models based on human responses to
climate and environmental change.

Lapa do Picareiro is a unique site, with about 10m of sediments spanning 50,000
years. The sequence includes almost 2m of deposits dated between 30-42 ka cal
BP, making it an ideal locale to track changes in paleoenvironments and human
ecodynamics across the Middle-Upper Paleolithic transition. The proposed
methodology uses radiocarbon dating to establish age control for the sedimentary
sequence and the archaeological materials, stone tool analyses for both relative
dating and means for understanding the human decision-making of Middle and Upper
Paleolithic humans, animal bone assemblages to reconstruct paleoenvironments and
understand Neanderthal and modern human diets. Sediment analyses are key to
understanding the site formation processes and environmental context of human
occupation. Taken together, the work will establish a complete
paleoenvironmental and geoarchaeological chronology for the Middle-Upper
Paleolithic transition at Lapa do Picareiro, providing critical context that is
missing from many other sites in the region.

The project contributes to theories about a major development in human
evolution. It offers a unique opportunity to resolve long-standing debates about
the last Neanderthals and earliest modern humans in Southern Iberia. Broadly,
this work will contribute to a greater understanding of the timing and nature of
the transition by analyzing the role that environmental change, technology and
diet choice played in human evolution. Data from the proposed excavation could
potentially uncover new archaeological evidence that would transform
understanding of this period.

The project also offers scientific engagement and cultural enrichment for
student participants who will join an interdisciplinary research team in an
international setting. The PIs have demonstrated success in mentoring student
research during previous NSF projects. Many of the students involved in this
project over the past 5 years have been first-generation college students from
under-represented and rural demographic groups. Recruiting these students has
the dual benefits of diversifying the field crew and enriching the educational
experience for students who may not otherwise have opportunities for
international travel or study. This project will generate partnerships among
American, Portuguese and Czech universities, creating new collaborative learning
and research opportunities for students and scientists alike.