* 1420448
* Self-Regulation of Science Learning in the Context of Educational Game Creation: A Study of Middle School Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Len Annetta, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 849,121.00

This broadening participation research project will contribute to foundational
knowledge about how middle school students with learning disabilities can better
learn science as they learn to create educational computer games. This research
will contribute to the need to determine how to better educate these students
studying science in our country. There are approximately 2.5 million school-age
children with learning disabilities in our nation's schools. There is a pressing
need to ensure that these students graduate high school as science literate
individuals who can contribute to society, pursue college education, and advance
in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) careers. Gaining a
better understanding of how students with learning disabilities learn science
while creating educational games has the potential to lead to further basic and
applied research which may ultimately improve how these students learn science
and how teachers can improve their instructional practices to help students
better learn science content and skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leaders at
George Mason University will investigate the effort attributions, self-efficacy
and self-regulation processes of middle school students with learning
disabilities in the areas of science learning and educational game creation.
Students with learning disabilities typically attribute their failures and
successes in learning to factors that are external to them, rather than to their
own efforts. Using social cognitive theory as the grounding for their work, the
researchers will conduct an exploratory study to examine two primary research
questions: 1) How do student effort attributions for learning relate to their
perceptions of self-efficacy for serious educational game creation and mastery
of science content? 2) Does intervention result in increased effort attributions
that correspond with increased self-efficacy for both serious educational game
creation and science learning? During the first phase of this project students
will participate in science learning and educational game creation activities.
During the second phase the first research question will be explored with a
group of students to gain preliminary data. During the final phase the second
research question will be studied to gather information about the potential for
future research about interventions affecting science learning. At the
completion of the exploratory study, it is anticipated that results will inform
future basic and applied educational research about students learning to self-
regulate their science learning in the context of educational game generation.
The results of this work are expected to be shared with education researchers
and the public in professional publications.