* 1420046
* Skills for Coping with the Stresses of Unemployment and Seeking New Employment Opportunities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Connie Wanberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,424.00

Unemployment represents one of the most significant stressors that people can
encounter in their working lives. Previous research has shown that unemployment
can have a serious impact on an individual's physical and mental well-being.
However, there are significant differences from one individual to the next with
respect to coping strategies during job loss. A related strand of research has
looked at what aspects of searching for employment are most difficult and what
intervention strategies are most useful for individuals seeking new employment
opportunities. In this project, the researchers will bring together these
different strands of inquiry to develop a cross-national investigation of the
key determinants, processes, and outcomes of self-regulation during
unemployment. National labor departments and international agencies have sought
ways to shorten the time of unemployment in order to minimize monetary and
mental health costs to individuals. Governments spend millions of dollars/euros
annually on services for unemployed individuals, and rely on academic
information to help them design effective services. Research that can help to
understand the problems individuals have in their job search and interventions
designed to help individuals speed a sustainable reemployment success are highly
important. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data will be collected in a five-wave
longitudinal design from job seekers in the Netherlands, U.S., and Germany. This
large scale project will provide important insight into how unemployment
insurance systems interact with individual characteristics to promote or deter
job search activity on the part of individuals. Accompanying projects in this
grant similarly expand current knowledge in significant ways, aiming in
particular at understanding the reasons behind (and solutions for) unintentional
(as well as intentional) procrastination and lack of persistence in the job
search process. Subproject 1 will integrate macro-level (systems-based,
economic) with micro-level (individual, psychological) perspectives by
investigating to what extent system-based Unemployment Insurance (UI) benefits
plays a role in unemployed individuals' job search, mental health and quality of
reemployment (finding a suitable job). Subproject 2 will examine unemployed
individuals' self-regulatory responses to setbacks and rejections. Subproject 3
will focus on job seekers' career adaptability as a form of proactive coping
with job loss. Subproject 4 will take a refined look at the causes, content,
dynamics, and outcomes of procrastination as an important form of self-
regulatory failure.