* 1420380
* Graduate Student Travel Support from US Institutions to the 14th International Conference on Nanotechnology (IEEE Nano 2014). To be held in Toronto, Canada  August 18-21, 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Carmen Lilley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 06/30/2015
* USD 7,700.00

Abstract Title: Graduate Student Travel Support from US Institutions to the 14th
International Conference on Nanotechnology (IEEE Nano
2014)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this grant is to
support graduate students from US institutions to travel to the 14th
International Conference on Nanotechnology (IEEE Nano 2014 in Toronto, Canada
from August 18-21, 2014. Funds will be given as an NSF fellowship to attend the
conference, where students will present their research as oral or poster
presentations. Students will have the opportunity to gain valuable knowledge and
insight into leading edge research from international researchers in
nanotechnology. Students will also have the opportunity to attend workshops lead
by experts in their fields to gain skills in new areas of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this grant is student
training in nanotechnology, nanoscience, and nanoengineering, which are critical
research and development areas for the US. By enabling the participation of
graduate students from US institutions in this conference, they will gain
valuable knowledge through their active participation in giving technical
presentations on their research, attending oral talks, and poster presentations.
They will also have the ability to network and learn about global research in
the nanotechnology community through formal and informal events.