* 1420654
* CSR: Small: Wireless Systems as Gesture Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Shwetak Patel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Over the past two decades there has been a rapid proliferation of wireless
signals, such as Wi-Fi and cellular, that support mobile devices. As a result,
wireless signals have become ubiquitous in our environment -- at home, at work,
and now even on airplanes. The goal of this project is to leverage these signals
around us to enable novel sensing applications, such as gesture recognition. A
gesture recognition system allows users to control devices using movements of
their hands, arms, legs, etc. This research focuses on using wireless signals to
achieve gesture-sensing capabilities that are currently impossible, particularly
(1) gesture recognition in the home without the need for specific movement
detectors (such as cameras or user-held devices), and (2) gesture recognition
that can operate on battery-free devices. The project will address fundamental
questions about the feasibility and limits of using existing wireless signals
for extracting rich sensing information, and will explore deep connections to
both communication and radar theory. This work has the potential to inspire the
design of novel systems that can open up new research questions in multiple
domains, including ubiquitous computing, mobile systems, computer networking,
and human-computer interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed inter-
disciplinary research takes a novel approach of leveraging existing wireless
systems to enable novel applications such as gesture sensing and recognition.
The project will produce algorithms, circuits, sensors, designs, and system
implementations to achieve this goal. The project will also be developing
battery-free gesture sensors that can work using only harvested power from
ambient wireless sources like TV and cellular transmissions. Further, these
designs will be integrated with existing mobile devices such as smartphones and
tablets to demonstrate always-on sensing on these power-constrained devices. The
project will also develop classification algorithms that can run entirely on
low-power micro-controllers without consuming significant amounts of power.
Further, this research will lay the algorithmic foundations for extracting
information from communication signals optimized for high-throughput (e.g.,
OFDM-based Wi-Fi and cellular transmissions) to enable rich sensing capabilities
like whole-home gesture recognition and battery-free gesture recognition.
Finally, the project demonstrate two main applications: reliable pointing
gesture recognition (where the user points along different directions to
activate devices) and through-the-pocket gesture recognition where the user can
gesture at the phone in a pocket, e.g., to change volume or mute the phone.