* 1420938
* AF: Small: Pseudorandomness for Space-Bounded Computation and Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Salil Vadhan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2018
* USD 492,395.00

Pseudorandomness is the theory of generating objects that "look random" despite
being constructed using little or no randomness. Work on pseudorandomness has
implications for many different areas of research in computer science,
communications, and mathematics.

This project seeks to advance the theory and application of pseudorandomness,
focusing on two core directions:

1. Pseudorandomness for space-bounded computation and related models: using a
new method from the PI's recent work, the project aims to make significant
progress on the long-standing "RL vs. L" problem --- whether every randomized
algorithm can be made deterministic with only a small increase in memory usage.

2. Pseudorandomness for cryptography: The project will export powerful
techniques and concepts from the theory of pseudorandomness to cryptography, in
particular exploiting computational measures of randomness that were introduced
in the PI's recent work.

The research will be closely integrated with the PI's educational efforts. In
particular, the PI will continue to develop new curricular, educational, and
expository material that are made openly available for others to use. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in all phases of this research, and
will be given opportunities to publish and present their results at premier
international conferences.

The PI will also continue his extensive service to the scientific community,
including chairing the SIGACT Committee for the Advancement of Theoretical
Computer Science. This committee does a substantial amount of outreach activity,
interfacing with funding agencies and helping convey the achievements and
potentials of research in theoretical computer science to a broad audience.