* 1420882
* AF: Small: Density Estimation and Uncertainty Propagation in Complex Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* N Aluru, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Complex systems, involving coupled interactions among several disciplines, at
micro and nanoscales are building blocks for many application areas including
information technology, energy, and health sectors. Many of the advances in data
revolution are due to the high quality images and information acquired by
miniaturized sensors and their networks and this advanced sensor technology is
an example of a complex system involving several interacting disciplines. A
major bottleneck currently facing the design and operation of complex systems at
small scales is the presence of uncertainties. Uncertainties such as variations
in physical/material properties, geometry, applied signals, etc. cannot be
avoided at small scales.  These uncertainties can significantly affect the
performance of complex systems sometimes negating the performance merits of
small scale systems. As a result, it is important to design complex systems in
the presence of uncertainties. In this project, the PI plans to develop
efficient and accurate algorithms for stochastic analysis of complex systems at
small scales.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to make algorithmic
advances in three areas of relevance to stochastic analysis of complex systems.
The first area involves development of kernel moment matching techniques to
estimate probability density functions (pdfs) of uncertain inputs. The key idea
is to estimate the pdf such that the output statistics are optimized. The second
area involves development of algorithms for numerical analysis of stochastic
mathematical models governing complex systems. The third area involves
development of integrated data-driven stochastic algorithms for coupled analysis
of complex systems. The integrated stochastic environment will be used not only
for robust design of complex systems but also to explore design and development
of novel complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students, including women and under-represented students, will be trained in the
interdisciplinary area involving algorithms, physics and engineering.