* 1420548
* Collaborative Research: Explaining, exploring, and scientific reasoning in museum settings
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2019
* David Sobel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2019
* USD 437,264.00

In order to improve science, technology, mathematics, and engineering (STEM)
learning, it is crucial to better understand the informal experiences that young
children have that prepare them for formal science education. Young children are
naturally curious about the world around them, and research in developmental
psychology shows that families often support children in exploring and seeking
explanations for scientific phenomena. It is less clear how to link children's
natural curiosity and everyday parent-child interaction with more formal STEM
learning. This collaborative project will team researchers from the University
of California, Santa Cruz, the University of Texas, and Brown University with
informal learning practitioners at the Children's Discovery Museum, The
Thinkery, and the Providence Children's Museum in order to investigate how
family interaction relates to children's causal learning, as well as how
modifications to museum exhibit design and facilitation by museum staff
influence families' styles of interaction and increase children's causal
learning. This project is funded by the Research on Education and Learning
(REAL) program which supports fundamental research by investigators from a range
of disciplines in order to deepen what is known about STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will examine how ethnically and
linguistically diverse samples of parents and children engage in collaborative
scientific learning in three children's museums across the U.S. The research
will combine observational studies of parent-child interaction in a real-world
setting with experimental measures of children's causal learning. The
investigators will examine how children explore and derive explanations for
museum exhibits about mechanical gear function and fluid dynamics. In this way,
the researchers will investigate the relation between styles of parent-child
interaction and children's causal learning. The team will also investigate novel
ways of presenting material within the exhibits to facilitate exploration and
explanation. They will explore how signage, conversations with museum staff,
parents' attitudes towards learning in museum settings, and parents' own prior
knowledge about the exhibits can influence the parent-child interaction and
subsequent causal learning. The project will advance the basic research goal of
advancing what is known about what affects children's science content learning.
It will also advance the practice-oriented goal of developing new strategies for
the design of science museum exhibits and make recommendations for how parents
can better talk to their children about scientific phenomena.