* 1420645
* MRSEC:  Polarization and Spin Phenomena in Nanoferroic Structures (P-SPINS)
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2021
* Evgeny Tsymbal, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 10/31/2021
* USD 9,629,898.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroic materials are
characterized by switchable magnetic or electric polarizations which make them
interesting for advanced technological applications. The Materials Research
Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
supports an interdisciplinary research project named Polarization and Spin
Phenomena in Nanoferroic Structures (P-SPINS). This project is centered on
studies of new ferroic materials and structures at the nanoscale aimed at
developing the fundamental understanding of their properties and related
phenomena important for information processing and storage, energy harvesting,
and advanced electronics. P-SPINS's education and outreach programs encourage
gifted young people to pursue scientific careers, broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, and improve materials literacy among the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;P-SPINS is organized into two interdisciplinary research
groups (IRGs). IRG1 "Magnetoelectric Materials and Functional Interfaces" is
focused on magnetoelectricity in complex functional heterostructures and its
unconventional use beyond the realm of static equilibrium and linear response.
This IRG synergistically explores dynamic strain-driven phase transitions in
magnetoelectric bulk materials and thin films, voltage-controlled entropy
changes, magnetoelectric heterostructures for ultra-low power devices with
memory and logic functions, and electrical tuning of interface magnetic
anisotropy and exchange bias. IRG2 "Polarization-Enabled Electronic Phenomena"
exploits ferroelectric polarization as a state variable to realize new
polarization-enabled electronic and transport properties of novel oxide,
organic, and hybrid heterostructures. This IRG investigates ferroelectrically
induced resistive switching effects, modulation of electronic confinement at the
hybrid ferroelectric/semiconductor and organic interfaces, dipole ordering in
molecular ferroelectric structures, and manipulation of polarization-enabled
electronic properties. To address these challenges in materials research P-SPINS
relies on interdisciplinary collaborations, extensive use of shared facilities,
partnerships with national laboratories and international institutions and
interactions with industrial companies to leverage the expected scientific
innovations for potential technological advances. As an integral part of the
center, P-SPINS maintains a portfolio of signature education and outreach
activities designed to increase the number, quality, and diversity of
individuals pursuing and succeeding at careers in materials science.