* 1420351
* Double Isolation: Social Pressure and Gender Disparities in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Sapna Cheryan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 02/28/2019
* USD 631,747.00

In 2010, women earned about half of all science undergraduate degrees; yet in
the same year, women earned less than 20% of computer science degrees. Computer
science remains one of the least gender diverse of the STEM fields and one of
the most impervious to change. Current theories that explain this disparity
typically focus on women's attitudes and backgrounds (e.g., lower confidence,
lack of prerequisites) or the unwelcoming climate of the field (e.g., negative
stereotypes about women's abilities). This work will focus on an overlooked
component of women's experience in the selection of an academic field: social
pressure from peers to conceal an interest in the field. Specifically, the
research will investigate whether women express less interest in computer
science because they anticipate negative judgment for entering a stereotypically
masculine field. Current interventions to draw girls into male-dominated fields
typically focus on changing women (e.g., providing computing experience). The
research proposed here suggests that women may be forsaking important learning
opportunities in STEM before trying them because of the social pressure they
perceive. However, relatively simple changes to educational environments may be
able to "turn off" this social pressure and increase women's interest in
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current work develops and tests a
theoretical model that identifies the sources of social pressure on women and
the consequences of this social pressure on women's interest and performance in
computer science. To test the theory, researchers will conduct two surveys in
Year 1 and seven behavioral experiments in Years 1 to 3. In Year 1, the focus
will be on whether women perceive more social pressure than men in computer
science but not in other fields (e.g., English), and the effects of perceived
social pressure on interest and performance in computer science. In Year 2, the
research will examine how to reduce social pressure by using private learning
mechanisms and broadening stereotypes. In Year 3, the researchers will partner
with the Computer Science Teachers Association to conduct a large-scale field
experiment across multiple high schools that tests whether exposure to female
computer science role models who are portrayed with their friends reduces
perceived social pressure on women and increases their interest in computer
science.