* 1420693
* EAGER: Natural Chromogenic Behaviors of Squid in Oceanic Waters
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* William Gilly, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 249,476.00

Complex color-changing (chromogenic) behaviors in squid provide camouflage by
mimicking benthic features such as rocks, coral or algae, and also serve in
intra-specific signaling. However, few studies have been carried out under
natural lighting conditions in the field, or without the presence of human
observers or noisy remotely operated vehicles. This project will extend field
studies of natural chromogenic behaviors to the family Ommastrephidae as
exemplified by Dosidicus gigas (Humboldt squid). To accomplish the research
under natural lighting conditions, the project will develop an improved low-
light Crittercam and an improved Driftcam that can operate effectively at
greater depths. These improved video platforms will lead to new understanding of
the generation and regulation of camouflage and communication in the open-ocean
environment. Little is known of predatory behavior in midwater region occupied
by Humboldt squid, which in the eastern Pacific Ocean is associated with a vast
volume of water that is naturally hypoxic called the oxygen minimum zone (OMZ).
This OMZ is currently expanding and moving toward the surface, largely due to
climate change. Observations of predatory activity in the upper OMZ will
increase our understanding of how pelagic ecosystems might change as climate
change progresses, and how these changes could impact economically and
ecologically important species like the Humboldt
squid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromogenic behavior in squid and other cephalopods
is generated by muscular organs called chromatophores that are controlled by
neural activity in the brain, and this direct, descending motor-control for
chromatophores is unique to cephalopods. Pilot studies with the National
Geographic Remote Imaging (NGRI) "Crittercam" video-package deployed on free-
swimming Humboldt under natural lighting have revealed static patterning-type
displays, like those seen in loliginid species, as well as a unique "flashing"
behavior, with the entire body rapidly alternating between pale white and deep
red. Flashing appeared to occur only during interactions with conspecifics,
strongly suggesting a communication role. These data also revealed a more subtle
wave-like "flickering" of chromatophores that may emulate fluctuations of light
in the water column and provide dynamic countershading or crypsis. Neither type
of behavior has been described in the scientific literature. The generation and
control of the flashing and flickering chromatophore signals is therefore of
great interest. This project will increase our knowledge of chromatophore
signals through in situ video observations and anatomic analyses of Humboldt
squid that include electrophysiology assessments, and immunohistochemical
analyses of mantle tissue. An improved version of an autonomous low-light drift-
camera package ("Driftcam") that can operate at midwater depths to observe
natural behaviors of Humboldt squid that are too small to carry a Crittercam
will be developed during the course of the project. Stanford graduate and
undergraduate students will benefit from direct involvement in all of the
research activities, and the researchers will also participate in wider public
science dissemination efforts through regional K-12 programs, international
educational outreach programs, and collaboration with major public media
outlets.