* 1420704
* EPSCoR Workshop: A 2014 Workshop on Engineered Crops
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Theodore Heindel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 02/28/2017
* USD 99,996.00

Iowa State University (ISU) is organizing a workshop focused on the knowledge,
technology, and education needed to engineer agricultural products that are
robust under changing climate. The ultimate goal is to develop a research and
educational roadmap for engineered crops, of interest to the EPSCoR community
because many jurisdictions are rural and have a strong agricultural heritage.
The workshop is bringing together plant scientists, with expertise in improving
crop performance, and engineers with knowledge of transport phenomena,
thermodynamics, and modeling, to unlock the underlying structural and
physiological properties of superior plant varieties. Engineering- and physics-
based modeling of transport phenomena in plants is still in its infancy, but
approximate models have been made and verified experimentally to describe the
transport of water and sugar in plants. This workshop provides opportunities for
plant scientists and engineers to develop a common language for engineered
crops, share ongoing research, form new partnerships, and design the discipline
of "plant engineering" - a cyber-enabled framework that will support accelerated
crop design with desired optimal performance.

Intellectual Merit

Food security is among the top challenges facing humanity. Environmental
stresses due to climate change are accelerating the need for plant
modifications, either naturally or through genetic engineering. As a step
towards addressing these challenges, ISU's workshop focuses on the emergence of
engineering design methods rooted in plant physiology and transport phenomena,
to develop improved crops with increased yield and/or better tolerance to
abiotic stresses caused by climate change. These technologies have reached a
stage where fundamental questions about optimal crop phenotypes can be answered,
and the answers efficiently translated into crop improvement. The goal of
tailoring crops using engineering know-how coupled with genetic engineering is
novel, promising, and challenging. Workshop products include a written roadmap
summarizing the necessary education, research and development to advance
engineered crops, as well as publications, and a website for displaying
outcomes.

Broader Impacts

There is a constant need to improve the efficiency and yield of global
agricultural crop production in order to increase food supply. This workshop at
ISU will offer opportunities to scientists and engineers from EPSCoR
jurisdictions to develop an interdisciplinary approach towards the design and
study of engineered crops. Activities in the workshop will highlight the
contributions of agricultural businesses and researchers in EPSCoR jurisdictions
to the development of engineered plants, and the education of future researchers
able to work in this field. Workshop recruitment efforts focus on junior faculty
and students from EPSCoR jurisdictions, including from community colleges and
schools in the nearby locale that have high underrepresented minority science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics enrollments.