* 1420532
* How Novice Elementary Teachers' Social Networks Affect Ambitious Math Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ken Frank, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,944,786.00

The study seeks to identify the mechanisms through novice teachers' social
networks shape their mathematics instruction. The researchers will collect
surveys, lesson plans, classroom observations, teacher tasks, and student work
samples from 200 teachers across districts in three states with different
contexts around standards and state assessments. Using social network analyses
frameworks, the study will model the novice teachers' future teaching using
ambitious mathematics instruction as measured by the Instructional Quality
Assessment based on measures of these teachers' mathematical knowledge for
teaching, and use of ambitious mathematics instruction and characteristics of
the novice teachers' social network, as well as their interactions. Qualitative
analyses will be used to support the results from the models. This study is
framed by an interdisciplinary approach that integrates a cognitive component
(focused on teachers' knowledge) and a sociological component (focused on the
social context of teachers) in order to understand novices' planning and
enactment of ambitious math instruction. No large-scale studies have used such
an approach to measure how these factors shape novices' math instruction. The
work will contribute to understanding factors that influence beginning
elementary teachers learning in the early stages of their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance knowledge and
understanding of STEM learning environments by examining how novice elementary
teachers' math instruction is influenced by the knowledge sharing, behavior, and
expectations of others. A key issue in the improvement of mathematics education
is the support beginning elementary teachers of mathematics, particularly as the
number of beginning teachers increases at all grade levels. This project, funded
in the Research on Education and Learning program, will study 200 novice
elementary teachers and their support networks in schools in three Midwestern
states, using innovative research methods in social networking to understand the
relationships among teacher knowledge, teaching practice, and the influence of
their peers and administrators on the novice teachers' future teaching practice.
It is important for districts to organize human capital and professional
development in ways that strongly support these novice elementary teachers in
teaching mathematics for increased student achievement. The results of the study
will provide recommendations for when schools and districts should provide
induction and professional development programs for novice teachers related to
their mathematical knowledge for teaching and how they can help novices respond
to possible conflicts among school-based norms, curricular standards, teacher
evaluation instruments, and external professional development.