* 1420350
* Collaborative Research:Community College Roots of STEM:Interactive Influences of Individual, Secondary School, &amp; College Factors  Predicting the Success of Underrepresented Gro
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Melissa Dancy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2020
* USD 210,000.00

Despite growing demands for a technically and scientifically literate US labor
force, women and members of racial/ethnic minority groups remain
underrepresented in STEM careers. A major gap in the knowledge base around this
phenomenon is an understanding of the different pathways that many
underrepresented students take when making STEM education and career choices.
For example, women and underrepresented minorities are disproportionately likely
to enroll in a community college initially with the intent of transferring to a
four-year institution. The proposed research will address the gap in the current
research base by investigating how pathways through community colleges to four-
year institutions contribute to the roots of gender and racial inequalities in
those who earn STEM degrees. The study will explicitly examine the individual
characteristics and educational experiences of students who started their post-
secondary education in community colleges. Specifically, this multi-phased study
will investigate the structural and individual factors that contribute to women
and underrepresented minorities' lower probability of completing a STEM major,
compared to White men. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative portion of the
project will integrate data on community college students into an existing
dataset (Roots 8-16 dataset). This current dataset links administrative records
on students from the public schools of North Carolina from eighth grade into one
of the sixteen campuses of the UNC university system. This project will add
administrative records on students who transfer from community colleges into the
four-year university system, thus diversifying the sample while strengthening
the conclusions that may be drawn from it. This portion of the project focuses
on the structural opportunities and constraints to math and science learning in
middle and high school and their impact on later educational trajectories.
Researchers will examine the barriers and opportunities to learning to determine
whether there are differential impacts on students from various
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The qualitative portion of the study consists
of a series of interviews with community college students who have indicated a
desire to transfer to a four-year university and an interest in majoring in
STEM. Students will be interviewed the first year of the project and again three
years later to examine their experiences and to further probe the findings from
the quantitative study, including: influences on making the transition to four-
year colleges and how female STEM majors navigate social structural constraints
and opportunities.