* 1420285
* The Role of Neuropeptide Y in Fat Deposition in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Elizabeth Gilbert, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Neuropeptide Y is a neurotransmitter, but also functions as a hormone to affect
other organs such as adipose tissue. It is one of the strongest stimuli of food
intake in birds and mammals, and promotes fat storage in mammals. There is no
information on the role of NPY in fat deposition in birds and mechanisms
governing adipose accumulation in avian species are still unclear. Increased
seasonal food intake and fat accumulation in birds and mammals (e.g., in
preparation for migration and hibernation, respectively) are important for
survival. Thus, a greater understanding of adipose development should provide
novel insight into evolutionary adaptations for seasonal changes in body
composition. Based on preliminary data from lean and fat birds showing
differences in NPY and receptor gene expression in adipose tissue and
differential food intake responses to NPY, it is hypothesized that NPY will
affect fat formation and maintenance in birds and that these processes will be
affected by both exogenous and adipose-derived NPY. A greater understanding of
the physiological processes associated with fat deposition in birds has broad
applications to all classes of vertebrates that undergo periodic acclimation to
food shortage by adjusting appetite and energy storage in fat. The findings may
also contribute to obesity research and potentially reduce healthcare
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has four main goals, using chickens as the
model organism: 1) Characterize the avian adipose-hypothalamic NPY axis by
quantifying the abundance of NPY and its receptors in adipose tissue and
hypothalamus. 2) Understand the function of NPY in regulating development of fat
cells. Approaches include evaluating effects of NPY treatment on pre-adipocyte
proliferation and differentiation in an in-vitro fat culture system. 3)
Determine if adipose-derived NPY plays a role in adipogenesis. NPY mRNA will be
knocked-down in pre-adipocytes and effects on differentiation will be evaluated.
4) Elucidate the signaling pathway(s) responsible for NPY's effects on fat
cells. Fat cells will be treated with NPY receptor sub-type-specific antagonists
to demonstrate the mechanism through which NPY affects fat.