* 1420446
* Reducing Racial and Gender Achievement Gaps in STEM:  Use of Natural Language Processing to Understand Why Affirmation Interventions Improve Performance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Valerie Purdie-Greenaway, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,035,994.00

Addressing issues related to reducing the size of the achievement gaps in STEM
disciplines among subpopulations of students is important to helping the Nation
meet its 21st Century science and technology needs. Research shows that causes
of achievement gaps in STEM arise from reciprocal interactions between societal,
social, and environmental factors that might suppress students' true academic
potential in challenging academic STEM domains. This project focuses on
environmental factors (identified as social identity threats) that devalue,
marginalize, or discriminate against students based on a social identity like
race, gender, disability status, or socioeconomic status; such factors can
eventually lead students to withdraw and disengage in STEM learning and careers.
The objectives of this research are to: (1) synthesize and systematically
analyze data from interventions (affirmation writing essays) shown to help
reduce the impact of social identity threats on student participation in STEM;
and (2) apply results of the synthesis and analyses to enhance existing
interventions (e.g., maximize impact on subpopulations of students whose
achiement in STEM fields is below their potential).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will proceed in two phases. First, the investigators will
create an encrypted online repository of data from more than 2,500 affirmation
writing essays, previously collected through randomized double-blind experiments
involving approximately 1,400 students who vary by race, ethnicity, age, gender,
and social class. The researchers will link this online repository of
information to academic and psychological outcomes for middle school and college
students. Using natural language processing (NLP), topic modeling, and other
methods the investigators will identify sematic content and essay structure
processes that mediate affirmation effects and highlight meaning of the
effectiveness of the essay writing interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
of these analyses will be used to develop and test a more robust intervention
for reducing social identity threats involving African Americans, White, and
female students. One hundred eighty (180) students (90 females and 90 males)
will participate in two separate laboratory studies. One, conducted at Columbia
University, will focus on race as a social factor; the second, conducted at Penn
State University, will focus on gender. The ultimate goal of this work is to
uncover and address psychological factors that might otherwise hinder students'
participation in STEM careers.