* 1420212
* The Benefits of Self-Motion for Visual Perception
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Michele Rucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

How does our visual system transform the light patterns impinging onto the
retina into a meaningful three-dimensional world of objects and movement? Over
the last few decades we have made enormous progress in our understanding of
brain functions. Yet, the fundamental computational and biological principles
underlying visual information processing remain elusive. Like other species, we
humans do not simply sit back and passively accept the sensory data that flows
around us. Instead, we actively seek out useful information by coordinating
sensory processing with motor activity on multiple scales. The hypothesis of
this project is that visual perception in humans is an intrinsically sensory-
motor process, in which the observer's behavior plays a key computational role.

To investigate this hypothesis, the project brings together researchers from the
Netherlands (Dr. Brenner at VU University in Amsterdam), the US (Dr. Rucci at
Boston University), and the UK (Dr. Rushton at Cardiff University), who have
developed critical expertise on the analyses of different types of motor
activities in humans. These researchers and their teams will investigate the
mechanisms by which people use motor/proprioceptive signals to accomplish visual
tasks. Understanding the impact motor activity has on perception is critical to
advancing our knowledge of how the visual system functions. Additionally,
understanding the interplay between our senses and motor processes will help us
to replicate those mechanisms in artificial systems.

In addition to the potential for advancing our understanding of visual
perception, this research also has several broader impacts. Many pathological
conditions that feature abnormal motor activity also present visual impairments.
Understanding the role of behavior in the extraction and processing of visual
information could point towards potential treatments for such visual
impairments. Furthermore, the interdisciplinary nature of this research offers
new opportunities for training students. By collaborating with the PI, students
at Boston University will have an opportunity to combine experimental and
theoretical research.