* 1420096
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): Greenland fjord-glacier coupling from an ice-sheet-wide perspective
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Twila Moon, Moon                    Twila          A
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 06/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

This project represents an important step in understanding Greenland fjord
circulation and ice dynamics on an ice-sheet-wide scale and will provide new
insights into the extent to which near-terminus ocean characteristics can affect
ice dynamics. A recent U.S. Climate Variability and Predictability Greenland Ice
Sheet-Ocean Workshop (June 2013) identified critical needs regarding: 1) finding
representative field sites for targeted research, 2) data to relate local
process studies to behavior across the ice sheet, and 3) broad coverage
observations for use in ice sheet modeling. This award supports a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow who aims to address all three concerns by classifying "families"
of similar glacier-fjord systems and identifying single glaciers or systems that
may best represent each group and by creating pan-Greenland datasets
characterizing individual fjords-glacier systems for use in upscaling and
modeling. Using a novel yet robust statistical approach, this research will be
the first to attempt to understand fjord-glacier interactions from a Greenland-
wide perspective. In addition to the research, the fellow will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in science through course development,
mentoring and a multimedia ocean science project. This interdisciplinary
investigation will be conducted by the fellow, a glaciologist, in collaboration
with sponsoring scientist, David Sutherland, a physical oceanographer at the
University of Oregon. Given the interdisciplinary nature of the research, the
project is being co-funded by the OPP Arctic Natural Sciences program and the
OCE Postdoctoral Fellowship program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With roughly seven
meters of sea level rise stored in the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS), its mass
balance plays a critical role in current sea level rise and is expected to be a
primary contributor in the future. Freshwater input from the GrIS may also have
significant effects on local and global scale ocean circulation. Predicting the
rate of mass loss from the GrIS, however, has proven challenging. Two primary
obstacles exist: 1) limited understanding of the processes controlling ice
dynamics, though it appears that ocean temperature and circulation may be key
elements, and 2) much of the current GrIS research is focused on a few large
fjord-glacier systems, with a relative dearth of information regarding many of
the other 200+ outlet glaciers. This research directly addresses these issues
with a comprehensive study to 1) characterize fjord and glacier systems to gain
insight into the range of ocean circulation and ice dynamics for most marine-
terminating Greenland glaciers, as opposed to a few, and 2) examine the extent
to which the continental shelf-to-terminus environment and associated ocean
circulation influence ice dynamics