* 1420349
* AF: Small: Linear and Polynomial Threshold Functions: Structural Analysis and Algorithmic Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Consider the commonly occurring situation in which a group of participants each
casts a yes-or-no vote and a binary decision is made based on which outcome
received the majority of the votes.  This simple scenario arises in countless
different settings, from elections involving millions of people to small groups
of friends deciding where to go for dinner. A generalization of a simple
majority vote is a *weighted* majority voting scheme, in which different
participants are allocated different numbers of votes. These weighted voting
schemes have many interesting mathematical properties and are present across a
wide range of areas, from corporate elections in which larger shareholders have
more votes to cast to well-studied models of human neurons (which hold that
neurons fire essentially according to a weighted vote of their input signals).
 Even more generally, one may consider "higher-order" weighted voting schemes,
in which each individual voter may belong to multiple "coalitions", each of
which has a weighted vote to cast.

In this project, the PI will study weighted majority voting schemes (known as
"linear threshold functions" or LTFs) and higher-order generalizations of these
schemes (known as "polynomial threshold functions" or PTFs) from a mathematical
and computational perspective.  The goal of this study is both to obtain a
better understanding of these functions, and to develop improved algorithms for
working with these functions in a range of contexts.  Specific problems that the
PI will address include: (1) Coming up with new ways to decompose "complex" PTFs
into "simpler" PTFs, and to approximate complex PTFs using simpler PTFs.  (2)
Developing efficient algorithms that can learn unknown PTFs and LTFs from noisy
data, and can construct a desired LTF or PTF to meet a set of "design
specifications" such as how much influence different individual voters should
have over the final outcome.

In terms of broader impacts, an improved understanding of LTFs and PTFs, and
more efficient algorithms for working with these fundamental functions, may
yield benefits in a range of areas (such as theoretical neuroscience, computer
science, voting theory, and more) that use such functions. Other important
focuses of the project are to train graduate students through research
collaboration, disseminate research results through seminar talks, survey
articles and other publications, and to continue ongoing outreach activities
aimed at increasing interest in theoretical computer science topics in a broader
population, including presentations at elementary schools.