* 1420405
* Doctorate Dissertation Research: Market Integration and Diet Transition: Nutrition, Food Security, and Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* kimber mckay, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 23,310.00

The human diet has shifted worldwide. It now includes more processed foods that
are lower in nutrients than their traditional, locally grown counterparts. We
know that this shift has contributed to an array of negative health consequences
including the emergence and rise of chronic diseases. But despite the fact that
approximately 75 percent of the United States' healthcare budget is spent trying
to combat chronic diseases and their associated health risks, these diseases
remain the leading causes of death and disability in this country. Developing
countries are now fighting chronic disease, as well, sometimes spending United
States foreign aid funds to do so. It turns out that knowing the dietary causes
of chronic disease is not enough to counter the trend. Dietary practices appear
to be embedded in a socio-cultural complex that quickly establishes deep roots.
Understanding how this complex develops and how it is perpetuated may be the key
to finding a solution. This requires looking more closely at cultural practices
and understandings at the local level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
project, anthropologist Michelle Grocke, a University of Montana doctoral
student supervised by Dr. Kimber McKay, will travel to the other side of the
world to take advantage of a unique opportunity to study this dietary shift as
it is in the process of occurring. The research will be conducted in Humla
District, a remote, resource poor area nestled on the border of China in the
High Himalaya of Nepal's far northwest corner. For centuries, Humlis have had
very limited access to the outside world. They have subsisted solely on their
own agricultural yields of nutrient rich crops along with salt and whole grains
obtained through trade. All of this is changing. The first road ever to be built
into mountainous Humla District is nearly complete. Already, the road has
increased villager access to a Chinese market where processed foods are
plentiful and cheap. Humlis have begun to change their diet and food preferences
even though the changes diminish diet quality and predictability. To investigate
the multiple causes and wide-ranging consequences of these developments, Grocke
will carry out a year long, case-control study in two villages that differ in
their access to the new market. Her mixed-methods data collection will include
focus groups and surveys; information on food frequency and food security; and
anthropomorphic measures to compare with information collected by other
researchers before the road was built. Cumulatively, these data will allow
Grocke to assess the nutritional, food security, subsistence, cultural, and
psychological changes that are taking place. The result will be in-depth
understanding of the dietary sea change that is leaving its mark on the quality
of life across the globe.