* 1420541
* Princeton Center for Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Ali Yazdani, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 19,975,000.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research in the
MRSEC at Princeton is focused on three directions in materials research. The
first exploits recent advances in physics and chemistry to uncover novel
"topological" quantum properties of electrons in semiconductors. The research is
promising for enabling future electronics with ultralow heat dissipation, and
enabling novel approaches to quantum computing. In the second direction, the
researchers combine two new technologies that enable the growth of very thin
polymer films with specialized physical properties critical for applications in
many industries. The third direction seeks to control and manipulate the spin of
a single electron trapped in an ultrathin nanowire. Advances will lead to logic
elements for quantum computing as well as a new class of broadly tunable lasers.
The researchers participate in a broad array of education projects. Each summer,
20 undergraduates, selected from over 400 applicants nationwide, engage in
supervised research in preparation for graduate school in science and
engineering. In addition, the researchers host 18 high-school and 30 middle-
school students from Central High, Trenton, for a rigorous 3-week science-camp
(PUMA). The PUMA alumni have achieved a high-school graduation rate of 100%,
with most going on to college. In addition, the researchers hold 8 one-day
Science fairs each year (some co-organized with the town library) which attract
from 300 to 800 K-12 students and their parents to campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;In the first of 3
projects, researchers seek to expand the search for novel topological quantum
properties of electrons in insulators, semiconductors and semimetals. Currently,
the long-established Bloch theory of crystalline solids is undergoing revision
because of topological principles neglected in Bloch theory. Semiconductors in
which the energy gap is "inverted" (relative to the atomic limit) exhibit
surface states occupied by massless Dirac fermions. Using scanning tunneling
microscopy, transport and photoemission experiments, researchers will test key
predictions of the new perspective, and search for new topological phases and
excitations (e.g. Majorana fermions). In the second project, researchers will
apply a laser-ablation technique called MAPLE to grow and investigate ultrathin
polymer films deposited under novel conditions that dramatically raise the
glass-transition temperature. Combining expertise in fluorescence, nanoscale
imaging and simulation, they will address the technologically important issue of
why the thermodynamic properties (e.g. the glass transition) of confined
polymers differ dramatically from those in bulk polymers. Researchers in the
third project will address a challenging problem in the quest for quantum
computing, namely how to couple well-separated qubits without losing quantum
information. Applying recent advances, they will coherently couple spin qubits
using microwave photons trapped in a high-Q superconducting resonator. A
serendipitous benefit is the discovery of lasing action. In a parallel effort,
experiments to achieve very long spin coherence lifetimes in isotopically pure
silicon are proposed.