* 1420724
* Expanding Repertoires of Practice: Improving Informal Science Learning Experiences for Dual Language Learners
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Jen Cassidy, Franklin County Historical Society
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 03/31/2018
* USD 291,051.00

As science centers and children's museums re-define their roles in a society
that is increasingly linguistically diverse, many seek to engage more
effectively with dual language learners. Dual language learners are young
children who are still in the process of acquiring basic language skills in
their first language while at the same time acquiring a second language. At
present, museum professionals face the challenge of developing programs and
practices in the absence of research on informal science education for this
population. The Center of Science and Industry (COSI) and The Ohio State
University (OSU) will collaborate to begin a systematic study of informal
science education programs and practices for reaching and serving preschool dual
language learners. The improvement of dual language learners' informal science
learning experiences is an increasingly important part of efforts to achieve
equity and diversity in participation in science. Such efforts are particularly
important as this population grows in number and as the significance of early
science learning experiences for later achievement becomes better understood.

This project will begin to address the lack of research through three
interconnected activities: (1) a national needs assessment of children's museums
and science museums, (2) an in-person convening and quarterly virtual meet-ups
with teams from eight partner museums, and (3) an exploratory study of COSI's
programs and practices to support the access, participation, and learning of
preschool dual language learners and their parents/caregivers. The project will
yield important insights into current practices and priorities with respect to
effective museum engagement with dual language learners, their families, and the
early childhood professionals who serve them. The project will (1) produce a
comprehensive report on the current state of the field related to providing
informal science experiences for preschool dual language learners; (2) identify
gaps in existing research and practice, as well as promising foci for future
study and improvement and expansion of museum practice; and (3) create a full-
scale Research in Service to Practice proposal and a national network of museums
to implement the proposal.

The overarching goal of the project is to advance the knowledge and awareness of
needs and practices related to informal science programming for preschool
children who are learning English as an additional language. The national needs
assessment will be conducted by means of an online questionnaire sent to museums
identified via public association lists, and questions will focus on
institutional practices in relation to school readiness and the needs of
preschool dual language learners and perceived gaps in services. In the
convening and virtual meet-ups, the project team, local community partners,
project advisers, museum association leaders, and museum partners selected for
their innovative work with linguistically diverse populations will discuss
partners' programs, practices and frameworks; emergent project findings; and
directions for further study. The exploratory study of COSI programs and
practices will entail participant observation, document analysis, and interviews
and focus group conversations with stakeholders, including parents, early
childhood educators, COSI team members, community organization leaders.

The project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. Its
funding includes broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants. An AISL Pathways grant, such as this one, allows practitioners and
researchers to undertake exploratory development work that has the potential to
produce evidence, findings, and/or deliverables that will form the basis of
anticipated further innovative, or potentially transformative, research and
development work.