* 1420736
* Soft Materials Research Center
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 09/30/2021
* USD 12,000,000.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The research of the Soft Materials
Research Center, SMRC is organized into two Interdisciplinary Research Groups:
Liquid Crystal Frontiers (LCF), and Click Nucleic Acids (CNA). LCF research is
directed toward the creation, understanding, development, and application of
novel soft materials, with liquid crystal ordering as an underlying theme. This
IRG expands the horizons and application of LC science in exciting new ways,
evolving materials that are active, functional, and responsive. These
attributes, long appreciated in LCs, including LC display electro-optics, will
be sought in new structural manifestations and applications of soft materials.
The CNA IRG proposes an exciting new area that uses broadly accessible thiol-ene
click chemistries, a family of chemistries know for their robust, clean
reactions, to link nucleic acids thus developing synthetic analogs of DNA called
CNAs. An advantage of CNAs is that they have a greater range of chemical
properties than those exhibited by natural nucleic acids. The SMRC operates and
continues to develop nationally recognized education outreach activities
directed toward the enhancement of science literacy and achievement. These
include Materials Science from CU, K-12 traveling science classes that have
reached ~80,000 CO students; Pathways Programs which facilitate the passage of
under-represented minority students from high school to undergraduate success,
and partnerships with under-represented minority-serving undergraduate
institutions transitioning undergraduate students toward STEM graduate careers.
The Center has nucleated a vibrant Boulder/Denver industrial activity of LC-
related start-up and spin-off companies, many employing Center graduates, with
achievements that include commercialization of LC-On-Si (LCOS)
microdisplays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The
Liquid Crystal Frontiers (LCF), and Click Nucleic Acids (CNA) IRGs meld
materials design, synthesis, modeling, and physical study into a seamless web
that drives and facilitates the evolution of new materials. Of particular
interest in LCF research are new LC structural themes that exploit the interplay
of chirality and polarity, such as the heliconical nematic and helical
nanofilament phases; novel LC phases of colloidal plates and rods including
ferromagnetic nematics; LC interaction with topologically complex colloids;
nanoporous LC polymers for electrolytes and organic photovoltaics; active
interfacial LCs for biodetection; chromonic LC mixtures; and hierarchical self-
assembly of nanoDNA. IRG2, the CNA IRG, will pursue the opportunities presented
by CNA with a synthetic approach that focuses on the development of highly
scalable synthetic processes for CNAs, on expansion of the base alphabets, and
on control of the backbone and side chains to tailor molecular compatibility.
The CNA self-assembly thrust will emphasize taking advantage of the enhanced
programmability and design flexibility afforded by CNAs, in applications
including nanotemplating and nanopatterning, nanoparticle organization, block
copolymers, and hydrogels. The SMRC operates and continues to develop nationally
recognized education outreach activities directed toward the enhancement of
science literacy and achievement. The Center has nucleated a vibrant
Boulder/Denver industrial activity of LC-related start-up and spin-off
companies, many employing Center graduates, with achievements that include
commercialization of LC-On-Si (LCOS) microdisplays.&lt;br/&gt;