* 1420311
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organizational Culture and the Deployment of Evidence-Based Practices
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Jill Viglione, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 03/31/2017
* USD 19,975.00

Although organizational reform is often communicated from the top-down,
responsibility for EBP implementation generally falls heavily on street-level
workers, like probation officers (POs) as they implement policy and practice
changes by incorporating them into workplace routines and decisions. Many
justice organizations, including state probation agencies, now encourage
managers and staff to adopt evidence-based practices (EBPs)--practices shown
through scientific evidence to improve individual and system level outcomes. For
example, some practices can reduce recidivism. In probation, EBPs focus on
rehabilative practices such as validated assessments, motivational interviewing,
and cognitive-behavioral therapies. EBP implementation requires justice
organizations to adopt new protocols and change daily work practices. The
potential for EBPs to improve probation practice and better serve communities
depends upon how street-level workers handle EBPs. Street-level workers are
front-line policy interpreters with primary responsibility for policy
implementation. Following this framework, other scholars have noted the
prevalence of discretionary decision making within street-level work that
affects new policy interpretation and implementation. This study examines: 1)
how POs understand, define and adapt EBPs to their existing organizational
routines; 2) the conditions under which POs make adaptations to EBPs during
implementation, and 3) the role organizational culture and institutional history
play in shaping adaptation decisions, which influences PO practices and
outcomes. This project will provide data and analysis to further our
understanding of complex decision making processes surrounding the use of new
practices and how historical and cultural influences shape street-level
decisions.

This study will also contribute to providing insight for agencies about how to
move away from relying on ineffective or inadequate treatment and services for
offender populations and towards use of best available practices to improve
supervision strategies that will, in turn, improve offender outcomes and public
safety. Given the widespread interest in EBPs, the project will contribute to
better policymaking concerning probation.