* 1420268
* AF: Small: The Lowerbounds in the Complexity of Parallelization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Anup Rao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 158,429.00

The PI investigates a family of techniques applicable to understanding streaming
algorithms and static data structures. A common theme is the use of methods from
information theory to measure how the information flows in the systems of
interest. The main goal is to understand how the complexity of parallelizing
these systems.

For example, if a static data structure is required to support many users
accessing data in parallel, can the data structure be made more efficient in
terms of the number of probes per user? How can one measure the parallel
complexity? How do the memory requirements for a streaming algorithm change when
the algorithm must process many streams in parallel? In all of these questions,
an obvious solution is to process each stream or user independently. In this
project the PI seeks to understand whether this is optimal in general.

The PI has already had significant success in tackling these kinds of questions
in the context of communication complexity. The goal of this project is to port
methods that work for communication complexity to the domains of streaming
algorithms and data structures. This project supports the training of two
graduate students in these topics. The PI is also involved in two major
workshops on relevant subjects, one at BIRS and one at the Simons institute, as
a part of this one-year award.