* 1420575
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards universal signal recovery algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Shirin Jalali, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Ill-posed and underdetermined systems of linear equations arise in many
applications ranging from healthcare to signal processing. Extensive research in
the last decade has proven that ?structured? signals can be recovered
?accurately?, even if the number of observations is less than the signals?
dimensions. Despite the existence of many complex structures in real-world
signals, the scope of structured signal recovery has mainly remained limited to
basic structures, such as sparsity and low-rankness. Extending the notion of
structure and proposing efficient recovery schemes for such structured signals
is one of the major open challenges in signal processing and information theory.
Any progress in this direction can potentially impact many application areas
such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves developing a novel and transformative approach to structured signal
recovery by addressing the following questions: (i) Do there exist practical and
efficient signal recovery algorithms that can recover signals from their
undersampled sets of linear measurements with little or no prior information
about their structures? Such algorithms are referred to as universal algorithms
in information theory. (ii) What are the fundamental performance limits of such
universal algorithms? Universal schemes have been developed and are popular in
other applications. For instance, universal compression algorithms such as the
omnipresent Lempel-Ziv code achieve the optimal performance without requiring
any knowledge about the distribution of the data. Recent results, by the PIs and
others, theoretically prove the existence of universal signal recovery
algorithms. This research investigates the existence and fundamental performance
limits of computationally efficient universal recovery algorithms.