* 1420864
* SHF: Small: Automatic High-Level Synthesis of Approximate Computing Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ruth Bahar, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 457,991.00

Reducing the power consumption of computing devices is a highly desirable goal
for modern digital circuits. This project seeks new methods to lower power
consumption of digital circuits by exploiting the inherent error resiliency of
emerging application domains such as signal and image processing, computer
vision, and machine learning. By giving up some arithmetic accuracy, it is
possible to design approximate circuits with dramatically lower power
consumption and smaller silicon footprint. Low-power and reliable operation of
computing systems is key for the continued push for smaller, faster and
increased functionality for these systems. Other than the obvious technical
impact to industry, broader impacts of this project would include new and
existing course development and development of a technical workforce, as it will
involve a number of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates new methods for the
synthesis of approximate circuits that will be generated directly from their
high-level behavioral descriptions. Working directly from high-level behavioral
descriptions gives larger leverage for approximate circuit generation and easier
incorporation within standard design flows. The novel synthesis approach is
inspired by program analysis techniques used in software engineering. The PIs
propose: (1) techniques for intelligent analysis of hardware designs to produce
approximate circuits where designers can trade-off power and accuracy in a
controlled fashion; (2) techniques that enable fast and efficient design space
exploration of approximate computing designs; and (3) support circuitry that
leads to low-area overhead for either low-power or error-resilient deployments.
This project will result in a software tool that will fit within standard
integrated circuit design flows, and will take as input a system accurately
described in a behavioral hardware description language and will produce as an
output approximate computing circuits along with their support circuitry. The
tool will enable designers to make appropriate tradeoff decisions between
arithmetic accuracy, power consumption, error resiliency and hardware overhead.