* 1420423
* Collaborative Research:  Iron and Manganese Depositing Cold-Seeps: Mineral Formation Along A Freshwater To Marine Ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Craig Moyer, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2016
* USD 72,359.00

This collaborative project examines the geochemistry and geomicrobiology of low-
temperature iron-(Fe) and manganese-(Mn) rich carbonate ecosystems in Soda Bay,
Alaska. These sites comprise numerous cold seeps and springs with bubbling
waters containing carbon dioxide (CO2) that have proven to be very unusual in
that they are also actively depositing Fe and Mn minerals, which in turn are
harboring extensive microbial mat communities. The springs and seeps found
within this unique watershed form along a salinity gradient with upstream being
more freshwater while downstream has a tidally-driven marine influence. These
habitats are sites where extensive microbial-mineral mounds (i.e., tufa
deposits) form. Tufas as high as three meters are located along the length of
both sides of Soda Bay Creek which drains into Soda Bay Estuary. The high flow
systems are predominantly iron oxide deposition environments while the systems
exhibiting low flow deposit manganese oxides. This project will investigate this
unique watershed in an effort to describe the biogeochemistry and
geomicrobiology of Fe- and Mn-mineral formation along the physicochemical
gradients from the upper creek to Soda Bay. Researchers hypothesize that the
mounds are autotrophic ecosystems hosting microorganisms able to grow and fix
CO2 from the energy captured from metal oxidation reactions. They propose to
examine the microbial ecology of these ecosystems with two primary questions in
mind. First, what are the metabolic processes these microbes use to capture
energy and thereby feed themselves? Second, how might these microbial
communities (fueled by mineral and CO2-rich fluids) change in response to the
physicochemical gradients? Answers to these questions will allow them to address
future important questions relating to whether these environments preserve
traces of microbial fossils or biosignatures that can show a historical presence
and thereby provide a glimpse into the past. This is a new and potentially
transformative investigation as there is virtually no information regarding the
impact of low-temperature Fe- and Mn-rich groundwater on freshwater or marine
ecosystems, whether such systems contribute to carbon fixation and the carbon
cycle, or the energetic or metabolic basis of the microbes supporting these
ecosystems.

This project will partner with the Hydaburg School District. One of the
researchers has built a longterm geoscience education and research program with
the Hydaburg School District and Hydaburg Cooperative Association (tribal
government) since 2008. The program involves 5th-12th grade science classes and
teacher training with an emphasis on the interdisciplinary nature of the
geosciences. Interested students have the opportunity to participate in field
sampling and will interact with scientists during trips to Soda Bay. This
project is closely coupled with local tribal groups that have a long history
with this site. Researchers will, in turn, routinely share their scientific
discoveries with the tribal organization.

The project is well suited for EAGER support as it is exploratory in nature and
potentially high impact. It will bring together multifaceted-technologies (e.g.,
aerial site survey, molecular biology, microscopy and geochemistry) in an effort
to achieve a multi-scale understanding of this novel ecosystem potentially
driven by metals as energy sources and where unique biogeochemical signatures
will be preserved. Interpretation of such signatures in the geological record
may provide new insights into important geological questions such as life in the
ancient past, the role of microbes in the formation of metal ore deposits and
even the evolution of life on Earth as the planet evolved from an anoxic to an
oxic world. Ultimately, investigators hope to better predict how life now adapts
to and mineralization occurs from interactions among these types of multi-
dimensional strong gradient-driven environmental forcing functions.