* 1420702
* Developing FTIR microscopy for lithic residue analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gilliane Monnier, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 124,410.00

Archaeology provides one of the best means of studying the ability of human
societies to respond to climatic and environmental change. Throughout the course
of human evolution, stone tools have been the primary medium by which humans
have interacted with the environment through the modification of natural
resources for food, shelter, clothing, and other material needs. Therefore,
stone tools in archaeological sites represent one of the most important data
sets for reconstructing prehistoric human adaptations. Yet one of
archaeologists' greatest challenges remains the rigorous interpretation of stone
tool functions. Currently, one of the ways this is done is through the
identification of microscopic remains of materials worked by stone tools (e.g.,
plant and animal tissue), which are sometimes preserved on tool surfaces.
Existing methods of microscopic residue analysis, however, are either
destructive or produce ambiguous results. Newer, non-destructive, replicable
methods based upon analytical chemistry are available, but need to be developed.
This project will develop Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) microscopy as a new
method of residue analysis. It will have three major impacts. First, application
of this method will provide a more direct means of inferring past human
activities than the current ambiguous approaches. Second, the development of
FTIR microscopy for residue analysis will provide a non-destructive means of
identifying not only residues, but the composition of most archaeological
materials, such as paints, pigments, textiles, food residues, ceramics, and the
like. This has crucial implications for the conservation of the non-renewable
archaeological record of the United States, the cultural patrimony of the United
States. It also has important implications for heritage studies at home and
abroad, as indigenous groups are increasingly wary about the destruction of
cultural artifacts. The development of non-destructive, non-invasive methods
such as this one will be a boon to researchers working with ethnographic and
prehistoric materials of all kinds. Third, this project will train graduate and
undergraduate students (many of whom are women, including ethnic minorities) in
cutting-edge scientific methods, providing skills applicable to a wide range of
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to create a library of
experimental reference samples of FTIR reflectance spectra that will be
standards against which archaeological spectra can be compared. The standards
will include some of the most common residues on stone tools, such as animal
muscle, fat, skin, bone, and hair; bird feathers; fish scales; plant fibers,
wood, resin, ochre, and manganese. These residues will be generated
experimentally on a variety of stone surfaces, from which reflectance spectra
will then be obtained using FTIR microscopy. In addition, experimental pieces
will be placed in a simulated burial environment for one year, to generate
standards on residues altered by burial. In addition to publishing the results
in peer-reviewed journals, all of the standards will be made available to the
research community, in perpetuity, on open-source websites.