* 1420273
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): Determinants of parasite populations in an estuarine system
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* NONE NONE, Buck                    Julia          C
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Parasites are now recognized as integral members of ecological communities, yet
thorough investigation of the relative influences of the complex factors
controlling their populations has not been undertaken. In this two year
postdoctoral research fellowship, the fellow will pursue empirical and
theoretical investigations into the relative influences of bottom-up and top-
down regulation and recruitment limitation on parasite populations in an
estuarine system. The research will take place at the University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB) under the direction of the lead sponsoring scientist Kevin
Lafferty. The fellow will also work with a second sponsoring scientist, Jan
Medlock at Oregon State University. The fellow will broaden participation of
under-represented groups in ocean sciences by designing a teachable unit on
host-parasite interactions and presenting this activity to groups of K-12
students.

In this research effort, the fellow will investigate the relative influences of
host density and eutrophication (bottom-up influences), concomitant predation,
predation on free-swimming parasite stages, and intraguild predation (top-down
influences), and recruitment limitation in a guild of trematode parasites with
complex life cycles. Results of experimental and survey work will be
supplemented with data from ongoing and completed projects in the UCSB
Ecological Parasitology Laboratory to parameterize mathematical models
describing the system. Under the direction of the second sponsoring scientist,
modified 'macroparasite' equations will be used to model the dynamics of
parasite populations, and test the relative influences of bottom-up effects,
top-down influences, and recruitment limitation. Research findings will
contribute to the growing body of knowledge on the relative influence of bottom-
up vs. top-down effects on population dynamics and the role of recruitment in
limiting populations.