* 1420252
* Measuring next generation science instruction using tablet-based teacher portfolios
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Stecher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,577,630.00

The investigators will build and study an electronic, tablet-based teaching
portfolio system that can be used to assess middle school science instruction
and teachers. The tablet system will contain examples of instructional
materials, student work, quizzes, and audio and video taken from classrooms.
Teachers will be able to annotate the materials that they include in their
electronic teaching portfolios. An electronic portfolio enables a comprehensive
set of measures and evidence of teacher effectiveness, including the use of
multi-media, something non-electronic portfolios cannot do. The tablet system is
expected to become a more effective system for the assessment of teaching when
compared to non-electronic forms of portfolios and labor intensive classroom
observations. In addition, the electronic portfolio will have the added benefit
of promoting teacher professional learning. These outcomes mean more efficient,
ongoing, and better documented teaching assessment. The system will be
consistent with the priorities established in the Next Generation Science
Standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will partner with the Los
Angeles Unified School District in piloting the tablet with 40 volunteer
teachers. Data on student outcomes, teacher knowledge, and teaching practice
will be used to cross validate the tablet measures. Quantitative measures will
be enhanced by a set of interviews with teachers. In addition to publications,
the investigators will make all of the materials, including source code and
measures, available as open source on the web.