* 1420634
* MRSEC: Columbia Center for Precision Assembly of Superstratic and Superatomic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,08/31/2021
* James Hone, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 15,791,022.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials are typically
created using the most basic building blocks of matter - atoms of the different
elements in the periodic table. The Center for Precision Assembly of
Superstratic and Superatomic Solids -- led by Columbia University in partnership
with City College of New York, Harvard University, Barnard College, and the
University of the Virgin Islands -- seeks to create novel materials from two new
types of building blocks: atomically thin sheets stacked into layered
structures; and precisely defined clusters of atoms linked together into bulk
solids. The Center research will provide better understanding of low-dimensional
materials and their interactions. This understanding will aid in the design and
discovery of new materials with better applications in electronic/magnetic
devices, optoelectronic systems, and thermoelectrics. The Center provides
interdisciplinary graduate research training and opportunities for undergraduate
research; includes research partners in industry, national laboratories, and
internationally; and will build new shared instrumentation facilities available
to the research community. The Center includes a comprehensive program to
improve and support science education through partnerships with three local K-12
schools, and a new pilot program at the Columbia School of Journalism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This Center seeks to
utilize atomically precise building blocks to create new materials and
structures. The first research thrust will utilize two-dimensional sheets such
as conducting graphene, insulating boron nitride, semiconducting transition
metal dichalcogenides, and a large family of other materials with a wide variety
of properties. New techniques developed by the research team will be used to
combine these materials into layered heterostructures with unprecedented size,
perfection, and complexity. These will be used to understand properties in a
protected, ultralow-disorder environment, and to achieve emergent electronic
phenomena at interfaces. The second research thrust will assemble atomically
defined clusters into new classes of functional materials with new forms of
inter-cluster chemical bonding. This approach will enable independent tuning of
cluster properties and interaction to achieve designer materials with
unprecedented levels of complexity and functionality. Three areas of focus are:
independent control over magnetism and conductivity; independent control over
thermal and electrical transport properties for thermoelectrics; and superatom
assemblies that can have electronic phase transitions that may be induced by
optical, mechanical, thermal, and other stimuli. The Center provides
interdisciplinary graduate research training and opportunities for undergraduate
research; includes research partners in industry, national laboratories, and
internationally; and will build new shared instrumentation facilities available
to the research community. The Center includes a comprehensive program to
improve and support science education through partnerships with three local K-12
schools, and a new pilot program at the Columbia School of Journalism.