* 1420681
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: A Holistic Design Methodology for Fault-Tolerant and Robust Network-on-Chips (NoCs) Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Ahmed Louri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Technology scaling down to the nanometer regime has aided the growth in
transistors that have made multi-core architectures a power-efficient approach
to harnessing parallelism and improving performance. Consequently, the design of
low latency, high bandwidth, power-efficient and reliable Network-on-Chips
(NoCs) is proving to be one of the most critical challenges to achieving the
performance potential of future chips. While multicores are facilitating an
enormous integration capacity, aggressive transistor scaling has also led to a
steady degradation of the device and circuit reliability. Increased device wear-
out (due to negative-bias temperature instability (NBTI), electro migration (EM)
and hot carrier injection (HCI)) has exacerbated the waning reliability of
transistors, thereby resulting in a significant increase in faults (both
permanent and transient), and hardware failures. As faults manifest within the
NoC substrate, multicore chips are faced with excessive delays and increased
power consumption while recovering from the fault. While NoC reliability
research has made significant strides at inter- and intra-router levels, there
is still a lack of a holistic design approach covering the reliability of the
entire NoC architecture, from device wear-out, to links and routers, to routing
protocols, to applications in a cohesive manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a holistic design methodology that addresses the
reliability of the entire NoC communication infrastructure (device, links,
routers, routing algorithms, and topology) while minimizing energy footprint,
reducing the area overhead and only marginally impacting performance. To achieve
our goal of improving link fault-recovery, this project will develop techniques
to maximize the utilization of the inter-router links with minimum power and
area overhead. For the router, this project will propose intra-router
reliability techniques with the goals of maximizing hardware utilization,
reducing redundancy and area overhead, and minimizing router pipeline latency.
Further, wear-leveling techniques developed by this project will improve the
reliability of NoCs and the lifetime of the chip. Finally, the proposed
techniques will be evaluated by developing fault models that are injected into
the NoC and evaluate the fault coverage, performance degradation and energy
efficiency through extensive modeling and simulation. The holistic design
methodology spanning the entire NoC architecture and the reliability techniques
developed from this project will positively impact the next generation multi-
core and System-on-Chip (SoC) architectures with improvements in energy
efficiency, performance and robustness to hard faults and soft errors. This
project will play a major role in education by integrating discovery with
teaching and training, and by attracting and training minority students in this
field.