* 1420978
* Using the Tools of Conservation Paleobiology to Assess the Impact of the Engineered Spring-Flood of the Colorado River
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Gregory Dietl, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 02/29/2016
* USD 16,185.00

Using the Tools of Conservation Paleobiology to Assess the Impact of the
Engineered Spring-Flood of the Colorado River By Gregory P. Dietl,
Paleontological Research Institute, EAR-1420978

ABSTRACT The over allocation of the Colorado River's water has led to the
ecological devastation of its delta and lowermost channel. The Colorado River
annually delivered over fifteen million acre-feet (~1.85x1010 m3) of water to
its delta but in recent years that number has been zero. In 2012, via a bi-
national agreement known as Minute 319, environmental pulse flows equal to
approximately 1% of the natural annual river discharge were negotiated by the
United States and Mexico to be released over a five-year trial period. While
this engineered environmental flow has the potential to be a restoration success
story, there is a crucial gap in our knowledge: no studies on the ecology of the
molluscan community in the lowermost channel of the river are available to
provide a benchmark for evaluating the success of this restoration effort. The
first pulse will be released in the early spring of 2014, providing a small
window in which to establish a baseline for current conditions. This proposal
thus seeks support to use a relatively simple community-based approach -
comparison of molluscan living and time-averaged death assemblages - developed
by conservation paleobiologists to establish a baseline. The samples collected
will provide a unique perspective on the composition of the pre-pulse-flow
community that is not available from any other source, which will allow the
asking of future questions about the success of the pulse flows.