* 1420967
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): Evolutionary ecology of the "living solar panel" - how photosymbioses influence diversification of a marine bivalve lineage
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* NONE NONE, Li                      Jingchun
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

In this two year postdoctoral research fellowship, the fellow will investigate
how photosymbiotic associations shape marine biodiversification using the
bivalve subfamily Fraginae as a study system. Research results will contribute
to our fundamental knowledge of biodiversity, macroevolution and marine ecology.
The project will be conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Colleen Cavanaugh at
Harvard University. The project includes multi-level outreach activities that
are specifically designed to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
ocean sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosymbiotic associations between
invertebrate hosts and photosynthetic dinoflagellates are crucial to the trophic
and structural integrity of coral reef ecosystems. Although extensive efforts
have been devoted to study the short-term ecological interactions between animal
hosts and their symbionts, the effects of photosymbiosis on long-term
evolutionary dynamics of marine metazoans are less well understood. This is
partially because most marine photosymbiotic associations are ancient (e.g.,
arising more than 200 MYA for corals). The hosts' present diversities and
genomes are highly modified by long, complex evolutionary histories; this makes
it difficult to trace specific changes due to photosymbioses. The bivalve
subfamily Fraginae is an apt system to address this topic because it contains an
exclusive photosymbiotic lineage that diverged recently (7 MYA) from its non-
symbiotic sister groups. Species in this group exhibit remarkable ecological and
morphological adaptations to the photosymbiotic lifestyle. They occupy nutrient-
deficient habitats where non-symbiotic species do not occur. Some species
possess greatly flattened, solar-panel-like shells to enhance sunlight exposure
to the symbionts, or bear microstructural shell features which function as light
condensing lenses. To advance understanding of these photosymbiotic
associations, the fellow will investigate evolutionary impacts of photosymbioses
on Fraginae at two distinct levels. At a macroevolutionary level, patterns of
lineage diversification and shell morphological evolution will be compared
between the photosymbiotic and non-photosymbiotic lineages using phylogenetic
comparative analyses. At a genomic level, comparative transcriptome analyses
will be performed on twelve Fraginae species collected from the Indo-west
Pacific and Atlantic oceans. Candidate genes involved in the establishment of
photosymbioses will be identified and their functions in the hosts'
physiological pathways and shell formations will be explored.