* 1420255
* CHS: Small: Detecting Misinformation Flows in Social Media Spaces During Crisis Events
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Robert Mason, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2017
* USD 515,046.00

This research seeks both to understand the patterns and mechanisms of the
diffusion of misinformation on social media and to develop algorithms to
automatically detect misinformation as events unfold. During natural disasters
and other hazard events, individuals increasingly utilize social media to
disseminate, search for and curate event-related information. Eyewitness
accounts of event impacts can now be shared by those on the scene in a matter of
seconds. There is great potential for this information to be used by affected
communities and emergency responders to enhance situational awareness and
improve decision-making, facilitating response activities and potentially saving
lives. Yet several challenges remain; one is the generation and propagation of
misinformation. Indeed, during recent disaster events, including Hurricane Sandy
and the Boston Marathon bombings, the spread of misinformation via social media
was noted as a significant problem; evidence suggests it spread both within and
across social media sites as well as into the broader information space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking a novel and transformative approach, this project
aims to utilize the collective intelligence of the crowd - the crowdwork of some
social media users who challenge and correct questionable information - to
distinguish misinformation and aid in its detection. It will both characterize
the dynamics of misinformation flow online during crisis events, and develop a
machine learning strategy for automatically identifying misinformation by
leveraging the collective intelligence of the crowd. The project focuses on
identifying distinctive behavioral patterns of social media users in both
spreading and challenging or correcting misinformation. It incorporates
qualitative and quantitative methods, including manual and machine-based content
analysis, to look comprehensively at the spread of misinformation. The primary
research site is Twitter, because it is public, it facilitates rapid information
dissemination, and it has gained exposure as a highly used medium during
disaster events. This investigation expands beyond Twitter to study information
flows across other social media and the surrounding Internet by tracing URL
links to their original sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research offers
empirical, theoretical and applied contributions to the field of human-computer
interaction in the areas of social computing, crisis informatics, and
crowdsourcing. Empirically, it enhances our understanding of the flow of
misinformation in online spaces. It builds on previous studies to include a more
nuanced view of misinformation by examining several types of behavioral actions,
including correction, speculation and challenges to misinformation. Moreover,
the project maps information contagion within a particular social media network
and across different platforms (using URL analysis) to identify patterns of
information diffusion, or signatures, that can be used to detect and classify
different types of misinformation. Theoretically, it contributes to a growing
understanding of crowdwork, crowdsourcing, and collective intelligence within
online social networks, specifically looking to understand and describe how the
connected crowd performs as a massive sensor network that detects misinformation
during crisis events. Finally, it aims to leverage these empirical and
theoretical contributions to develop solutions for the real-time detection of
misinformation on social media.