* 1420160
* 73rd Midwest PDE Seminar, May 10-11, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Jared Wunsch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2015
* USD 9,000.00

The Midwest PDE Seminar is a conference series that has been held biannually
since 1977 at universities across the Midwest. Partial Differential Equations
(PDE) are ubiquitous throughout science and engineering, since they express
relationships between rates of change of quantities of interest. Linear PDE such
as Laplace, heat, wave, and Schrödinger equations are central to many phenomena
in physics. Nonlinear PDE arise in fields such as general relativity, condensed
matter physics and optics, gauge field theory, and fluid dynamics. Nonlinear PDE
are also employed to tackle mathematical problems in the area of geometric
analysis. This meeting brings together experts from across these fields to
exchange information about recent research results and to foster collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for the 73rd
edition of the Midwest PDE Seminar, to be held at Northwestern University on the
weekend of May 10-11, 2014. Study of the Laplace, heat, wave, and Schrödinger
equations remains a lively and rich subject; for instance the study of Laplace
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues in both compact and noncompact settings (spectral
and scattering theory) is of considerable current interest. Moreover, nonlinear
PDE such as arise in general relativity (Einstein equations), condensed matter
physics and optics (nonlinear Schrödinger equation), gauge field theory (Yang-
Mills equations), and fluids (Navier-Stokes and Euler equations) remain rich in
mysteries. On the side of geometry, the study of Riemannian manifolds endowed
with special metrics has seen astounding advances in recent years. Work
involving Hamilton's Ricci flow and breaking developments in the theory of
Kähler-Einstein metrics on Fano manifolds have involved profound new tools from
PDE. These theories are tied to a nonlinear degenerate parabolic equation (Ricci
flow) and an elliptic equation (complex Monge-Ampère) respectively. Discussions
in this seminar will address these and other topics. The conference encourages
and supports broad and diverse participation of junior mathematicians, women,
and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
http://www.math.northwestern.edu/midwestpde/