* 1420752
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Transnational Markets are Maintained Across Cultural and Linguistic Divides
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Vivian Lu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 22,690.00

Globalization has presented new challenges for scientific understandings of how
economic competitiveness can be achieved. Among those challenges is the need for
a nuanced understanding of what emergent markets look like, and what makes them
succeed or fail. Some of the most rich data sources for analyzing new markets
are in sites where there are vast cultural and linguistic differences, since the
networks that form in such contexts are predictably more difficult to establish.
This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous,
scientific fieldwork, explores how successful transnational markets emerge and
are maintained across merchant networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vivian Lu, under
the supervision of Dr. Sylvia Yanagisako of Stanford University, will explore
how merchants create business relationships across linguistic and cultural
difference in a globalized era. In particular, this project explores how
merchants successfully conduct transnational importation businesses with limited
resources (for example, formal contracts, financial institutions, or
translators). This project proposes that globalized commodity flows and business
relations are made possible by cultural understandings of kinship, friendship,
and partnership. These relationships between merchants are important to
understand how cultural innovations and interpersonal trust are necessary for
transnational markets to thrive. This project will investigate how transnational
business experience transforms the economic possibilities and social networks of
young merchants from non-elite backgrounds. Over the course of 12 months using
conventional ethnographic data collection techniques, this study follows a
sample of merchant returnees through regular in-depth shadowing, qualitative
surveys of a broad set of merchants for contextual data, and research visits to
interview the families of merchant returnees. This project will contribute to
debates in economic anthropology about development and globalization, and
discussions of transnationalism and labor migration. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project
would be of benefit to development planners and policymakers struggling to
understand how economic competitiveness emerges and is maintained in new
markets.