* 1420596
* Can Pair Programming Reduce the Gender Gap in Computing? A Study of Middle School Students Learning to Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Linda Werner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 701,767.00

Learning to program is the entry point in a computing pathway, but large numbers
of students, particularly women and girls, drop out of introductory programming
courses at the college and K-12 level. To attract and retain girls and women,
there is a need for pedagogical approaches that foster persistence, creativity,
fearlessness, computational ways of thinking and problem solving, or "Intrepid
Exploration," a term coined by this team of researchers. The proposed study
focuses on pair programming in middle school--a gender-equitable practice where
two people collaborate on one computer. Research suggests that pair programming
benefits both women and men, and that benefits depend on partner compatibility.
However, most pair-programming research has been done with university students
or professional programmers, and focuses on the efficiency or correctness of a
problem solution, rather than on the nature of the collaboration or the problem-
solving process. The goal of this study is to understand the conditions under
which pair programming can foster the kind of thinking and problem solving that
will prepare female middle school students to pursue and persist in computing
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be a design experiment with 80
girls and boys from a range of socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds who are
enrolled in game programming classes. The classes will be taught using a pair
programming toolkit developed over ten years by a collaboration of researchers
and teachers. In-depth and multi-method data collection and analysis will be
used to describe gender-based differences in student interactions, and to study
how interactions evolve over time, and the individual, relational, and
institutional factors that play a role in the nature of those interactions. Data
will be collected on the implementation process, as well as on individual
learning, interpersonal dynamics, sequences of interactions, and the context in
which learning takes place. The mixed methods analysis process will focus on the
integration of data from multiple sources following criteria to ensure the
design quality and interpretive rigor of the approach. The project will result
in a descriptive model of what pair programming in middle school looks like, for
whom it fosters intrepid exploration, and the interactional processes that are
associated with the development of intrepid
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will advance knowledge and have
clear implications for educational practice. They will contribute to our
understanding of the conditions under which collaboration in middle school can
address the gender gap in computing, as well as whether there are gender-based
and cultural differences in interactions, and if they affect the kinds of
thinking and problem solving needed to succeed in computing. The research will
also be the first to investigate how to support and measure the development of
intrepid exploration in efforts to increase gender diversity in computing. The
findings will also be responsive to the practical concerns of teachers, such as
how to foster effective pair programming, how to assess individual learning, and
how to provide a tailored and gender-equitable pair programming experience.