* 1420168
* Microaggressions in Engineering Student Teams:  Effects on Learning, Performance, and Persistence
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Denise Sekaquaptewa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 548,459.00

Because engineering is cast as a masculine field, women engineering students can
experience subtle yet pervasive stereotypic messages in their learning
environments that can negatively influence their experiences. This early stage
research project will identify specific behavioral manifestations of gender
stereotypes--microaggressions--and their cumulative effect on learning,
performance, and persistence in introductory engineering course teamwork. Such
microaggressions may cause the climate of the team to become less welcoming to
women. The proposed research unites two areas of strong research interest
(social science research on gender stereotypes and engineering education on
teamwork and climate) to advance understanding of women's underrepresentation in
engineering as compared to men.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is
to identify and reliably measure microaggressions in both lab-based and
classroom-based engineering student project teams. The research will test
whether exposure to microaggressions increases perceived stereotype threat and
diminishes a sense of belonging in engineering for women compared to men,
leading to a gender gap favoring men in the important engineering outcomes of
learning, performance, and persistence. The research program builds on prior
NSF-funded work of the investigators and includes five research activities. The
goal of Study One is to identify the specific types of microaggressions (e.g.,
ignoring women's contributions or assigning women to less important tasks)
occurring in videotaped laboratory-based engineering teams. Researchers will
develop a reliable microaggressions assessment procedure, and will analyze
effects on engineering outcomes (learning, performance, and persistence). In
Study Two, the lab-based data will be supplemented with qualitative data
reported by students who previously participated in an engineering student group
project, via student focus groups. Study Three will examine the influence of
microaggressions occurring in class-based teams on engineering outcomes over
time. Introductory engineering student teams will be tracked and observed at
three time points in one semester to measure microaggressions and their
influence on academic and psychological outcomes. In studies Four and Five
engineering students (both women and men) will be randomly assigned to view one
of two videos showing student teams in which microaggressions are present or
absent in team interactions. The researchers will analyze the effects of the
different videos on the students knowledge of the content of the video and their
persistence in solving problems.