* 1420330
* Collaborative Research: STEM Education and Workforce Participation over the Life Cycle: The Intersection of Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Disability Status
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Eric Grodsky, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 229,865.00

This collaborative research project will study the effects of STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) skills and training gained from high
school through college on the career-long learning prospects of diverse groups
of individuals and their adaptation to changing workplace experiences. Project
investigators at the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Minnesota-
Twin Cities and the University of Wisconsin-Madison will also contribute to the
important research on STEM broadening participation issues, specifically the
intersection of race, ethnicity, gender and disability with STEM education, STEM
workforce development and STEM career success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will conduct interviews with individuals who originally participated in a
U.S. Department of Education survey called the High School and Beyond (HS&amp;B)
study. The students were high school seniors when the data was initially
collected in 1980. Some of these students also provided additional survey data
in 1982, 1984 and 1986. Beginning with this longitudinal survey data, the
researchers will study the STEM training that students acquired and the STEM
competencies they developed in school. Drawing on specific coursework, test
scores, grades, degree attainment, and field of degree, the investigators will
analyze how these competencies contribute to workforce success and flexibility
in mid-life work for persons with diverse, intersecting attributes defined by
race, ethnicity, gender and disability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new data set
will be made available to the public and to researchers through the U.S.
Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics. The project
will use a large population sample, combining data from the sophomore and senior
cohorts of the HS&amp;B study, in order to conduct theoretically grounded
analytic modeling about the relationships between STEM training, workforce
outcomes and diversity attributes. The main theoretical focus of the work is
examining the relative contributions of education as credentials (signaling
theory) versus the relative contributions of what is learned in school and non-
school settings (human capital theory).