* 1420417
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: REAL: INTRINSICS: An Interactive Narrative Technology to Reduce Implicit Negative Stereotyping and Improve the Climate in STEM for Underrepresented Students
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Melanie Green, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 11/30/2014
* USD 216,026.00

Women and people from racial/ethnic minority groups are underrepresented in STEM
courses, majors and careers in the United States. Social and psychological
factors, in particular the prevalence and persistence of negative stereotypes
toward underrepresented group members' abilities in STEM, play a key role in
explaining and perpetuating this imbalanced level of participation in STEM
fields. In particular, the prevalence and persistence of subtle "micro-
inequalities" caused by implicit biases and stereotypes, which have taken the
place of more overt, intentional forms of discrimination, have contributed to
the "chilly climate" faced by underrepresented students in STEM classrooms.
Research has revealed that bias persists in STEM educational contexts, even
among individuals who value fairness and even among professionals who are
themselves members of underrepresented groups. This project will focus on
developing, assessing and deploying a digital interactive narrative platform,
called INTRINSICS (Interactive Narrative Technology for Reducing Implicit
Negative Stereotyping and Improving the Climate in STEM), for use by
introductory-level undergraduate STEM instructors and their students that will
allow students to express negative subjective classroom experiences, raise
awareness about these subjective experiences among instructors and students in
the classroom, and empower instructors and students to be proactive in
responding to experiences of discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will employ a three-year development and research plan to verify the efficacy
and impact of the INTRINSICS platform and its constituent components. In years 1
and 2 (Phase 1: development and guiding research), the technological framework
and back-end impact of the platform will be developed and the content, graphics
and interface for three modules will be iteratively designed and developed. A
set of randomized experiments conducted with undergraduates enrolled in
introductory-level physics and biology courses will test the impact of several
fundamental variables central to the experience of the platforms narratives,
including narrative voice; the generation versus reception of narrative content;
the reception of narrative content believed to be fictional versus content
believed to reflect people's actual experiences; and the inclusion versus
exclusion of interactive elements. The results of the experiments will directly
guide the final content and design of the platform's three modules. In year 3
(Phase 2: applied research and deployment), the researchers will employ a
longitudinal design to test the long-term impact of the full INTRINSICS platform
among students and professors in introductory-level physics and engineering
classes.