* 1420316
* RI: Small: A Systematic Approach to Robot Task and Motion Planning in Belief Space
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Tomas Lozano-Perez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Robots have the potential for wide-ranging
positive impacts on society in complex or dangerous applications such as
disaster relief, elder care and the reshoring of manufacturing jobs. However,
existing robots have had limited success is these domains, mainly because the
planning and control algorithms are not robust to misconceptions in the robot's
"understanding" of its environment nor to small imperfections in the robot's
ability to execute the required actions. The overall goal of this project is to
develop the sensing, planning, and control algorithms necessary to overcome
these problems, and hence necessary to allow robots to work productively in
complex domains shared with humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key activities of
this project are the development of new ways of representing uncertainty in the
state of the world that support efficient planning for robots. These new
representations and algorithms provide principled and practical methods of
integrating perception and action in complex domains. The resulting algorithms
are tested in the context of a real robot performing household tasks in a
kitchen environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also involves a thorough
integration of research and education. Graduate and undergraduate students are
involved in all aspects of the research. Furthermore, the research in this
project forms the basis of an undergraduate subject on robot planning algorithms
under development at MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to develop the estimation, planning, and control
techniques necessary to enable robots to perform robustly and intelligently in
complex uncertain domains. Robots operating in complex, unknown environments
have to deal explicitly with uncertainty. Sensing is increasingly reliable, but
still inescapably local: robots cannot see, immediately, inside cupboards, under
collapsed walls, or into nuclear containment vessels. Planning, whether in
household and disaster-relief domains, requires explicit consideration of
uncertainty and the selection of actions at both the task and motion levels to
support gathering information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to explicitly
consider the effects of uncertainty and to generate actions that gain
information, it is necessary to plan in belief space: that is, the space of the
robot's beliefs about the state of its environment, which we will represent as
probability distributions over states of the environment. For planning purposes,
the initial state is a belief state and the goal is a set of belief states: for
example, a goal might be for the robot to believe with probability greater than
0.99 that all of the groceries are put away in acceptable locations, or that
there are no survivors remaining in the rubble.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing a systematic, integrated approach to finding plans
efficiently in high-dimensional uncertain domains. By factoring the belief space
and exploiting a decoupling between geometric and probabilistic reasoning, this
approach can employ constraint satisfaction methods to generate good solutions
relatively efficiently. This program of basic research provides conceptual,
formal, algorithmic, and software results that are of use in mobile manipulation
robotics, as well as artificial intelligence more generally, including
applications from medical diagnosis and treatment to electronic commerce to
managing energy production and distribution systems.