* 1420709
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Centers
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Margaret Gardel, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 21,100,000.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of Chicago supports innovative
research to produce the design principles for the next generation of materials.
The research is focused on investigating materials formed far from equilibrium,
exploring new paradigms for material fabrication and response, and exploiting
feedback between structure and dynamics. Senior investigators come from eleven
University Departments and Institutes, as well as neighboring Argonne National
Laboratory and PREM partner, the City College of New York. The Center's shared
facilities provide vital support for its research and further support the
broader materials research community by granting access to external users. The
Center's collaborations with industry, national laboratories and international
partners serve to engage those entities in research with the Center, and expand
opportunities for MRSEC students. The Management Laboratory, run with the
Chicago Booth School of Business, and industrial internships provide
professional development opportunities for MRSEC students. In addition to
training a diverse group of students, the Chicago MRSEC brings science inquiry
experiences to underserved students in neighboring communities on Chicago's
South Side including programs for students and teachers and after-school Science
Clubs. The MRSEC provides summer research opportunities to undergraduates from
all over the US and high school students from the South Side of Chicago. As part
of its outreach to the general public, the MRSEC collaborates with Chicago's
Museum of Science and Industry and the Exploratorium in San Francisco to develop
materials science exhibits. The MRSEC is committed to increasing the Center
diversity as reflected in the significant participation by women in the Center's
investigators and leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Research is organized in three Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs): (i) The IRG on Dynamics at Soft Interfaces focus on both
scientific challenges and technological opportunities that arise from
controlling and manipulating how much or how fast a soft interface forms or
deforms. The research endeavors to establish the link between the interface
dynamics and the properties of the material as a whole, which opens up
opportunities for designing specific material responses and provides a pathway
towards innovative applications. (ii) The IRG on Spatiotemporal Control of
Active Materials aims to understand, design, and synthesize materials containing
distributed molecular elements that convert chemical energy into mechanical
work. Its goal is to achieve control of active materials and ultimately to
create novel molecular assemblies for robust tunable shape change. (iii) The IRG
on Engineering Quantum Materials and Interactions seeks to elucidate the
critical issues of control and coherence in both individual and in collective-
mode quantum systems, with the intention of manipulating and exploiting quantum
coherence in materials over a large range of length scales. Goals include
advancing applications in quantum sensing, fabricating materials for quantum
information as well as creating the next generation of characterization tools
for traditional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Management Laboratory, run
with the Chicago Booth School of Business, and industrial internships provide
professional development opportunities for MRSEC students. In addition to
training a diverse group of students, the Chicago MRSEC brings science inquiry
experiences to underserved students in neighboring communities on Chicago's
South Side including programs for students and teachers and after-school Science
Clubs. The MRSEC provides summer research opportunities to undergraduates from
all over the US and high school students from the South Side of Chicago. As part
of its outreach to the general public, the MRSEC collaborates with Chicago's
Museum of Science and Industry and the Exploratorium in San Francisco to develop
materials science exhibits. The MRSEC is committed to increasing the Center
diversity as reflected in the significant participation by women in the Center's
investigators and leadership.&lt;br/&gt;