* 1420063
* Stereotype Threat Effects and Deaf and Hard of Hearing College Students' Mathematics Problem Solving Performance
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ronald Kelly, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 534,204.00

This broadening participation research project will contribute to foundational
knowledge about the hidden threats to mathematics performance that undergraduate
students who are deaf and hard-of-hearing experience. There is a significant
need to determine how to better educate deaf and hard-of-hearing college
students in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). This group
of students represents an untapped potential for contributing to the STEM
workforce and for better learning the STEM skills needed to work in our
technology-driven society. Deaf individuals represent 3.5% of the eligible
workforce in our country, but only 0.8% of deaf undergraduate students major in
STEM and less than 0.2% of doctoral recipients in STEM are deaf. It is essential
to understand the threats these students experience in college STEM education
and, eventually, to implement the appropriate educational practices and
interventions that will result in more deaf and hard-of-hearing undergraduate
students majoring in STEM and working in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leaders at Rochester Institute of Technology and
the University of Rochester will investigate the nature and existence of
negative stereotypes towards deaf and hard-of-hearing college students, and
study the impact of stereotype threat on the mathematical problem solving of
this student cohort. Using social identity theory as the grounding for their
work, the researchers will conduct three studies. The first investigation will
involve the use of a modified implicit association task to study the stereotypes
of the deaf and hard-of-hearing related to mathematics among both hearing and
deaf subjects. The second experimental study will involve testing stereotype
threat conditions during performance of mathematics problems involving logic,
estimation and actions that inhibit the tendency to perform calculations. The
third study will examine how stereotype threat in deaf and hard-of-hearing
subjects may degrade working memory as it relates to completing mathematics
problems. Results of these studies are expected to be shared with education
researchers and the public in professional publications.