* 1420455
* Relationships Between Subsurface Processes, Eruptive Products and Surface Morphology of Maar-diatreme Volcanoes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Greg Valentine, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2018
* USD 294,231.00

Maars are volcanic craters cut into a pre-eruptive landscape, surrounded by low-
profile ejecta or tephra rings. They are among the most abundant volcanoes on
Earth, and occur most commonly in volcanic fields where there may be tens or
hundreds of individual volcanoes. Maar eruptions present a significant hazard
where populated regions overlap with volcanic fields. Because they involve
violent explosions caused by mixing of hot magma and groundwater, their
eruptions can produce a full gamut of dangerous phenomena including blast waves,
pyroclastic flows, widely dispersed ballistic blocks, ash fall and far-travelled
fine ash plumes, large-scale subsidence, and volcanic mudflows. Maars and their
underlying plumbing structures - diatremes - can also be of economic importance,
especially when the erupted magma is diamond-bearing kimberlite. Diatremes
commonly resist erosion, and in exhumed landscapes such as the Colorado Plateau
they form striking buttes and pinnacles (e.g., Shiprock, New Mexico, and parts
of Monument Valley, Arizona). Despite their hazards and economic importance,
many questions remain about the subsurface processes beneath maar-diatremes and
the relationships of those processes to eruptive phenomena.

This project combines field studies at young maar-diatremes with innovative
experiments that are intended to mimic, at the scale of meters, the processes
that form the volcanoes. Field studies will focus on two young maars, Dotsero
(Colorado, age ~4150 yrs) and Nilahue (southern Chile, erupted 1955) where
original post-eruptive geometry can be well constrained, the tephra deposits are
largely non-indurated and therefore amenable to component and clast
shape/texture analysis, and sub-volcanic stratigraphy is well constrained,
allowing us to link lithic clasts to their depths of origin. These results will
be compared with and interpreted in light of experimental work that will use
different configurations of buried explosives in artificial layered "geologies,"
allowing for characterization of crater geometry and detailed analysis of the
composition of ejecta in terms of proportions derived from different depths.
Explosions will be monitored with high-speed video, seismometers, and acoustic
sensors in order to constrain dynamics, and post-experimental excavation will
reveal the "diatremes" that are produced in order to explore the relationship
between their structure and ejecta. Together, the field and experimental studies
will greatly advance our understanding of maar-diatreme eruptions and the
factors that control their hazards and potential economic resources.