* 1420073
* NYU Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 09/30/2021
* USD 14,400,000.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The New York University MRSEC
investigates the pathways by which molecules and particles can be organized into
materials. One approach emphasizes the role of processing and harnesses new
insights that organization need not be orderly, that disorder need not be purely
random, and that the materials arising from random organization across multiple
scales can have properties surpassing those of crystals. Another seeks to
elucidate the mechanisms by which complex molecules crystallize and how defects
in crystals can regulate their growth. These activities unite scientists,
engineers and mathematicians in an effort to explore materials from the
molecular to the macroscopic scale. Their goal is to understand and improve the
properties of materials such as food, ceramics, cements, pharmaceutical
formulations, organic displays, solar cells, and a host of other technologies,
with an eye toward optimizing mechanical strength and fracture resistance,
improving the transport of electrons, light or heat, and stabilizing therapeutic
agents. The NYU MRSEC operates several programs that benefit K-12 students and
the New York City community, exposing students and teachers to materials science
concepts, providing summer research programs for high school students,
delivering materials science lessons and teacher training on a mobile
laboratory, and producing broadcast-quality science videos. The MRSEC operates a
summer research program for visiting undergraduates and faculty, largely from
four-year colleges and minority-serving institutions. The MRSEC contributes to
the acquisition and operation of state-of-the-art instrumentation facilities,
including several electron, optical, and holographic microscopies that provide
unique capabilities for users at NYU and beyond. The Center expands its impact
through a network of national and international collaborators, as well as
technology partners and entrepreneurial
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The NYU
MRSEC unites six NYU Departments and collaborators from key institutions in a
project that revolves around two interdisciplinary research groups: Random
Organization of Disordered Materials (IRG 1) and Molecular Crystal Growth
Mechanisms (IRG 2). IRG 1 investigates how systems driven out of equilibrium
evolve towards absorbing states in which dynamic rearrangement ceases, exploring
the structures and correlations that arise in granular, multicomponent and
active materials under external and internal driving, particularly those of the
absorbing states. A key goal is the optimization of material properties such as
yield strength and photonic band structure, and the development of active
materials such as optically reconfigurable colloids and active extensile
viscoelastic liquids. IRG 2 investigates the fundamental science of molecular
crystal growth, an area of vital interest for pharmaceuticals, organic
electronics, and other technologies. The IRG advances the understanding of
essential aspects of crystal growth science and engineering, investigating
nucleation, dislocation generation and structure, multi-step assembly at the
unit cell level, and origins of non-classical morphologies in molecular
crystals. IRG 2 combines theoretical modeling, computer simulation, and
experiment to develop predictive models of crystal structure and free energy and
to investigate the dynamic aspects of crystal growth.