* 1420382
* Bioinspired Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 09/30/2021
* USD 12,424,374.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Nature acts as an exquisite engineer
capable of creating structures and functionalities that are unmatched by
anything manmade, such as the rupture-free passage of a virus through a cellular
membrane, the ability of a highly motile white blood cells to seek and destroy
an immunogenic target, or synchronously beating ciliary fields clearing debris
from a lung. This research team draws inspiration from such biological
capabilities. They seek to uncover the fundamental design principles underlying
these and other remarkable biological functions, and to use this knowledge to
create a new generation of biomaterials that are endowed with properties
heretofore found only in living organisms. The research straddles the interface
between biology and materials science. Starting from a few well-characterized
building blocks of biochemical origin, they are building structures of
increasing complexity to determine which components are required for the
emergence of desired biological functionality. The project runs a multi-level
outreach and education program, structured around a set of key activities:
exhibits at the Discovery Museums of Acton, MA, field trips for high school
students, a summer Research Experience for Undergraduates, minority mentoring
program in conjunction with the Science Posse of New York, summer courses in
advanced experimental techniques based on the project's shared facilities and
provides career development opportunities for graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to create new materials that are
constructed from only a few simplified components, yet capture the remarkable
functionalities found in living organisms. In addition to opening new directions
in materials science research, these efforts serve to elucidate the minimal
requirements for the emergence of biological function. This challenging endeavor
draws on expertise in diverse and complementary experimental and theoretical
techniques that span the physical and life sciences. This group of individuals
are collaborating to combine elemental building blocks, such as motor proteins,
DNA origami and filamentous virus, to understand the emergence of biomimetic
functionalities that are highly sought-after in materials science and to
synergistically engineer life-like materials. The goal of their first project,
Membrane based Materials, is to uncover the design principles that cells use to
shape and reconfigure membranes, and to apply these principles in order to
engineer heterogeneous and reconfigurable membrane materials. To accomplish this
they are exploiting the analogy between nanometer-sized lipid bilayers and
micron-sized colloidal monolayers assembled from filamentous viruses or DNA
origami rods. The goal of their second project, Biological Active Materials, is
to create active analogs of quintessential soft matter systems including gels,
liquids crystals, emulsions and vesicles using elemental force generators, such
as motor proteins and monomer treadmilling. They are experimentally and
theoretically characterizing the emergent properties of such materials,
including their ability to convert chemical energy into mechanical work, perform
locomotion, and undergo dynamical reconfiguration.