* 1420953
* Student Travel Support for the ACM SIGCOMM 2014 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Dimitrios Koutsonikolas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

The ACM SIGCOMM 2014 Conference will be held August 17-22, 2014, in Chicago,
Illinois. ACM SIGCOMM is the flagship annual conference of the Association for
Computing Machinery?s Special Interest Group on Data Communications. This award
financially assists approximately 16 graduate students and 3 postdoctoral
researchers from US institutions to attend this conference. Participation in
conferences such as SIGCOMM is an extremely important part of the graduate
school experience, providing students with an opportunity to interact with more
senior researchers and exposure to leading edge research in the field. The award
will enable graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, who would be
otherwise unable to do so, to attend the main SIGCOMM 2014 conference and the
associated workshops. The travel grant chairs encouraged the participation of
women and under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This award provides travel support for US-based graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers to attend the ACM SIGCOMM 2014 conference. SIGCOMM is
the flagship conference in the networking community and a highly competitive
venue (with acceptance rate around 10%). Its rich program exposes participants
to new ideas and cutting-edge research and allows for interaction among
researchers from all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project integrates research and education of students through exposure to a
premier technical conference in computer networks and communications. Students
and junior researchers will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field. The proposed
student participation is expected to have a positive impact on the students'
research interests and quality. The project will promote diversity by
encouraging and enabling women and other under-represented minorities to
participate. Furthermore, the truly international flavor of SIGCOMM as an annual
conference is well-known and cultivates international research interactions and
presents a tremendous opportunity to students and junior researchers to increase
their breadth of ideas and technical perspectives.