* 1420321
* Collaborative research: From the learner's perspective: Unpacking the why and how of model-based learning about biological systems
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Momsen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2020
* USD 218,027.00

The purposes of this study are to promote and understand how undergraduate
students learn foundational biology ideas in introductory biology courses. It
will implement and study an innovative approach, which has students learn
biological explanations by modeling phenomena as biologists do. The approach
directs students to think about structures, behaviors and functions in nature,
and to write these out and discuss them. This study will explore in detail
student reasoning while they do this and how they learn. The project has
potential not only to advance the field's ability to measure student
competencies that are valued in recent science education standards documents
(e.g., NGSS), but also to advance the field's understanding of how student
"modeling ability" develops in a particular discipline. In this way, it can
provide an important foundation for other research on the learning of modeling
practices in science. Moreover, because the innovations take place in an
introduction to biology course and introduction to biology is required for a
large number of college majors, the project can be transformative for a large
number of students across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be
conducted in a pre-designed undergraduate biology course across four
universities, two public and two private, serving diverse populations. The aims
are: (1) propose systems thinking skills needed by biology students, by (a)
getting feedback from academics, and reviewing; (2) to examine more closely
student thinking during their activities by (a) recording group discussions, (b)
conducting clinical interviews with a subset of students, and (c) collecting
student drawings in response to different prompts than they have used previously
that help the instructors better understand what students are thinking; (3)
conduct open-ended comparisons between other assessments and their assessments
of student models; (4) compare outcomes when students are provided different
visual representations as feedback (split-plot design); and (5) make comparisons
between different demographic groups.