* 1420608
* CIF:Small: Collaborative Research:Theoretical Foundation of Distributed Wireless Channel Access
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jie Luo, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Due to lack of fundamental understanding on how to share wireless media among
spatially distributed users, the energy consumption and bandwidth efficiency of
wireless networks remains defficient and highly suboptimal. Prior investigations
of wireless channel access have followed two separate paths that reflect vastly
different viewpoints; namely, the traditional information-theoretic approach
assumes perfect user coordination and ignores the modularized network
architecture, while the traditional network-theoretic approach largely focuses
on access control protocols and ignores the impact of the physical layer. This
project will bridge the gap of the classical theories by developing a
theoretical foundation for channel access in distributed wireless systems. More
specifically, it will extend classical information theory by developing a
channel coding theory for physical layer distributed communication, where users
do not jointly design channel codes. It will also extend classical network
theory by developing a medium access control (MAC) framework for distributed
networking, where physical layer properties, such as joint multiuser message
decoding and flexible adaptation of communication parameters, are efficiently
exploited at the link layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contains two parts
which respectively address the physical and the data link layers of distributed
wireless networks. In Part I of the project, the goal is to develop a rigorous
coding theory to characterize the fundamental limitis of distributed
communication systems. The coding theory will support extensive communication
performance tradeoffs and structured coding schemes with low computational
complexity. Part II of the project contains three steps. The objective of the
first step is to characterize optimal link layer distributed channel sharing
schemes, their fundamental properties and performance improvements over
classical schemes. The objective of the second step is to develop a unified MAC
framework to achieve asymptotic optimal channel sharing in distributed networks
via the joint adaptation of communication parameters (e.g., rate, power,
transmission probability). The objective of the third step is to develop MAC
algorithms with fast convergence properties that ensure efficient network
operation in transient environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By extending
information theory to distributed communication models, the project will advance
the integration of information and network theories, and significantly improve
the energy and bandwidth efficiency of wireless systems. Unification of the two
classical theories will also influence the way modern communication network
subjects are taught in Higher Education and attract more talented students to
this field of acute national importance.