* 1420937
* Emergent Forms of Expression in Postsocialist Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Anna Bernstein, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 183,831.00

A society's evolution toward openness and democracy is typically measured
through the quality of the freedoms that it affords: freedoms of expression,
speech, assembly, and the press for example. Those working in areas such as
public policy, security studies, and development regard the establishment of
enduring systems of democracy as essential to our national security, and to the
establishment of terms of trade that allow for economic growth and economic
competitiveness. Scientists analyzing such dynamics have established preliminary
conclusions about what emergent forms of expression have meant, but they have
done so without an empirical data set that is exhaustive to establish
generalizable scientific knowledge. This project provides much needed empirical
data on emergent forms of expression in postsocialist contexts.

In this project, Dr. Anya Bernstein of the Department of Anthropology at Harvard
University explores the intersection of religion and politics in contemporary
Russia with the objective of expanding current Euro-American understandings of
secularism. Since the collapse of the USSR, the Russian Orthodox Church has
effectively been establishing itself as Russia's state religion. Recent highly
publicized trials, such as the well-publicized "blasphemy" trials, received
global press coverage that was quick to describe the conflict in classic terms:
believers against atheists, nationalists against internationalists, the liberal
intelligentsia against the conservative narod (people). The project asks why
certain symbols and representations possess a certain affective charge that
drives political action. The researcher will employ a range of classic
ethnographic data collection techniques, including participant observation,
interviews and retrospective interviews, visual research methods, media and
content analysis, and juridical research. The project challenges the dominant
interdisciplinary claim that we are currently in a period characterized as "the
global return of religion", citing Pentecostal and Islamic movements as their
evidence. This project provides much needed empirical evidence to scholarly
discussions that have tended to exclude postsocialist contexts or relegate the
appearance of religious themes in postsocialist contexts (the former Soviet
Union, Eastern Europe, China and Central Asia) as suggestive of the reemergence
of repressed forms of expression that were denied under socialist regimes. The
project asks what other social phenomena could account for their emergence. The
broader impact of this research lies in its implications for informing our
understanding issues critical to national security. The project provides
insights about international relations are influenced by internal cultural and
political debates that will be valuable to policymakers and other foreign policy
analysts.