* 1420872
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Economic Voting Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jim Granato, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 2,709.00

A highly-regarded economic voting theory examining the electoral effects of
monetary policy, the Rational Partisan Theory (RPT), posits that partisan
inflation shocks follow the midterm cycle, implying that monetary policy matters
in midterm elections but not during on-year elections. Yet, recent empirical
evidence shows inflation has become less relevant electorally; instead,
unemployment still matters in elections. The nature of the changing electoral
dynamics between the two components of monetary policy is unclear, however. In
order to solve the puzzle, this study investigates the electoral implications of
recent monetary policy developments, in particular, the aggressive inflation
stabilization - an understudied area in economic voting research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the study lies in its
application of recent concepts in macroeconomic policy to understand trends in
economic voting. Accordingly, the study develops and integrates theoretical and
statistical models to rectify the midterm cycle of inflation under the RPT, and
to extend the RPT to examine the partisan effects of unemployment policy. First,
through the integration of theoretical and behavioral concept of inflation
expectations and the statistical concept of inflation persistence, the study
posits inflation stabilization moderates voters' uncertainty of on-year election
outcomes, resulting in inflation policy neutrality at midterms. Second, while
inflation policy is de-politicized, unemployment policy remains discretionary
and is subject to partisan forces. Using a two-dimensional decision-making model
of partisan policy and voter perceptions on unemployment severity, the study
tests the assumption that voters always reward long-term policy but reward or
punish short-term policy based on its performance. Voter behavior, however, is
further assumed to be conditioned by income levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the study are twofold. First, the emphasis on inflation
stabilization has resulted in low inflation since the 1980s. To the extent that
economic stability is highly desirable, this "great moderation" of the business
cycle is a testament to the success of macroeconomic management. Yet, the policy
has its limitations, as we have learned from the 2008 financial crisis. The
electoral implications, as this study argues, reflect a monetary policy
imbalance: while inflation ceases to be an election issue in recent time,
unemployment remains a problem to be solved from time to time. In the absence of
an effective monetary policy to stabilize unemployment volatility, the public
will continue to turn to the political party in power for answers. Research has
shown that inflation stability can contribute to greater output/unemployment
stability. The challenge to monetary policymaker, therefore, is on perfecting
the policy tool to achieve "inflation-output costabilization", as it did during
the 1980s and 1990s. Recent policy measures aiming at reducing unemployment,
such as the judicious use of quantitative easing, are consistent with both the
refinements to RPT posited above but also with advances made in inflation
targeting.