* 1420198
* Social Presence During Instructor Mediated Synchronous Versus Asynchronous On-Line Course Discussions: A Study of Undergraduate Students with Disabilities Learning Statistics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ibrahim Dahlstrom-Hakki, Landmark College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 493,470.00

This broadening participation research project will contribute to foundational
knowledge about how college students with learning disabilities, attention
deficit hyperactivity disorders, and autism spectrum disorders learn statistics
in an on-line course when the instructor and the students participate in
discussions at the same time or when the discussions are asynchronous. Students
with these types of disabilities are the largest group of students with
disabilities taking courses at our nation's colleges and universities. Online
postsecondary STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education
is growing at a rapid rate with little research conducted about how students
with disabilities learn in this environment. Additionally, as college faculty
engage students in on-line discussions and classes, the varied timing of the
information delivered may negatively or positively impact how students learn
STEM content. While there have been several studies to support a positive
relationship between the increased presence of the instructor during on-line
courses and student satisfaction with online discussions and online learning
performance, there is a need to determine if learning is maximized when the
instructor is or is not present and the interactions with the instructor are
asynchronous. This is an even more critical issue for students with disabilities
who have deficits in executive function, which may negatively impact their on-
line learning and which may be lessened by the presence of the faculty during
instruction. Knowing more about how college students with learning disabilities,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorders, and autism spectrum disorders learn
statistics in an on-line course, when faculty-led discussions are varied between
synchronous and asynchronous formats, has great potential to lead to
improvements in how these students with disabilities learn STEM and how college
faculty teach on-line STEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leaders at
Landmark College will determine the best ways to investigate how college
students with learning disabilities, attention deficit hyperactivity disorders,
and autism spectrum disorders learn statistics in an on-line course when the
instructor-led discussions are either synchronous or asynchronous. Students with
these disabilities typically exhibit difficulties with executive function, which
negatively impacts learning, and which may be mitigated by the presence of an
instructor during on-line learning. Using social presence theory as the
grounding for their work, the researchers will conduct an exploratory study to
examine the research question: Does the inclusion of instructor-mediated virtual
synchronous discussions of online statistics content result in improved
conceptual understanding of statistics concepts for students with disabilities?
The hypothesis for this work is that students with disabilities learning
introductory college statistics online will develop a deeper understanding of
statistics concepts following synchronous, as compared to asynchronous, virtual
instructor-mediated discussions. At the completion of the project, it is
anticipated that results will inform future basic and applied educational
research about students with and without disabilities learning STEM in on-line
courses. The results of this work are expected to be shared with education
researchers and the public in professional publications.