* 1420184
* AMPERE-II:  Active Magnetosphere and Planetary Electrodynamics Response Experiment-II
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Brian Anderson, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2020
* USD 5,100,000.00

The Earth?s magnetic field interacts with the supersonic solar wind of charged
particles from the Sun to create the magnetosphere. The magnetosphere is the
high altitude extension of Earth?s magnetic field, and spans the region of space
where the geosynchronous satellites orbit the Earth. Our magnetosphere responds
dramatically, even violently, to solar storms resulting in geomagnetic storms
and drives the electric currents that cause aurora borealis and intensify the
Van Allen radiation belts. The electric currents that flow between Earth?s
uppermost atmosphere and the high-altitude magnetosphere are a reflection of the
state of the entire region of Earth?s space environment and their measurement
allows us to study the system. The Active Magnetosphere and Planetary
Electrodynamics Response Experiment (AMPERE) is the first ever system providing
continuous, global measurements of these central electric currents and their
dynamics as Earth?s magnetosphere responds to solar storms. AMPERE measures
these currents by collecting the magnetic field data from all of the Iridium
satellites, sampling the field from each satellite once every 20 seconds. There
are 66 satellites in the Iridium constellation and AMPERE acquires data around
the clock from every single one. With AMPERE we now have a system in place to
provide continuous 24/7 pictures of what is really happening to near-Earth
space, much like weather radars track the actual progress of weather fronts and
major storm systems. Iridium is a private sector constellation of satellites,
owned by Iridium Communications. AMPERE is the first-of-its-kind partnership
between the commercial sector and research scientists to achieve something that
the government could not have accomplished on its own. The expansion of this
achievement under AMPERE-II will yield the first capability to observe the
electrodynamics of near-Earth space with the global, continuous coverage
necessary to resolve geomagnetic storms. It places the scientific community in
position to make major advances across a range of challenges in magnetosphere
and ionosphere science. AMPERE-II will harness the full potential of these new
data to transform our understanding of Earth?s interaction with near-space and
increase our ability to cope with the effects of solar
storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric power is the cornerstone technology on
which virtually all other infrastructures and services depend. Yet it is
particularly vulnerable to adverse space weather effects. Protecting the
nation?s power grids from the potential catastrophic effects of space weather is
increasingly recognized as a critical element of ensuring the sustainability of
modern society. Currents induced in the power grid during geomagnetic storms can
actually melt the copper windings of transformers at the heart of most power
distribution systems. Replacement of failed transformers can take weeks or
months. Sprawling power lines act like antennas, picking up the currents and
spreading the problem over a wide area. Accurate understanding and reliable
prediction of the electric currents in the Earth?s magnetosphere and ionosphere
that cause this space weather effect are crucial. If utility operators know a
geomagnetic storm is coming and just how bad it?s going to be, they can take
measures to reduce damage?e.g., disconnecting wires, shielding vulnerable
electronics, or powering down critical hardware. A few hours without power is
better than weeks or worse. AMPERE data continues to be the only global,
continuous source for observations of the energy input into the ionosphere via
electric currents that are critical for developing improved specification and
forecasting of the ionospheric current systems that pose a potential hazard to
the power grid. This makes the AMPERE project a critical component in our first
line of defense against this potential space weather hazard.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMPERE-II will provide key observations and derived
products of the global Birkeland currents at timescales within geomagnetic
storms and substorms together with analysis tools to enable and facilitate
research by the broader community to make major advances on important science
questions on magnetosphere and ionosphere coupling and dynamics, including: How
does the M-I system respond to driving by plasma and magnetic fields of CMEs?
What is the M-I system response to solar wind high-speed streams? What are the
stages and sequences of activity onset and electrodynamic reconfigurations? What
do they tell us about underlying governing processes? How are radiation belt
dynamics and high-altitude magnetic reconnection related to and governed by
global electrodynamics? What are the consequences of high-latitude
electrodynamic forcing for the thermosphere and ionosphere? To maximize the use
of AMPERE-II by the research community, the project will carry out a number of
engagement activities, including: Forming an AMPERE Users Group as an open forum
for updates, questions, requests, and discussion; Establishing an AMPERE Core
Users Team as an advisory team to recommend/review new products, validation
analyses, and organize workshops; Hosting a series of Science Mini-workshops for
focused collaborative science discussion as well as Student Workshops envisioned
as 2.5 day events of student science investigations and tutorials.