* 1420491
* Learning Theory and Analytics as Guides to Improve Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Matthew Bernacki, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,973.00

Undergraduate STEM courses are increasingly using learning management systems to
provide extra supports for students and instructors. However, little research
has been conducted on how best to structure these systems to provide students
with metacognitive and motivational supports that might facilitate learning. The
project will conduct three studies that will 1) identify how students use the
elements of the learning management system content and how that use relates to
student performance outcomes in STEM content; 2) test embedded learning strategy
training experiences for students and motivational interventions to examine the
affordance for student motivation, behavior, achievement, and completion rates;
and 3) test whether a behavior-based early warning system will identify
problematic learning behaviors earlier and more accurately than existing systems
so that interventions might be targeted to the students particular problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four courses in biology, calculus and two engineering
domains within the earliest semesters of study at the undergraduate level will
be the context of this study. The researchers and instructors from the
departments will collaboratively design the learning environments built around
Blackboard, the most common learning management system currently in use. The
project will collect large grain data currently available from Blackboard of
student performances in the system, medium grain data from a secondary module
within Blackboard that aggregates behavior and performance and reports at the
student level, and small grain data, logs of each student's transaction with the
materials hosted in the course. An experimental design will be employed during
the project that randomly assigns students different interventions and specific
training supports. Data mining techniques, regression and structural modeling
approaches will be used to identify patterns and examine the impacts of the
training and motivational supports on student learning outcomes in the specified
STEM content areas.