* 1420774
* OCE-RIG:   Hydrodynamics of Flexible Ribbon-Fin Propulsion for Highly Maneuverable Research Vessels
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Oscar M Curet, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,984.00

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) are transforming the way we explore the
ocean, allowing longer explorations in a variety of ocean conditions.
Biological-based designs could enhance the mobility and efficiency of future
AUV's. In particular, flexible ribbon-fin propulsion represents an ideal
propulsion mechanism for highly maneuverable vehicles. However, the
hydrodynamics, fluid-fin interaction and maneuvers using elongated fin
propulsion are still poorly understood. The outcome of this research will
provide insights into the hydrodynamics of flexible ribbon fin-base propulsion
during different maneuvers. Two students, one graduate student and one
undergraduate, will be supported by this award to research possible ribbon-fin
propulsion designs. The principal investigator will also present the research to
a group of K-12 students participating in a local ocean science camp program and
develop a new graduate and undergraduate course that will focus on the
hydrodynamics of animal locomotion in the broad context of ocean exploration,
biology, underwater vehicle design and fluid
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will study the hydrodynamics of a
flexible undulating ribbon fin using a robotic fin as a model. In particular,
the objectives are: 1) examine the effect of flexibility and morphology in the
hydrodynamics performance, 2) investigate the interconnection of flow structure,
propulsion efficiency and actuation control, and 3) study maneuvers and flow
control. The series of experiments will include measurement of fin kinematics,
propulsive forces, and flow measurements using particle image velocimetry (PIV).
The experiments will be performed at the Hydrodynamics Laboratory at Florida
Atlantic University.