* 1420488
* Collaborative Research: Re-Crafting Mathematics Education: Designing Tangible Manipulatives Rooted in Traditional Female Crafts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2021
* Melissa Gresalfi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 01/31/2021
* USD 656,308.00

Standard mathematics education that is embedded in symbol systems often fails to
engage students, especially girls, by divorcing mathematics from real world
contexts. This lack of engagement extends into truncated course taking and a
potentially life-long avoidance of mathematics. This project will build on
theories of learning that postulate that design experiences (i.e., embodied
learning) can play a crucial role in the learning process alongside of more
formalized construct learning. Specifically, the researchers will explore
traditional women's crafting (knitting, crocheting, sewing, and quilting) to
create models for mathematics learning using craft design and especially the
process of fixing mistakes in physical contexts to teach basic mathematical
concepts such as proportional reasoning, fractions, and geometry. The broader
impact of this work lies in its potential to broaden participation in STEM
activities and, later, careers for girls and women, highlighting both the
everyday mathematics at play in traditional women's crafting communities as well
as introducing middle school youth to new mathematical ideas. The goal is to
design and identify tools, materials, and activities that can be leveraged in
the long term to transform approaches to mathematics spanning both in- and out-
of-school learning spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to (1) conduct a
series of cognitive and connective ethnographies of female crafting circles to
theorize the connections between mathematics and traditional women's crafts; (2)
develop key tools, materials (i.e., a set of new tangible manipulatives) and
supporting activities with potentially high utility in teaching mathematics
through design and embodied approaches to learning; and (3) field test these
early prototypes with a range of youth (grades 5-9) to deepen understanding and
provide the necessary foundations for the next stages of curriculum development
and broader adoption. The core focus will be on highlighting new ways to engage
students and educators in mathematical thinking through hands-on crafts, an
approach that leverages a range of mathematical ideas to provide students with
new tangible manipulatives as "objects-to-think-with" in mathematics education.