* 1420984
* RUI:  OCE-RIG:  Decadal climate, carbon and nutrient variability: New insights from deep-sea bamboo coral records on the California margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michele LaVigne, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,994.00

In this project, the investigator will examine paleoceanographic records to
study how ocean productivity, nutrient cycling, and carbon cycling have been
impacted by rapid climate variability. To achieve this aim, the investigator
will develop paleoceanographic reconstructions of intermediate water nutrient
concentration and provide the first continuous high-resolution (interannual-
decadal scale) records of intermediate water biogeochemistry that will extend
modern instrumental records. These records will advance our understanding of
mechanisms linking rapid variations in atmospheric/surface ocean climate,
upwelling, productivity, and deep-sea carbon and nutrient cycling. The
investigator will integrate the research into educational activities by
establishing a new coral geochemistry research program at a small liberal arts
college and support participation of under-represented groups in ocean sciences
at both the undergraduate and high-school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact
of climate change on processes such as upwelling, nutrient availability, carbon
export and ocean biogeochemistry is currently poorly understood.
Paleoceanographic records can provide critical perspective on the mechanisms
linking climate, the carbon cycle, and ocean oxygenation in the past. The
investigator will use high-resolution (interannual-decadal) geochemical records
from deep-sea bamboo corals to reconstruct past changes in nutrient cycling and
carbon export for the past 400 years. The study is focused around a central
question: How are deep-sea nutrient biogeochemistry and carbon cycling in the
California Current System affected by climate change? Trace elemental ratios
preserved in bamboo coral skeleton (Ba/Ca) will be used to determine whether
changes in surface-ocean-atmospheric climate affect intermediate water mass
nutrient cycling on decadal timescales. In particular, this study will closely
investigate the last 400 years with a focus on: (1) validating the use of an
established intermediate water nutrient proxy in California Current System (CCS)
bamboo corals (Ba/Ca), (2) understanding the relationship between intermediate
water nutrients and primary productivity in the CCS, and (3) the relationship
between CCS export production and rapid climate change in the past (e.g. the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation and the El Ni√±o Southern Oscillation). A unique
suite of coral archives allows for a depth transect across intermediate waters
(792-2055m water depth, in total) and direct comparison with instrumental
records.