* 1420732
* Diagnosing misconceptions about algebra using Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Thomas Griffiths, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 443,248.00

This project, to be conducted by researchers at the University of California,
Berkeley, and Carleton College, will develop an online math tutor to help high
school and college students learn algebra. The tutor will diagnose students'
misconceptions about algebra by asking them to solve a series of math problems.
The website will be made available to students anywhere, making it possible to
collect large amounts of data on algebra problem solving that will be used to
refine the technological approach, develop computational models of student
learning, optimize the design of tests, and identify effective strategies for
online learning and teaching. This project will advance the work of the REAL
(Research on Education and Learning) program in studying the cognitive basis of
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) learning, as well as
the Cyberlearning program in discovering how to design and effectively use
learning technologies of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach used for
knowledge diagnosis in the online tutor will be Bayesian inverse reinforcement
learning. This approach combines ideas from machine learning and cognitive
science. Students' responses will be modeled using Markov decision processes, a
decision-theoretic formalism that indicates how a rational agent should take a
series of actions to achieve a goal. This will make it possible to calculate the
probability that a student would take a particular series of actions, given his
or her knowledge of the domain. Bayesian inference will be used to invert this
model, providing a probability distribution over the knowledge state of the
student given his or her actions. Applying this approach to algebra problem
solving will make it possible to identify students' misconceptions from freeform
solutions to algebra problems. The proposed research will require addressing
challenges such as working with the infinite, structured state spaces that are
needed to describe algebraic equations, accommodating composite actions (such as
skipping a step in a derivation), modeling learning, and optimizing the design
of assessments.