* 1420831
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Clarifying the ingredients and significance of nonlocal versus local sediment transport on steepland hillslopes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Daniel Morgan, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2018
* USD 173,374.00

Hillslopes of varying steepness cover much of Earth's terrestrial surface, and
may be entirely mantled with regolith or consist of bare bedrock surfaces, or
involve mixtures of these conditions. Because of the central role of hillslope
behavior in landscape dynamics, and because of the importance of soils and soil
transport in critical zone processes that sustain much of life on Earth, the
topic of sediment transport on hillslopes has a particularly rich legacy. Viewed
at a human timescale, this topic is central to studies of erosion and erosion
control in the agricultural and environmental sciences. Further, this topic is
central in geomorphic studies focused on descriptions of transport that can be
used in models of hillslope and landscape evolution. This project is aimed at
clarifying the factors that contribute to "local" transport, where downslope
sediment movement involves small particle motions controlled by local soil and
land-surface conditions, versus "nonlocal" transport associated with soil slips,
biotic disturbances (e.g., tree-throw), particle ravel following fire, etc.,
which can involve relatively rapid, long-distance sediment motions. The research
will combine theoretical, experimental, and field-based work in the Oregon Coast
Range and the Sierra Nevada Mountains to clarify rates of sediment transport and
the effects of transport on changing steepland topography. The work is a
collaborative research and education effort involving students and faculty from
Vanderbilt University and the University of Oregon. It will provide teaching
tools deriving from visualizations of experiments and numerical simulations, and
it will provide data sets to the science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
work on hillslope sediment transport suggests the need to clarify the
ingredients and implications of "nonlocal" versus "local" transport processes
and associated formulations of the sediment flux, as expected hillslope behavior
under these two conditions is quite different. However, the supporting theory
has outpaced experimental and field-based observations needed to inform this
theory. This project is aimed at closing that gap, as implications for
understanding hillslope evolution are far-reaching. The project will: (1)
combine experiments with scaling analyses to clarify ingredients of rarefied
particle-surface interactions during their downslope motions, as these influence
key processes of sediment disentrainment; (2) explore theoretical formulations
of nonlocal transport for two-dimensional topography that is convergent-
divergent in planform; (3) combine field observations with modeling work
centered on hillslopes in the Oregon Coast Range and moraines in the Sierra
Nevada Mountains that were selected to reveal ingredients of nonlocal transport
behavior; and (4) formulate descriptions of nonlocal transport with appropriate
space-time averaging to take into account the discontinuous (patchy,
intermittent) nature of sediment motions on steepland hillslopes, as is
necessary for treating the sediment flux as a time differentiable quantity.