* 1420026
* SHF:Small: Collaborative Research: CONTINUOUS-TIME DIGITAL COMPUTATION AND SIGNAL PROCESSING
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Rajit Manohar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2017
* USD 72,808.00

The goal of this research is to develop high-performance and power-efficient
digital signal processors, using a novel event-driven approach involving special
techniques that carefully keep track of the timing of events. Unlike standard
"asynchronous" logic this approach inherently uses physical time as part of its
representation of information. The systems and techniques to be developed in
course of this research can benefit a number of important applications,
including sensor networks and biomedical instrumentation in health care. The
body of knowledge to be created would potentially find applications in other
areas as well, including control systems and robotics. The work has a
significant educational component, in that it involves synergistic development,
combining different domains of knowledge and thus training the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in interdisciplinary work, leading to new,
creative solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Appealing technical properties of this
approach include the absence of aliasing, better spectral properties of error,
and faster response to changing inputs, compared to classical techniques. The
approach is suitable for certain applications that demand very low power
dissipation, notably those involving portability or difficult-to-access
locations. While prior work concentrated on demonstrating the feasibility of
continuous-time digital signal processors, this new effort concentrates on
developing next-generation systems and achieving very high performance,
necessitating new principles and techniques. The work seeks to advance the
performance of continuous-time digital signal processors by reducing the
effective sampling rate and improving output reconstruction, by using special
coding techniques for relaxing granularity requirements in the signal processing
units, by processing directly non-uniformly quantized signals, and by employing
algorithmic techniques; it also expands continuous-time digital techniques to
general scientific computation. The proposed effort brings together two groups
with complementary expertise. The Columbia University group specializes in
mixed-signal circuits and has demonstrated the first continuous-time digital
signal processors; the Cornell University group works in asynchronous digital
electronics, including event-driven processors and asynchronous dataflow FPGAs.