* 1420820
* Doctoral Dissertation Research on the Role of Domain-General Executive Functions in Language Production: Resolving conflict in lexical selection
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Angela Fink, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 9,193.00

Understanding how speakers succeed in producing fluent speech with little
conscious effort is critical not only to our understanding of the human capacity
for language, it also provides insight into how injury to the brain can result
in different patterns of loss to that capacity. Producing speech is an
impressive mental feat. For example, even cognitively intact individuals
sometimes slip up and say the wrong word (e.g., monotony instead of monogamy).
How is it that most of the time speakers manage to avoid such difficulties?
Building on previous work, this project proposes that speakers efficiently
manage the complexity of speaking by drawing on general mental processes called
executive functions. These allow speakers to "focus" mental processing, allowing
them to efficiently retrieve the words they wish to speak. This project tests
this hypothesis by examining how the efficiency of producing speech is related
to (i) individual differences in executive functions and (ii) recent experience
using executive functions in other cognitive tasks. Gaining a better
understanding of the links between general and language specific mental
processes may help professionals capitalize on those links in therapeutic and
educational settings. For instance, recent research on bilingualism suggests
that regular experience with difficult language processing--e.g., when a
bilingual alternates between multiple languages may improve general cognitive
control and delay the onset of dementia. Identifying which general processes are
involved in speech production may therefore allow the development of cognitive
control training that targets those processes--which may be used to help
individuals with deficits to language production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will specifically examine how particular parts of general cognitive
control contribute to word retrieval during speech production. Previous work has
shown that there is competition among multiple representations during word
retrieval (e.g., upon seeing a picture of a CAT, the words CAT, RAT, and DOG all
come to mind). This project will examine whether general control processes known
as executive functions help resolve such competition. Specifically, it will
investigate two executive functions that support conflict resolution: response
inhibition (suppression of an automatic response to a stimulus) and interference
resolution (prevention of an incorrect response when multiple options are
available). The first of two studies will test whether speakers? individual
differences in response inhibition and interference resolution abilities
influence their picture naming performance in the context of strong competition.
If the target executive functions help speakers resolve conflict among competing
word-level representations, then speakers with higher control abilities should
show have less trouble naming pictures in the presence of competition.
Importantly, several behavioral tasks will be used to evaluate each executive
function, ensuring that the executive function measures do not reflect task-
specific effects. The second, parallel study will examine the causality of the
relationship between the target executive functions and word retrieval using a
procedure known as negative transfer. Each of three groups will receive
intensive practice in non-linguistic tasks intended to 'exhaust' a specific
executive function. If the target control process (e.g., response inhibition) is
involved in conflict resolution during word retrieval, then negative transfer
should occur, such that speakers who practiced that process have more trouble
naming pictures after practice than before it.