* 1420013
* University of Minnesota MRSEC
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 09/30/2021
* USD 18,520,000.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves three
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs). The first team aims to develop new
understanding of charge transport in solid-state materials, key to technologies
such as plastic electronics and magnetic storage devices. The second team is
developing nanocrystals made from non-toxic and earth abundant elements, for
fabrication into thin films for solar energy and low energy lighting. The third
team is developing new approaches to assembling polymeric materials with
superior property combinations, for applications as diverse as water treatment,
fuel cell membranes, gene therapy, and integrate circuit manufacturing. The
senior investigators provide research experiences for promising undergraduates
from a national network of four-year colleges, minority serving institutions,
tribal colleges, and universities. Summer camps for high school students, from
the Twin Cities and from Native American communities across the upper Midwest,
involve senior investigators, students, and postdocs in hands-on activities.
Entertaining demonstration shows to illustrate fundamental scientific
principles, by faculty from all three IRGs, engage over 20,000 K-12 students
each year. Close interaction with industry involves knowledge transfer in a pre-
competitive collaboration with over 40
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific target of IRG-1, Electrostatic
Control of Materials, is to control electronic properties in novel materials.
Recently developed methods based on ionic liquids and solid electrolytes can
generate unprecedented charge densities, up to an electron per unit cell,
enabling dramatic property modification. Opportunities include reversible
control of magnetic order, fine-tuning of insulator-metal and superconducting
transitions, novel devices, discovery of new phases, and determination of
transport limits in new materials. The focus of IRG-2, Sustainable Nanocrystal
Materials, is the design, synthesis, processing, and thin film properties of
environmentally benign nanocrystal-based electronic and optoelectronic
materials. The field is constrained by reliance on toxic (Pb, Cd) and/or scarce
(In, Te) elements, with serious environmental, health, and economic concerns.
The team is targeting nanocrystal-based thin films made from nontoxic, abundant
and sustainable materials (Si, Ge, Cu, Zn) using scalable, low-temperature
processes such as plasma synthesis. The vision of IRG-3, Hierarchical
Multifunctional Macromolecular Materials, is to develop a multiple interaction
approach to polymer materials design that enables multifunctional applications
by decoupling the optimization of two or more desired attributes. Three
integrated thrusts target control of aqueous rheology and gelation with polymers
containing cellulose ether blocks; control of structure and properties of block-
polymer-based "amphiplexes", assemblies of polyanions with cationic copolymer
micelles; and design and preparation of novel multiblock polymers featuring
independent control of ordered-state symmetries and mechanical properties.