* 1420111
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Interaction At The Periphery Of Empires
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Susannah Fishman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 18,629.00

One central goal of archaeology is to understand how complex social entities
such as "states" and "empires" arise. In the process marginal regions which lie
outside centers of power must develop means to interact and deal with such
larger neighbors. ("Tribal regions" in Northwest Pakistan provide one modern
example.) This research examines one such case. Doing so in an archaeological
context provides the advantage of tracing interactions over an extended period
of time.

This project will explore the relationships between technology and politics by
examining how ceramic technology in local centers in Naxçývan, Azerbaijan, at
the periphery of the Urartian Empire (Middle Iron Age, MIA, 800-600 BCE), shaped
life in the frontier. Urartu was the first empire to arise in the highlands of
the Ancient Near East, encompassing much of Eastern Turkey, Northwest Iran, and
the Southern Caucasus. What was the political relationship between the Plain,
Naxçývan and Urartu? How did changing ceramic technology generate and/or reflect
the development of new political relationships? Political context affects
economic opportunities, consumer preferences, and labor conditions, which
changes technology. In return, technological changes can alter political
practices, as the desire for certain luxury goods, new food preparation methods,
and previously unknown trade partners become essential to local communities.

The research will reconstruct ceramic production from the Early Iron Age (EIA,
1200-800 BCE) and the MIA, and observe which aspects of ceramic technology show
discontinuous change. Ceramic production usually changes gradually over time,
and abrupt change generally requires a catalyst related to social, political,
and economic shifts. Abrupt changes in ceramic technology probably show that
Sharur inhabitants were reorganizing certain aspects of life in response to
Urartu. Ceramic samples will be studied from excavations of a fortress, a
domestic settlement in the valley below, and survey of the surrounding area to
investigate how artisans, pastoralists, farmers, and administrators negotiated
imperial expansion through material culture. Ceramics will be analyzed using
multiple methods including petrography, XRD, NAA, SEM, and radiography to
investigate raw material acquisition, forming, decoration, and exchange.
Studying the provenience of raw materials provides evidence for exchange
networks, forming reveals organization of production, and decoration indicates
symbolic positioning. By layering these data, it will be possible to reconstruct
how people in this region engaged with Urartu as a vassal, neighbor, or
antagonist.

The NSF grant will contribute to international collaboration between American
and Azerbaijani archaeologists, with directors and team members from both
countries working together towards common goals. The Naxçývan Archaeological
Project provides resources to develop Azerbaijani archaeological research
initiatives, facilitating Azerbaijani development of their own heritage
including a site conservation plan. The project also provides training to
undergraduate and graduate students from institutions throughout the United
States. Research results will be presented at conferences for scholarly
audiences, and public talks in Philadelphia and Azerbaijan. Ongoing excavation
results are posted on the project website in English, Azerbaijani, and Russian.
Finally, all results will be published in a monograph and as articles in peer-
reviewed journals.

Human-technological relations are a pressing concern of the modern world, and
archaeology is uniquely positioned to add data with time depth to our
understanding of how these relationships function. Azerbaijan lies at the nexus
of Asia and Europe, and deeper knowledge of ancient life at these crossroads
makes it possible to contextualize modern processes of technological change and
globalization in this politically critical region. By reconstructing past
relationships between technology and power, this research will shed light on the
modern dynamics of technological complexity.