* 1420307
* Investigating Proportional Relationships from Two Perspectives (InPReP2)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Sybilla Beckmann, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,331,220.00

Strengthening middle school mathematics education is as urgent as any challenge
facing STEM education in the United States. Ratios and proportional
relationships are a critical foundation for mathematics and science, yet they
pose perennial challenges for students and teachers. Investigating Proportional
Relationships from Two Perspectives (InPReP2) will examine how future teachers
develop understandings of proportional relationships in mathematics courses they
take as part of their preparation programs. The project will collect data in
teacher preparation courses and through interviews during which future teachers
solve problems about proportional relationships. The courses and interviews will
be based on a potentially transformative approach to ratio and proportional
relationships, which has been overlooked by past research. The project will also
conduct a study comparing how preservice middle grades and secondary grades
mathematics teachers at the University of Georgia (UGA) and Kennesaw State
University (KSU) reason about proportional relationships. Discoveries about what
is easier and what is harder for future teachers to learn will be used to
identify key targets for instruction that better prepare future teachers to help
their students with critical, yet difficult, middle grades mathematics.

Past research suggests teachers' difficulties with proportional relationships,
covariation, and multiplicative relationships are likely to have roots deep in
the multiplicative conceptual field, yet this same research has not examined
those roots directly. InPReP2 will examine how preservice middle school
teachers' capacities to reason about multiplication and division in terms of
quantities support and constrain their facility with proportional relationships.
InPReP2 will also investigate proportional relationships based on two
complementary perspectives, one that makes covariation visually explicit with
double number lines and one that makes multiplicative relationships between
quantities visually explicit with strip diagrams. The central hypothesis for
InPReP2 is that the two perspectives may facilitate both key features of
proportional relationships and open new pathways that make subsequent topics
more accessible. InPReP2 will investigate methods that coordinate detailed case
studies with recent advances surveying multiplicative reasoning in large,
national samples. InPReP2 will also examine in both clinical and experimental
settings how different initial strengths and weaknesses with multiplicative
reasoning affect how future teachers make sense of the two perspectives on
proportions and applications. InPReP2 results about multiplicative reasoning
will inform improved teacher education and professional development content
courses that prepare teachers across the nation for standards that emphasize
sense making with quantities. Teachers with an understanding of proportional
relationships in terms of quantities will be better prepared to support their
students' reasoning about co-variation and multiplicative relationships, which
is fundamental to college readiness. InPReP2 methods will advance STEM education
research by investigating how Diagnostic Classification Models, in combination
with measures of reasoning, can be used to coordinate surveys of large samples
with detailed case-studies of small samples. Such methods have broad
implications for generating generalizable findings about learning in complex,
multi-faceted domains. InPReP2 will integrate training of new mathematics
education researchers and teacher educators into all aspects of the project.