* 1420620
* MRSEC: Center for Nanoscale Science
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2022
* Vincent Crespi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 10/31/2022
* USD 15,905,853.00

****Nontechnical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Transformative advances occur when new
types of material organization and behavior are conceived, created, and
controlled. The Penn State Center for Nanoscale Science creates four
interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) to meet this goal. The IRG1 team
predicts, synthesizes and develops layered materials that couple together
electrical, magnetic and mechanical properties in new ways with potential
application in cell phones, high-power electronic devices, nonvolatile memory,
ultrasound, and precision actuation. In IRG2, self-powered active materials are
developed to sense and react to the environment through their collective
behavior, capturing key elements of biological behavior in abiotic systems with
potential application in biomedicine, diagnostics and sensors, and autonomous
materials repair. IRG3 is pioneering the development of electronic metalattices,
systems that organize materials in three dimensions on a few-nanometer length
scale through innovative high-pressure synthesis, with unique electronic,
optical, magnetic and thermal properties. In IRG4, light is used to modulate the
controlled, reconfigurable assembly of diverse arrays of nanoparticles
purposefully designed to harbor unique collective electronic and optical
properties for new types of optical devices and bioinspired sensing. This
cohesive culture of shared science is then extended to educate and inspire
future scientists and members of the public, bring advances to market through
industrial outreach, and reach the wider community through international
collaboration and facilities networks. Hands-on materials-oriented kits,
smartphone apps, summer science camps, and programs to support students from
diverse backgrounds reach thousands of students each year. Researchers at all
career stages will be instilled with a native expectation that materials
research naturally reaches across disciplines and is open to individuals with
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;IRG1 "Designing Functionality into Layered Ferroics"
targets the electric-field control of material response starting from the level
of atoms, exploiting geometry, topology, composition, and gradients to design
and discover fundamental new mechanisms and material classes of acentric layered
oxides with strong coupling to spin, charge and lattice degrees of freedom. IRG2
"Powered Motion at the Nanoscale" designs synthetic active matter that exhibits
emergent properties and complex functions based on motor interactions, taking
advantage of synthetic motor systems that allow control of the critical features
of active matter free from the constraints of living organisms. IRG3 "High-
Pressure Enabled Electronic Metalattices" exploits a unique capability to fill
~10nm pores with high-quality crystalline semiconductors and characterize them
with high-harmonic ultrafast coherent photons, deploying these techniques to
create a new class of ordered 3D metalattices that modulate electronic,
magnetic, and vibrational degrees of freedom against nm-scale structural order.
IRG4 "Multicomponent Assemblies for Collective Function" exploits principles of
optically modulated, gradient-driven assembly of heterogeneous, reconfigura-ble
particle arrays to create electronic and photonic architectures with functions
determined by the collective properties of the ensemble.