* 1421082
* OCE-PRF Track 1:  Dissecting the physiological and molecular responses of marine picoeukaryotes to the interactive effects of P deficiency and ocean acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* LeAnn Whitney, Whitney                 LeAnn          P
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Picoeukaryotes are an ecologically important, but understudied group of
picophytoplankton that are significant contributors to oceanic primary
production and global carbon cycling. In this postdoctoral research project, the
fellow will examine the physiological and molecular response of three
picoeukaryotes to elevated carbon dioxide and changes in nutrient availability.
This is an important and timely topic for improved understanding of marine
ecosystem responses to global climate changes. This two year fellowship hosted
by Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, will advance the career
of the fellow who has strong background in microbial research, a field that is
of increasing importance in oceanography. The broadening participation
activities include education and outreach to youths from a local Somalian
community residing in Maine since the Somalian civil war.

In this project, the fellow will study the response of Micromonas pusilla,
Ostreococcus tauri, and Bathycoccus prasinos, picoeukaryotes commonly found in
oligotrophic regions, to conditions representative of future oceans,
specifically ocean acidification and phosphorus limitation. Physiological
measurements and whole-cell transcriptomic profiling will be used to
characterize the cellular response of this ecologically important group of
picophytoplankton to changes in phosphorus availability and rising ambient
carbon dioxide. In addition, cell abundance and gene expression patterns will be
investigated in field samples using species-specific molecular assays to
understand how natural picoeukaryotic populations respond to regional gradients
in environmental conditions. The study will provide insight into how climate
change may impact picoeukaryote growth and thus carbon cycling in oligotrophic
gyres. Data and information about rate processes and underlying cellular
mechanisms are critical for future development of ecologically-driven,
predictive ocean ecosystem models.