* 1421505
* SHF: Small: Optimizing Compiler and Runtime for Concurrency-Oriented Execution Model
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Zheng Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 426,141.00

Title: SHF:Small:Optimizing Compiler and Runtime for Concurrency-Oriented
Execution Model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "dark silicon" effect, where an
increasing fraction of cores will have to be kept powered off (or, "dark"), at
every generation of transistor downsizing, has made it difficult to sustain
further efficiency gains via the scaling of semiconductor technology. However,
the demands of applications and their data on storage and processing
capabilities are rapidly growing, thus increasing the gap between the efficiency
of the system stack and the needs of modern applications. This research project
aims to redesign the system stack based on a novel paradigm that combines
throughput-processing architecture and a concurrency-centric compilation
framework. The system stack used in this research project consists of
architecture specialized for throughput, which trades single-thread instruction
level parallelism (ILP) exploitation units for throughput units. The compiler is
specialized for concurrency, which minimizes single thread latency by
interleaved execution of a tremendous number of concurrent
threads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project reveals the implications of
concurrent execution on throughput processors and how these implications affect
compile-time decisions and the corresponding runtime optimization. The
intellectual merits are two-fold: 1) it reveals that the existing mainstream CPU
compilation techniques are concurrency-oblivious, which leaves both many
challenging problems unanswered and many opportunities for performance
improvement to be explored, and 2) it tackles these problems by addressing both
the resource allocation and instruction/thread scheduling aspects of compile-
time decision making, which is where the fundamental difference between the
concurrent execution model and the traditional CPU execution model arises. The
broader impacts of this project are that the research results will drive
innovation in business, education, and computing applications by reinventing the
system stack to enhance efficiency and to help achieve the next supercomputing
milestone, namely, exascale-computing.