* 1421941
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Chinese Labor Unrest: Transforming the State from Below?
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Valerie Bunce, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

In China, tens of thousands of strikes, protests, and riots over workplace
issues are estimated to occur annually. What is the political impact of this
turmoil? Dominant analyses assume that rising unrest is not fundamentally
altering the Chinese political system. This project assesses another
interpretation, namely that worker activism is gradually transforming the Party-
state from below, but in a potentially contradictory manner, spurring a
strengthening of the coercive capacity of local governments, on the one hand,
while forcing officials to side with labor against capital in formally
adjudicated disputes and to publicly reframe the role of workers in a more
positive light, on the other.

To test this hypothesis, the project will first employ an original, crowd-
sourced and georeferenced dataset of strikes, protests, and riots by workers
across China, as well as GIS maps of county-level demographic and economic data,
to identify those causes of labor unrest that might also correlate with
government policy. Next, it will use a time series dataset drawn from official
sources to analyze the relationship between provincial-level labor dispute rates
and both spending on the anti-riot People's Armed Police (PAP) and outcomes of
labor dispute mediation, arbitration, and litigation (i.e., the balance between
pro-worker, pro-employer, and mixed rulings), controlling for those variables
that were significant in the first round of analysis. Finally, to examine subtle
changes in government rhetoric and to understand the precise mechanisms
potentially linking unrest and policy outcomes, interviews will be conducted and
media reports and state press releases collected in provinces that lie along the
regression line of disputes and PAP spending but that vary in their levels of
unrest.

This research will have important ramifications for our understanding of the
long-term viability of the Chinese Communist Party, as well as the role of
social movements under authoritarianism more generally. To date, the emphasis of
researchers has largely been on how state structures shape dissent, not the
reverse, and on movement "successes" versus "failures." The project will examine
alternatives to prevailing top-down narratives of state-society relations and
explore how concessions and repression can combine in unexpected ways,
encouraging further unrest even as unrest is clamped down upon more forcefully.
The project will prove valuable outside of academic circles. Its findings should
provide guidance to activists in the international labor movement regarding how
best to support their counterparts in China. Following the dramatic events of
the Arab Spring, democracy promotion experts in government and civil society
ought to find the results of the project useful in gauging the openings?and
barriers?to reform in single-party states. Finally, at a time when spending on
domestic "stability maintenance" has outstripped the entire Chinese defense
budget, this research will inform debates among security analysts regarding
Beijing's internal and external priorities and the interaction between the two.