* 1421726
* CSR: SMALL: Design Validation Methods for Reliable and Efficient Floating-Point
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2018
* USD 414,341.00

Floating-point arithmetic enables computers to smoothly
and&lt;br/&gt;efficiently handle widely varying magnitudes such as the diameter
of&lt;br/&gt;an atom or that of a star, and fit these measures within
computer&lt;br/&gt;words that come in standard widths.
Unfortunately,&lt;br/&gt;when calculations are performed on floating numbers,
round-off errors&lt;br/&gt;are introduced, often causing real-world disasters,
such as errant&lt;br/&gt;missile launches. While employing large computer word
widths can&lt;br/&gt;minimize these errors, it also slows down computations,
increases&lt;br/&gt;their memory, and energy needs. This project could have a
broad impact&lt;br/&gt;by providing much needed debug support for scientific
programmers to &lt;br/&gt;develop more reliable floating point
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel ways to estimate
round-off errors, thus&lt;br/&gt;helping programmers arrive at efficient
floating-point computer codes.&lt;br/&gt;Special emphasis is placed on handling
tricky cases such as squaring&lt;br/&gt;numbers and taking their trigonometric
values where prior research had&lt;br/&gt;not sufficiently advanced. By
developing powerful and automated tools&lt;br/&gt;for precision estimation, it
allows programmers to tune their codes&lt;br/&gt;and pick word widths
parsimoniously while not losing accuracy. &lt;br/&gt;The investigators use these
tools to develop pedagogical material and best&lt;br/&gt;practices based on
hands-on experience that helps inform students who&lt;br/&gt;typically are not
taught the pitfalls of floating-point arithmetic.