* 1421418
* RI: Small: Functional Object-Oriented Network for Manipulation Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Yu Sun, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 398,529.00

This project constructs a functional object-oriented network (FOON) to model the
connectivity of the functional-related objects and their functional motions in
manipulation tasks. The graphical model FOON are developed and learned by
observing state change of objects and human manipulations with the objects. A
well-trained FOON enables robots to decipher a task goal, seek the correct
objects at the desired states, and generate an optimal motion, which eventually
allows robots to perform daily living tasks and provide needed help to people
with disabilities and seniors. The project builds a kitchen environment with
representative kitchen objects and a virtual environment to collect training
data and learn a representative FOON from the observations of self-generated
manipulation tasks performed in both environments. The data collected in the
proposed work enables researchers to fully explore daily living tasks from the
object state and object motion point of view and provide excellent training and
testing data sets for other related research. The FOON provides a powerful tool
for discovering new insights in neuroscience, cognitive science, and psychology.
It is also useful in training to break down skills for teaching and training
evaluation. This project draws additional minority students through the
exceptional diversity programs that exist at USF. The project supports a summer
camp to attract young students to STEM careers and the research results are
widely disseminated through publications and inclusion in courses.