* 1421191
* U.S. NSF - China NSF Workshop on Sustainable Manufacturing, Wuhan, China, March 13-15, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

1421191&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support
for a workshop on sustainable manufacturing to be held in Wuhan, China, March
13-15, 2014. This workshop is targeted to identify high-priority specific
research objectives that can be pursued significantly better by collaborative
U.S. - China research teams than by U.S. researchers and China researchers
working separately without U.S. - China collaboration. In this workshop, U.S.
and China researchers will define high-priority sustainable manufacturing
research objectives and identify related collaborative research project areas
that are potentially fundable jointly by the U.S. NSF and China NSF. The
workshop is designed for broad and in-depth discussions of challenges,
opportunities, and collaborations in critical areas of mechanical/chemical
sustainable manufacturing. Participants from each country are leading/active
scholars in mechanical, chemical, industrial, material, civil and environmental
engineering. Thematic areas include (i) sustainable products and processes and
(ii) sustainable manufacturing systems. These thematic areas will cover most
frontier research topics, such as product design innovations for resource
efficiency and effectiveness, manufacturing process and equipment design with
minimum ecological footprints, smart manufacturing, fast and in-time green
production, and sustainable supply chain and industrial ecology. This workshop
should help greatly U.S. delegates to gain a clear understanding of research on
sustainable manufacturing in China, and identify high-level collaboration
opportunities with Chinese colleagues. As the workshop is designed for
multidisciplinary discussions, it is targeted to lead to identification of
cutting-edge areas in sustainable manufacturing and a plan for effective
interdisciplinary collaboration. The U.S. delegation is formed of academic
scholars of all ranks, including scholars from underrepresented groups. This
award is co-funded by the Global Venture Fund (GVF) of NSF's International
Science and Engineering section (ISE), as well as the CMMI and CBET divisions of
NSF's Engineering Directorate.