* 1421943
* RI: Small: Using Humans in the Loop to Collect High-quality Annotations from Images and Time-lapse Videos of Cells
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Margrit Betke, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 10/31/2018
* USD 370,151.00

Sequences of microscopy images of live cells are analyzed by cell biologists to
understand cellular processes, for example, to prevent cancer or design bio-
materials for wound healing. Research progress is slowed or compromised when
scientists find the image analysis efforts too labor-intensive to do themselves
and the automation methods too numerous, unreliable, or difficult to use. The
project develops image-analysis software to leverage human and computer
resources together, in particular on the internet, to create high-quality image
interpretations. Live-cell imaging studies support basic research to understand
cellular processes and design biomaterials. The work on statistically
significant performance evaluation can have broad impact on the research
methodology in computer vision.

The research explores how human and computer resources can be leveraged
together, in particular on the internet, to interpret images and videos of
cells. Initially, an expansive benchmark study of detection, segmentation, and
tracking algorithms for analyzing images of live cells is conducted. Computer-
vision approaches to address the major challenges for existing algorithms are
then developed, for example, to interpret the emergence of new cells due to
mitosis in time-lapse microscopy videos. Methods are designed for quantifying
the quality of automatically and manually obtained annotations and the
variability between multiple annotations. A tool is built to effectively and
efficiently use the expertise of domain specialists, in particular, cell
biologists, to judge and select automated methods that analyze cell images.
Crowd-sourcing experiments in which internet workers analyze images are designed
and conducted. The quality of these lay workers' annotations is compared to the
quality of annotations by domain experts and automated methods. Finally, a
machine learning system is developed that automatically determines which types
of cell images or videos can be analyzed accurately with or without human
involvement.