* 1421869
* NeTS:  Small: Spectrum Sensing and Resource Allocation for Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Brian Mark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 482,446.00

Radio spectrum has become an increasingly expensive and scarce resource due to
the exponential growth of the wireless industry and the rapid proliferation of
wireless devices over the past couple of decades. Ironically, studies of
spectrum usage have shown that much of the available spectrum is highly
underutilized, due to the current policy of static allocation, which partitions
the spectrum into various licensed bands. The main goal of this project is to
develop a cost-effective solution to the spectrum scarcity issue based on
emerging cognitive radio technology, which has the potential to allow unlicensed
users to reclaim unused spectrum in the licensed bands. A cognitive radio is
capable of detecting unused or idle spectrum and dynamically tuning its
transmission and reception activities to the so-called spectrum holes. A group
of unlicensed users equipped with cognitive radios can form a network and
communicate with each other via such spectrum holes. This research focuses on
developing efficient and accurate methods for cognitive radios to identify
spectrum holes and allocate this spectrum to enable communications among
unlicensed users without causing harmful interference to the licensed users of a
spectrum band. A major challenge of this work lies in how to perform spectrum
sensing and resource allocation in a cognitive radio network to maximize its
capacity while managing the additional interference and overhead incurred by the
cognitive radios. If the project is successful, the research results should have
a significant impact on increasing the capacity and performance of future
wireless networks. The research is expected to advance the field of cognitive
radio and contribute towards its adoption in commercial applications. The
results of this research will be applicable to future infrastructured wireless
networks, as well as wireless communications in emergency scenarios such as
disaster relief. An experimental platform will be developed to prototype and
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed dynamic spectrum access approach in
practical wireless environments. Students, including some from underrepresented
groups, will gain practical experience from working with the cognitive radio
testbed. New course materials will be developed to teach the basics of cognitive
radio technology to students at the graduate level.

The technical approach of this research centers on a joint consideration of
spectrum sensing and resource allocation, taking into account the three main
dimensions of spectrum holes, i.e., time, space, and frequency. A
multidimensional characterization of spectrum holes will be developed, which
incorporates a bivariate Markov chain to model temporal dynamics, power control
in the context of spatial spectrum sensing, and frequency-domain search for
spectrum holes in the wideband regime. A model of a cognitive radio network
based on simplicial homology will be developed to allocate spectrum resources
among cognitive radio nodes, as well as the communication and computational
resources required for spectrum sensing, to optimize performance from a
networking perspective. Interference modeling and management for the cognitive
radio network will be addressed in conjunction with resource allocation. The
project will study tradeoffs among communications and computational resources
within the proposed framework for dynamic spectrum access. An important
component of the project is the development of a cognitive radio network testbed
based on an open software radio platform, which will be used to prototype and
evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms and protocols in realistic
wireless scenarios.