* 1421126
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research:Concurrent Programming with Composable Transactional Objects
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Eric Koskinen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Concurrent Programming with Composable
Transactional Objects

With multicore architectures becoming increasingly prevalent, the problem of
constructing scalable and efficient concurrent software has attracted increasing
attention. There has been growing interest programming models that allow
programmers to demarcate regions of thread code---so-called transactions---that
should appear to occur atomically, when viewed from the perspective of other
threads.

The premise of this project is that current, monolithic software transactional
memory (STM) designs are inherently too inefficient and permit too little
parallelism. Instead we propose a very different approach: a library of
customized concurrent data structures that can be composed, through a very
light-weight run-time, to form transactions. Each data structure is optimized to
exploit the semantics of its type. The intellectual merits are the development
of new type-specific synchronization and recovery algorithms, along with formal
tools to reason about their correctness. These ideas will be embodied in a novel
concurrency library and verification toolkit, which will be used to construct
benchmarks and applications. The boarder impacts involve incorporating
concurrency into education and the potential to benefit society through higher
performing, more reliable, and less expensive software.