* 1421163
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Exploring New Approaches in Space-Bounded Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Pavan Aduri, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 218,142.00

Certain computational problems such as graph connectivity, matching, and
primality testing admit time-efficient algorithms. On the other hand problems
such as boolean formula satisfiability, traveling salesman problem, and
factoring still defy such fast algorithms. Why does such computational disparity
exist among natural computational problems? This clearly is a foundational
question which impacts many areas including mathematics, engineering, economics,
optimization, and communication - areas beyond computer science. The main goal
of ``computational complexity theory'' is to study the notion of efficient
computation. Typically, efficiency is measured in terms of computational
resources such as time and memory (space).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
investigate certain central and longstanding open questions concerning
nondeterminism and randomness in the context of memory-efficient computations.
By focusing on memory-bounded computations, it will (a) study the role of
unambiguity in nondeterminism (b) design deterministic algorithms that are
simultaneously time and space efficient for nondeterministic computations (c)
investigate the power of computations with multiple access to a random
tape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study of proposed topics will help in understanding
relations among three fundamental concepts of computation: determinism,
nondeterminism and randomness, in the context of computations with limited
memory. Intuition gained from this project will enhance our understanding of the
complexity of solving practical computational problems arising from various
fields beyond computer science. Research results from this grant will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and will be presented at national and
international conferences, thus enabling broad dissemination of the results to
enhance scientific understanding. Expository survey articles aimed at a broader
theoretical computer science audience will be written. New courses will be
created and taught along the theme of this project, thus integrating teaching
and research. The grant will also be used for various human resource development
activities such as supporting and mentoring graduate students.