* 1421326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Institutional Design as Mediator in the Political and Economic Effects of Supranational Court Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Lauren Peritz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 06/30/2016
* USD 13,863.00

Can international courts promote economic cooperation among countries?
International courts cannot compel compliance with their rulings yet sometimes
actually change the behavior of governments. This project posits that two
factors influence whether a country complies with the ruling of an international
court. First, domestic political divisions hinder compliance with court rulings
and prolong disputes by making policy change more difficult. Second, the design
of an international court---namely its ability to punish non-compliance---can
mitigate this effect. The results of this analysis will help both scholars and
policy-makers to understand how the United States can effectively promote its
economic interests in trade cooperation. It is key to understand when
international courts can (and cannot) resolve economic disputes given their
significance to the United States. The argument is tested by examining
litigation at the World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement Body and the
European Court of Justice.

Compliance and causation have been difficult to estimate; this project will make
a substantial theoretical contribution by developing a new model for estimating
causal effects. This project will create a novel dataset and statistical
analysis of two measures of compliance. First, the project will examine the
economic impact of court rulings using trade patterns for hundreds of
commodities and a new statistical model for estimating causal effects. Second,
the project will measure the political impact of court rulings using evidence
from news archives about whether governments enact legislative and policy
changes after adverse rulings. In addition, this project will contribute to
training an undergraduate student in methods in the social sciences.