* 1421575
* SHF:  Small:  Scalable and Maximal Predictive Runtime Verification for Concurrent Software
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Grigore Rosu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The increasingly widespread use of multicore processors, whose computing power
can only be unleashed by concurrent software, makes software defects, or bugs,
become more common and labor-intensive to detect and repair. Runtime
verification is a novel analysis approach that extracts information from a
running system and uses it to detect and possibly react to observed behaviors
satisfying or violating certain properties. Runtime verification scales well and
avoids the complexity of traditional formal verification techniques. The
techniques developed in this project will lead to robust production quality
software by providing a scalable alternative to formal verification that
provides many of the same guarantees for safety and security.

This project aims to develop a scalable predictive runtime verification
framework for concurrent software. A major technical advancement over prior art
is that it not only detects errors when they occur at runtime, but is able to
predict general security and safety property violations before they actually
surface, preventing bad behaviors from happening by taking proper actions
defined by the users. This project builds upon a sound and maximal causal model,
hereby providing the provably maximum possible prediction power on the observed
trace with no false alarms. The core research insight of this work is to explore
the maximal causality of concurrency with automated constraint solving, which
has been studied for decades and is becoming increasingly powerful.