* 1421929
* CHS: Small: Methods to Enhance Teamwork in Computer-Mediated International Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Susan Fussell, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2021
* USD 580,000.00

This research will draw from understanding of moment-by-moment team dynamics to
develop new interventions to help international teams overcome collaboration
challenges. Communication tools and social media have the potential to allow
people to interact fluidly across national, cultural and linguistic boundaries
in ways that would have been difficult if not impossible in the past. In
computer-mediated organizations, teams of people from across the globe now work
together on common problems, each bringing his or her own perspective and
expertise. Despite the promise of new media for interaction across national and
cultural boundaries, however, much of this potential fails to be realized.
Multicultural teams are challenged by mismatches in social conventions, work
styles, power relationships and conversational norms, which can lead to
misunderstandings that negatively affect relationships among team members and
the quality of group work. This project will lead to new tools and knowledge for
communication across geographic and cultural boundaries that will be made widely
available to the research community and general public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Just as successful teams work together to ground the informational
content of their messages, they need to likewise work together to build a shared
understanding about the affective meaning of each other's behavior. Particularly
a team's ability to regulate its interaction dynamics has been found to be a
significant predictor of its performance. This project will contribute to the
fields of computer-mediated communication and computer-supported cooperative
work by developing new theories and understandings of how people use technology
to communicate and collaborate across cultural boundaries. It will contribute to
human-computer interaction, information science, and related fields through the
development of new techniques and tools for improving a team's ability to
regulate its interaction, thereby leading to better relationships among
teammates and better outcomes. It will also contribute novel tools to evaluate
coordination of affect in team interaction in real time and to provide
interventions to improve team functioning. Finally, the work will explore new
technical issues around real-time automated assessment of team dynamics.