* 1421501
* Collaborative Research: Lay Deployment of Professional Legal Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Dalie Jimenez, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 07/31/2018
* USD 45,841.00

Despite doctrine that assumes to the contrary, the structure of the modern
justice system rests on the assumption that individuals can both access and
deploy the kind of legal knowledge that used to be the exclusive province of
legal professionals. A great deal of research focuses on methods of providing
access to professional legal knowledge. Little has focused on whether and how
lay individuals can deploy such knowledge in, for example, litigating small
claims court cases. This project will investigate whether and how lay
individuals can deploy professional legal knowledge when questions of access to
knowledge are eliminated. The project is innovative in evaluating the deployment
of lay legal knowledge via a field experiment, a method that can illuminate
causation and that has as yet been seldom used within legal sites. The project
is also methodologically innovative in integrating insights from multiple
disciplines concerning cognition and action into the deployment of legal advice.
The field experiment consists of two comparisons: (i) a self-help assistance
packet addressing the legal aspects of household legal problems versus an offer
of representation from legal professionals, and (ii) a self-help packet covering
good household management practices versus telephone or in-person household
management counseling. The self-help packets will be mailed directly to lay
individuals to eliminate the question of whether people had access to legal
knowledge. By comparing the outcomes experienced by individuals randomized to
the packets versus outcomes experienced by individuals randomized to
professional and quasi-professional assistance, the investigators will discover
whether and how lay individuals can deploy professional legal knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses important issues concerning the use
of legal knowledge in a deprofessionalized environment. The investigators will
disseminate their findings broadly, ensuring it is useful to relevant
policymakers. The project will also contribute to the training of scholars in
multi-disciplinary methods in the social sciences.