* 1421652
* SHF: SMALL: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Compiler Coaching
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Sam Tobin-Hochstadt, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2017
* USD 136,247.00

Title: SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Compiler
Coaching&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ``Compiler Coaching'' (Dialog) project
represents an investment in programming language tools and technology. Software
engineers use high-level programming languages on a daily basis to produce the
apps and applications that everyone uses and that control everybody's lives.
Once a programming language translator accepts a program as grammatically
correct, it creates impenetrable computer codes without informing the programmer
how well (fast or slow, small or large, energy hogging or efficient) these codes
will work. Indeed, modern programming languages employ increasingly
sophisticated translation techniques and have become obscure black boxes to the
working engineer. The goal of the Dialog project is to create channels of
communication between these translation processes and software engineers, with
the expectation that the latter can use this new source of&lt;br/&gt;information
to improve the speed, size, or energy consumption of their
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will explore the Dialog idea in two
optimizing compiler settings, one on the conventional side and one on the modern
one: for the Racket language, a teaching and research vehicle that they can
modify as needed to create the desired channel, and the JavaScript programming
language, the standardized tool for existing Web applications. The intellectual
merits concern the fundamental principles of creating such communication
channels and frameworks for gathering empirical evidence on how these channels
benefit the working software engineer. These results should enable the
developers of any programming language to implement similar channels of
communication to help their clients. The broader impacts are twofold. On one
hand, the project is likely to positively impact the lives of working software
engineers as industrial programming language creators adapt the Dialog idea. On
the other hand, the project will contribute to a two-decades old, open-source
programming language project with a large and longstanding history of
educational outreach at multiple levels. The project has influenced hundreds of
thousands of high school students in the past and is likely to do so in the
future.