* 1421765
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: The Automata Programming Paradigm for Genomic Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Gavin Conant, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 348,219.00

Inferring knowledge from genetic data will drive future advances in the life
sciences. However, DNA sequences are being generated faster than they can be
analyzed with existing computing technologies and algorithms. The core
computations performed by many genomic applications involve pattern matching.
This operation is normally implemented using automata-based algorithms and can
be efficiently mapped onto non-general purpose platforms such as Field
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) and Micron?s recently announced Automata
Processor (AP). However, the lack of high-level programming interfaces for these
devices hampers their adoption in the bioinformatics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fills this gap by developing novel
programmatic descriptions of several genomic analyses and mapping them onto
these two non-traditional architectures. The work advances the state-of-the-art
in several ways. At an algorithmic level, new methods to address the biological
problems of genome-scale orthology inference and regulatory motif search are
being developed. At a computational abstraction level, the researchers are
designing an extended finite automaton abstraction suitable to support diverse
computations, and are mapping new and existing computational kernels onto it. At
a hardware mapping level, automatic tuning techniques for the effective
deployment of automata-based computations on FPGA and Micron?s AP are being
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This interdisciplinary project will facilitate
the adoption of FPGA and Micron?s Automata Processor by biologists by providing
a new library of pattern matching routines and a high-level automata-based
programming interface for these platforms. In addition, the researchers are
developing instructional material in a variety of topics, such as genomic
analysis, pattern matching, automata processing and high-performance computing.
Finally, this project provides research opportunities and access to pre-
production hardware to undergraduate and graduate students, interdisciplinary
training, and technology transfer to industry. The results of this research will
be made available through the release of software tools and publication in
international conferences and journals.