* 1421118
* OCE-RIG: Implementation of Advanced Underwater Optical Instrumentation for the Study of Marine Particle Dynamics in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Andrew McDonnell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 07/31/2017
* USD 109,999.00

The production, transformation, sinking, horizontal transport, remineralization
and deposition of particulate organic matter in the oceans play important roles
in the cycling of carbon and other elements throughout the earth system.
Traditional oceanographic strategies for the sampling and study of marine
particles often involve various forms of direct collection. However, these
approaches are severely limited in their ability to provide particle data at
high spatial and temporal resolutions, and to determine the in situ structure of
these small and delicate particles. For these reasons, in situ imaging of
particles and plankton is rapidly becoming an important tool for the study of
marine particle dynamics and the ocean's biological pump, as these instruments
enable the high-resolution and non-destructive assessment of particle size,
concentration, and morphology. This project will facilitate the initial testing,
operational development, and utilization of the Underwater Vision Profiler 5
(UVP), an advanced in situ imaging system. Deployments of the UVP in the Arctic
Ocean will generate a new dataset that will be used to explore the nature of the
biological, chemical, and physical factors that influence the cycling of
particles and carbon in this region. The award supports two students at the
University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), one Master's and one undergraduate, to
participate in research related to particle cycling in the Arctic ocean. The PI
and the students will use in situ imaging equipment to study the links between
the particle size distribution and the sinking flux of particulate organic
matter. The cycling of particulate matter in the Arctic Ocean is not well
understood, and this research will enhance of our understanding of particle
dynamics and carbon cycling in a region that is currently undergoing rapid
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will advance the
methodological capabilities of the UAF laboratory, begin a new research endeavor
into the dynamics of marine particles and carbon cycling of the Arctic Ocean,
and engage two students in research that is relevant to the Arctic.