* 1421245
* RI: Small: Generation and modulation of variability in trial and error learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Adrienne Fairhall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 459,521.00

Reinforcement learning is a powerful learning strategy in which random
perturbations are made to an output and changes that lead to more successful
outputs are reinforced. Animals learn to perform highly skilled tasks by trial
and error, but how biological neural networks generate variability from trial to
trial is not known. An ideal model for examining this relationship between
variability and learning can be found in song learning by birds. Birds learn
their songs by trial and error, and are able to adjust their songs into
adulthood. In addition, the basic neural architecture of the learning circuit
has been mapped out; some effects of behavioral context on variability are also
known. How variability is generated, and how it is controlled, can thus be
studied mechanistically.

This project will study two candidate mechanisms for the generation and control
of variability: chaotic dynamics in a cortex-like area, and dynamical modulation
of synchrony in a basal ganglia circuit. While generic neural networks are
chaotic, this project will explore how such dynamics are modified in a cortical
network of biophysically plausible neurons with structured connectivity based on
the known topography of the learning circuit. Furthermore, the birdsong cortical
area receives inputs generated by basal ganglia. How might this input influence
the variability of the output? It is proposed that the ability of activity in
basal ganglia to affect cortex may depend on the synchrony of basal ganglia
outputs. The studies will be constrained by experimental data from these
candidate areas through collaborations with two laboratories.

The work will contribute to a general understanding of variability in biological
learning, and may suggest strategies for structuring noisy input during motor
learning that can lead to efficient outcomes for robotics applications. Further,
Dr Fairhall is developing materials for broad outreach programs that include a
Massive Online Open Course to introduce concepts in computational neuroscience
to a very diverse audience, and a workshop for middle school girls interested in
mathematics applied to the life sciences.