* 1421855
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Dependable Real-Time Computing on Heterogeneous Chip Multiprocessor Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Hakan Aydin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 269,966.00

Chip multiprocessor (CMP) systems, which provide multiple processors on a single
chip, also known as multicore systems, have displaced single-processor
architectures as the de facto standard model for computing platforms. This
change is due to the fact that the CMPs offer superior performance and power
efficiency, compared to the traditional designs. An emerging feature of the CMP
era is the deployment of several different types of processing elements on the
same platform, with varying computation speed and power consumption
characteristics. An additional complicating factor is that a trend toward
overprovisioned designs, where only a subset of the available cores can be
active at any time, due to power and thermal constraints. Such heterogeneous
CMPs are increasingly being deployed in systems where applications with
different safety assurance (dependability) and timeliness requirements must co-
exist on the same CMP. Hence, there is a growing need for an integrated
framework to allocate heterogeneous hardware resources of a CMP among
applications in a way that makes efficient use of the resources while assuring
that the diverse safety and timeliness requirements of the applications are met.

This project aims to develop models, algorithms, and run-time management schemes
for collections of applications with a mix of different timing and dependability
requirements running on a shared heterogeneous CMP platform. In particular, a
central objective is to develop a sound methodology to selectively apply known
hardware and software fault tolerance mechanisms (such as modular redundancy,
task replication, re-execution) to such mixed-dependability applications, by
considering resource, power, and timing constraints simultaneously. A second
objective is to extend the framework to tackle the challenge of intermittent
run-time faults that occur in bursts and can affect multiple applications at
once during a bounded time window. Success in these efforts could improve the
safety and reduce the development and production costs of the increasingly
complex cyber-physical systems upon which we all have come to depend.

Education and outreach activities include integration of aspects of the research
into undergraduate and graduate courses at the two participating institutions,
involvement of students as research assistants, and efforts to recruit student
participants from under-represented demographic groups.