* 1421435
* RI: Small: Micro-GPS: Localization using Visual Landmarks in Commonplace Texture
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Szymon Rusinkiewicz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,993.00

This project develops a Micro-GPS system that provides centimeter-level accuracy
and is reliable both indoors and out, based on specific landmarks in the
"random" textures present in the world. The key idea is that all floors, such as
the carpet in a building, the grain of a wood floor, the concrete on a sidewalk,
and the asphalt on a road, have small imperfections, bumps, or variations in
color from location to location. A downward-pointing camera mounted underneath a
vehicle can observe specific, unique arrangements of these seemingly random
variations, looking them up in an index to find out their precise position in
the world. The developed technology can provide capabilities for better in-car
navigations, such as accurate parking in a particular spot, pothole avoidance,
and lane departure warning. Other applications might include smart wheelchairs
that can stay on a sidewalk and avoid rough patches, scooters for the elderly
and disabled, assistive technologies for the visually impaired, marker-free
smart highways, smart robots in warehouses that can precisely position
themselves next to shelves, and even domestic assistants that can handle day-to-
day chores inside a home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is based on a key
idea that localization is possible based on specific features in the "random"
textures present in the world: seemingly-heterogeneous textures that have unique
variations everywhere but globally consistent image statistics. The key
challenges of this project include developing methods for (1) detecting uncommon
locations or "features" in a close-up image of the ground surface; (2) computing
a feature descriptor for each detected landmark, in a way that is invariant to
changes in orientation and lighting; (3) matching the features against a map: a
pre-built database of features, their arrangements, and their locations in the
world; and (4) being able to create and update the database to increase coverage
and to account for changes. All of these are common components in contemporary
systems for tracking, image alignment, and recognition. However, the individual
algorithms have been tuned to work best for "natural" images. Instead, the
project focuses on developing detectors, descriptors, matching algorithms, and
update strategies that are tuned to the statistics of common ground textures.
The research team investigates whether accuracy can be improved by combining
descriptors based on color with ones based on surface normals or height fields;
and the systems issues involved in scaling the system to widespread coverage.