* 1421050
* International Rural Gentrification
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Peter Nelson, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 297,528.00

The concept of gentrification -- where middle or high income residents displace
poorer residents within a particular region -- is relatively well studied in
cities and urban settings. It is commonly used to describe economic,
demographic, and cultural change in such environments. Gentrification in rural
areas and areas with lower population densities is much less well studied. As
America's rural landscape undergoes significant social and economic
transformations, it will become increasingly important to understand the factors
underlying these changes. In this project, scholars from the United States, the
United Kingdom, and France will investigate whether rural changes in these three
countries can be explained by the concept of rural gentrification. The three
countries to be studied in this project are of particular interest because there
are some important differences from one country to the next that will allow the
researchers to test different hypotheses concerning social and economic change
in rural settings. In terms of intellectual merit, this project will add to the
theoretical understanding of gentrification as it plays out in different spatial
contexts and situate interpretations of rural gentrification from different
national contexts within the literatures on asset-based theorizations of social
stratification, urban gentrification, and social capital in rural development.
In terms of broader impacts, this project will produce key understandings that
will be beneficial to rural development professionals and rural residents. Given
the aging population in many advanced economies and the relationship between
aging and migration to rural areas, forces of rural gentrification are likely to
accelerate in the coming years. Therefore, knowledge of the extent of and
processes behind rural gentrification across national contexts will be critical
for future planning.

The researchers will employ a combination of qualitative and quantitative
methods to better understand whether rural gentrification is capable of
explaining the form and dynamics of rural change across the United States, the
United Kingdom, and France. The work will consist of (1) content and discourse
analyses to understand how the concept of gentrification is used in the
literatures in the three countries, (2) interviews with residents to develop a
conceptualization of social assets employed within processes of rural
gentrification, and (3) mappings and analyses of the geographies of rural
gentrification in the three countries.