* 1421871
* AF: SMALL:  Computational Framework for Characterizing Protein Conformational Landscapes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Nurit Haspel, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 320,000.00

Proteins are involved in virtually every process in life. The relationship
between protein structure, dynamics and function has challenged experimental
biologists and computer scientists for years, but many research questions remain
open due to the complexity of events such as protein folding, binding and domain
motion. Existing computational methods to analyze the structural and functional
properties of protein conformational spaces are limited due to the high
complexity and high dimensionality of events such as protein folding and
binding.

Educational and outreach activities will be implemented through the following:
a) Interdisciplinary collaborations with researchers inside and outside UMass
Boston. b) Training and mentoring the research of undergraduate and graduate
students, including women and students from under-represented groups in science.
Active work with women and students from under-represented groups will be
pursued through the Bridges to the baccalaureate program, the UMB women in
science club and the IMSD program at UMass Boston.

Proposed algorithms exploit the geometric and biophysical properties of proteins
to efficiently characterize their conformational space and detect interesting
regions that may be functionally important but are hard to determine
experimentally. The three following related research problems will be explored:

1. Characterize Protein Flexibility and Constraints: Methods will be developed
for effective sampling of protein conformational landscape by combining concepts
from computational geometry and biophysics. The emphasis of this part will be on
rigidity analysis and probabilistic methods.

2. Effective Low-Dimensional Representation of the Conformational Space:
Effective feature selection and dimensionality reduction techniques for reliable
representation of the conformational space will be tested. These methods
represent high dimensional, complex data using a smaller number of variables
while preserving essential information. This will facilitate the analysis and
characterization of protein dynamics.

3. Characterizing Intermediate Conformations: Powerful algorithmic methods that
combine geometry, mathematical and topological tool will be developed to
effectively analyze the protein conformational spaces and discover highly
populated regions. The emphasis will be on clustering methods, detection of
outliers and handling noise and multiple constrains. The goal is to identify
important structural and functional properties of protein conformational spaces
such as the shape and number of low energy minima, high energy barriers and
intermediate states.