* 1421695
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Cognitive models of the acquisition of vowels in context
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Naomi Feldman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

Models of infant language acquisition allow researchers to test hypotheses about
how infants learn their native language from speech. This project focuses on how
infants determine which sounds are meaningful in their language and concentrates
on co-articulation, a process in which sounds are produced differently depending
on qualities of neighboring sounds. Co-articulation is closely tied to the
historical creation, change, and loss of sound patterns in language. As a
result, the models developed in this project further our understanding of both
infant language acquisition and historical language change. Knowing how
different aspects of the learning process interact can also help pinpoint
deficits that might underlie developmental language disorders. Finally, building
models of language acquisition that can work on speech data can potentially help
create speech recognition technology that adapts robustly to novel languages,
accents, and domains of discourse in the same way that human learners
do.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A series of unsupervised phonetic learning models are
created to examine how learners take into account co-articulation. Whereas
previous models of phonetic learning have categorized each sound independently,
these models begin with a set of constraints that capture possible dependences
between sounds, formalized using a Markov random field. They then learn from the
data which constraints characterize a particular language. Recordings of child-
directed speech from the CHILDES database are annotated through forced alignment
to serve as test corpora for comparing the newly developed models with previous
models. The project yields a rigorous evaluation of where existing models fall
short, a new framework for accounting for phonetic variability, and corpora to
support the development and evaluation of future phonetic learning models.