* 1421180
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): Near-Inertial Oscillations on the West Florida Shelf in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Ekaterina Maksimova, Maksimova               Ekaterina      V
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 09/30/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Near-Inertial Oscillations (NIO) in the coastal ocean may play a significant
role in vertical mixing and horizontal dispersion&lt;br/&gt;of nutrients and
particles in the eastern Gulf of Mexico, particularly on the West Florida Shelf
(WFS). There is evidence that on the WFS the depth of the thermocline appears to
migrate vertically over the course of a day, suggestive that a NIO mode
structure may be modulating the thermocline depth and possibly affecting the
distribution of biota across the thermocline, making the NIO potentially
important to the coastal ocean ecology on the WFS. This award will support a
Postdoctoral Fellow to investigate the dynamics of NIO on the WFS. The Fellow
will work at the College of Marine Science at the University of South Florida
(USF-CMS) with the sponsorship of Dr. Robert H. Weisberg, and in the Center for
Ocean-Atmospheric Prediction Studies at the Florida State University (FSU-COAPS)
with the co-sponsorship of Dr. Dmitry Dukhovskoy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;She will
also mentor a summer undergraduate student through the Florida-Georgia Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LS-AMP) at FSU, develop a physical
oceanography lab to add to a set of bio-geochemical labs for the Oceanography
Camp for Girls and contribute physical oceanography questions for the Spoonbill
Ocean Sciences Bowl.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the
kinematics of NIO on the West Florida Shelf (WFS) with a full documentation of
their spatial and temporal variations. This will be followed by a thorough
investigation of the dynamics of the processes, particularly, how turbulence and
bottom stress enter into the force balances and affect the conditions and
mechanisms of generation of NIO in the region. Finally, the role of near-
inertial motions in mixing on the WFS will be assessed.