* 1421285
* Linking biogeochemical sulfur and iron cycling with the diversity and activity of benthic microbes in coastal Hawaiian marine environments
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Kiana Frank, Frank                   Kiana          L
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 130,000.00

During this two year Postdoctoral Fellowship at the University of Hawaii, the PI
will focus her research on understanding how microbes impact the distribution of
iron and sulfur in the He'eia Fish Pond. Fish ponds have been an important part
of the Hawaiian coastal system for hundreds of years, and this research will
provide insights into microbial-mediated chemical cycles in Hawaiian estuaries.
The results will be useful for Hawaiian coastal management and fisheries
management. The PI will also serve as a mentor and role model for University of
Hawaii undergraduates and organize a science outreach program for students at
Kamehameha schools. The investment in this Postdoctoral Fellowship will advance
the career of the PI who has strong background in microbial research, a field
that is of increasing importance in oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes
account for more than 90% of biomass in the ocean, produce ~50% of the oxygen on
Earth, and play crucial roles in mediating the biogeochemical cycling of
elements such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, iron, phosphorus and sulfur. However
we have a limited understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the specific biogeochemical
processes that occur within the ocean, the kinetics of these processes, the
taxonomy and physiology of the organisms responsible, the complex syntrophic
interactions amongst community members, and the extent to which microbes
influence the cycling of bioactive elements. Heeia Fishpond is a tidally-
influenced, shallow Hawaiian coastal estuarine system where excessive primary
productivity and respiration of phototrophic organisms generate striking diel
variations in dissolved oxygen concentrations, and lead to substantial vertical
migration of redox transition zones in both the sediment and water column. The
PI will couple fine-scale redox measurements and bioenergetic modeling with
molecular microbiology and direct measurements of metabolic rates to: (1)
constrain the extent and distribution of chemotrophic energy metabolisms within
the fishpond, (2) calculate the microbial impact on the speciation and
distribution of iron and sulfur, and (3) characterize the diversity and
distribution of active benthic microbial communities within the fishpond that
regularly occur over the diel cycle.