* 1421577
* CSR: Small: A Time-Predictable Integrated CPU-GPU Architecture for Hard Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Wei Zhang, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 607,000.00

Massive and energy-efficient computation capability, coupled with the enhanced
programmability, makes Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) a desirable platform to
accelerate a variety of data-intensive hard real-time applications such as
medical data processing, autonomous auto navigation, and vision-based aircraft
controls. The computer industry has already delivered several GPUs for embedded
computing applications. However, none of these GPUs can guarantee time
predictability, which is crucial for hard real-time systems. The integration of
the CPU and the GPU on the same die makes it even more challenging to attain
time predictability. The goal of this project is to fill this need, though
investigation of the design of time-predictable integrated CPU-GPU architectures
that can also offer high performance and energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses this problem by: (i)
systematic analysis and evaluation of time-unpredictability of GPUs and
integrated CPU-GPUs; (ii) exploration of time-predictable and heterogeneous
last-level cache (LLC) architectures for integrated CPU-GPUs, including private,
partitioned, and locked LLCs; (iii) design of time-predictable and heterogeneous
on-chip interconnection networks that can efficiently support communications
within and across the CPUs and GPU; (iv) design of time-predictable memory
controllers to enable scalable, safe, and tight WCET (Worst-Case Execution Time)
estimation; (v) development of the first WCET analyzer for the proposed
integrated CPU-GPU processor to support hard real-time computing. Other project
activities include efforts to transition the results of the research to
industry, integration of topics and projects related to the research in courses,
and open-source distribution of software.