* 1421948
* CHS: Small: A Hybrid Brain-Computer Interface for Behaviorally Non-Responsive Patients
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Chang Nam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,894.00

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have been explored for several years in an
effort to provide communication for "locked in" users who have the desire and
mental capacity to communicate but are unable to speak, type, or use
conventional assistive technologies due to severe motor disabilities, and a lot
of work has gone into making this initially crude technology more practical,
usable, accurate, and flexible (e.g., by improving speed of performance and
providing virtual reality feedback and/or advanced device control). In this
project the PI and his team turn their attention to a group with even greater
need: patients who have been misdiagnosed as vegetative or minimally conscious,
and without the mental ability to form messages or respond to questions. These
individuals are not only unable to move but also unable to see, and are at risk
of being euthanized based on the mistaken assumption that they are effectively
"brain dead" whereas it has been shown by European colleagues, using methods and
equipment comparable to American hospitals, that 17-42% of such patients were in
fact able to use a BCI to respond to questions. The PI worries that severely
injured veterans and others might sometimes be misdiagnosed, potentially able to
communicate with friends and loved ones if only some technology could more
effectively assess their brain activity. The PI's goal in this project is to
extend current BCI technologies to focus on assessing consciousness in this
vulnerable patient population and provide, where possible, the ability to
communicate.

The PI's approach is to adapt and extend conventional BCI protocols and feedback
environments to work with people who cannot see and must instead rely on other
modalities of stimulation. The work will involve three thrusts. First, the PI
and his team will improve methods to identify brain response based only on
tactile and auditory stimuli, by determining the best tactile stimulation
frequency for each subject. Second, they will use "hybrid" BCIs combining P300s
and steady state somatosensory evoked potentials (SSSEPs) to elicit two
different kinds of EEG signals that could improve accuracy. Finally, they will
develop a new six choice BCI system tailored for these users; at present the
best BCIs for these patient groups allow just two or three choices, whereas a
six choice system could lead to faster communication and broader control
options. Across all three of these thrusts, the team will also explore signal
processing methods to improve accuracy. Human subjects experiments will be
conducted across three groups: healthy blindfolded users, healthy blind persons,
and patients who have been labeled as nonresponsive. Project outcomes, which
will include useful non-visual BCIs that have been tested with blind persons and
new methods for combining different EEG signals to improve performance, will be
broadly disseminated both to the scientific community and to those involved with
nonresponsive patient care at all levels.