* 1421198
* STEM Interest and Engagement Study
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Jennifer Schmidt, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,315,359.00

During middle school, many young people disengage from and consequently do not
achieve in school-based STEM subjects. This phenomenon is more pronounced among
young people in low-income communities than elsewhere. Many summer, out-of-
school STEM programs are designed to offer young people opportunities to engage
in hands-on, inquiry-based learning that promote interest and engagement in
STEM. Research on the effect of these types of programs is limited, however.
This research project seeks to fill this gap by identifying and studying
practices that promote interest and engagement in STEM-related topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the summer STEM Interest and
Engagement Study is to identify instructional practices associated with
cultivating and sustaining young people's interest and engagement in out-of-
school STEM summer learning programs for middle school youth. The project is
based on a model of change developed from existing theory and empirical research
on the cultivation of youths' interest and engagement in STEM. The project is a
descriptive study that will apply multiple data collection and analytic methods,
including the Experience Sampling Method (ESM), to determine instructional
practices and the resulting interest, engagement, and perceptions of youth as
they participate in STEM activities. In addition, survey data provided by
program participants will allow the researchers to account for individual
differences in preexisting interest and background factors, such as gender and
ethnicity, and to measure changes in dispositions toward STEM. By better
understanding these connections, practitioners can better understand how the
design of their programs may influence the outcome of the participants'
experience, including their education and career decisions.