* 1421729
* III: Small: Core: Monotonic Retargeting: A Scalable Learning Framework for Determining Order
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Joydeep Ghosh, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 496,167.00

Determining preferences, or identifying and ordering items of most interest or
relevance based on very limited information, is a fundamental problem in many
disciplines. While perhaps most obvious in search, the problem shows up in areas
as diverse as economics and health informatics. This project is developing a
broad methodology to address challenging learning problems that involve
ordering, including determining top choices for recommendation, multi-label
classification, and learning to rank-order a set of query results. The key
insight is that if the objects to be ordered are given numeric scores, only the
relative values of these scores affect their ranking, and not the actual values.
This project is using this insight to develop new and better learning algorithms
for ranking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project is developing
methods that can efficiently optimize over all possible monotonic (that is,
order preserving) transformations of scores. Since these scores become the
target values for regression, this class of approaches is being called monotonic
retargeting. A systematic way of alternating between readjusting scores and
updating the regression model is being developed, with nice properties for
scalability and distributed implementation, as well as strong convergence
guarantees. Themes common to different types of preference learning or ranking
studies are being identified to help bring together the diverse communities,
including students, that work on this topic. This wide coverage is possible as
it easy to relate to the need to determine priorities and make choices in
various walks of life. The applications and impacts of the project are expected
to be wide and diverse as well.