* 1421125
* OCE-PRF Track 2 (International): Modeling ocean biogeochemical dynamics in wind-forced fronts and eddies
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* NONE NONE, Whitt                   Daniel         B
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2016
* USD 194,000.00

In this project, a Postdoctoral Research Fellow aims to develop a process-based
understanding of the physical and biological dynamics that control primary and
export production in the ocean. The focus of the research is on the physical and
biological dynamics in submesoscale fronts and eddies and, in particular, on the
effects of realistic high-frequency winds on these dynamics. Improved
understanding of these dynamics will contribute to a better understanding of the
global carbon cycle. This project builds a truly intellectual and cross-
disciplinary collaboration between the fellow and sponsoring scientists, John
Taylor, University of Cambridge, and Marina Levy, University Pierre et Marie
Curie. This award was supported with funding from the Office of International
and Integrative Activities.

Every year, oceanic microbes convert about fifty Pg of inorganic carbon (in the
form of carbon dioxide) into organic carbon, accounting for about half of all
primary production on the planet. This organic carbon then forms the trophic
base of the entire marine ecosystem. Moreover, perhaps a quarter of the organic
carbon created is exported to the deep ocean, where it may remain sequestered
from the atmosphere for centuries. However, these biogeochemical dynamics are
substantially modified by the heterogeneous physics of the upper ocean, which is
characterized by a virtual spider web of fronts and eddies and regularly
modified by persistent and variable atmospheric forcing. In global ocean and
earth system models, these dynamics occur at scales smaller than a grid cell,
therefore it is essential to understand and parameterize these dynamics. In
pursuit of this effort, the fellow will use numerical models at multiple levels
of complexity to explore three key questions: 1) How do realistic high-frequency
winds affect primary and export production in ocean fronts and eddies? 2) What
physical, biological and chemical mechanisms control the dynamics in these
environments and how sensitive are the results to different parameters? 3) How
do fronts and eddies modify biological community composition? This research will
help lay the groundwork for improved parameterizations of upper ocean physics
and biogeochemistry. Understanding and parameterizing these dynamics will enable
more accurate global modeling of the earth system - past, present and future.