* 1421116
* Making for Change: Becoming Community Engineering Experts through Makerspaces and Youth Ethnography
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Angela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,992.00

Many communities across the country are developing "maker spaces," environments
that combine physical fabrication equipment, social communities of people
working together, and educational activities for learning how to design and
create objects. Increasingly, maker spaces and maker technologies are being
designed to provide extended learning opportunities for school-aged young
people. Unfortunately few youth from under-represented populations have had the
opportunity to participate in these maker spaces. This proof-of-concept project,
a collaboration of faculty from Michigan State University and the University of
North Carolina, Greensboro with staff of the Boys and Girls Clubs in Lansing and
Greensboro, will address two challenges faced by middle school youth from
backgrounds underrepresented in engineering professions: 1) a lack of
opportunities to learn engineering meaningfully and to apply it to understanding
and solving real-world problems (i.e. learning), and 2) few experiences that
foster the ability to see oneself as an important, contributing producer and
consumer of engineering (i.e. identity). The team will develop and study an
informal (out-of-school) STEM learning model to engage middle school youth from
underrepresented backgrounds in experiences related to engineering-for-
sustainable-communities. The model engages youth both in maker spaces and in
conducting community ethnography studies to identify local problems and then to
design potential solutions for them. The participants will also be connected
into a broader social network of experts.

Using a design-based research approach and applying social practice theory and
systems theory, the work will identify how critical aspects of the learning
environment shape identity work. This will yield information on the value and
affect of the instructional tools that will be produced. The team hypothesizes
that, by alternating over time between maker spaces activities and community
ethnography studies, youth will a) reflect upon what they know and need to know
to define problems and design solutions, b) develop stronger engineering
identities, and c) realize the potential they have to make change in their
community. Professionals in education and engineering will benefit from
additional empirical evidence for how identity unfolds over time, across
learning contexts, and how it promotes opportunities to learn in engineering.