* 1421440
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Identifying Design and Operational Loopholes in Cellular Network Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Chunyi Peng, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 10/31/2017
* USD 245,581.00

The cellular network is the largest wireless infrastructure deployed today. It
plays an important role to provide users mobile Internet access and cellular
voice service. A key design component of the cellular network is its signaling
protocols, which operate on the control plane. Compared with their Internet
counterparts, these signaling protocols are more complex to ensure vital control
functions, such as mobility support, radio resource control, session management
for data and voice, to name a few. Consequently, their proper design and
operation are critical to both the cellular operators and the users. The
objective of this project is to devise tools and verify the correctness of
signaling protocols in current cellular networks by: (i)identifying design
loopholes in the protocols defined by the 3GPP standards, as well as operational
slips made by operators and vendors, (ii) analyzing their root causes and
performance penalties, and (iii) devising techniques that fix such problems. The
proposed activities can enhance the reliability of cellular networks in both
design and practice. They will help us to not only better understand how to
avoid design and implementation mistakes in a cellular system, but also to
renovate the current protocol design and even affect the upcoming 5G cellular
technology in its standardization. If successful, the results will facilitate
the design and practice of a more reliable mobile Internet infrastructure for
our society. The project will also recruit and train a new generation of
students and engineers, including those from minority groups, who are
technically ready for the mobile Internet era. The PIs will interact closely
with the related industry for possible technology transfer.

The research in this project has two main thrusts. One is to devise tools and
identify design loopholes and operational slips in cellular networks. The
project will develop a cellular-specific verifier that adapts generic model-
checking techniques with domain-specific cellular knowledge, and uses phone-
based empirical validation. The project will apply model checking to identify a
superset of potential candidate loopholes, and then validate the real ones
through experiments over operational 3G/4G carriers, by focusing on design slips
in two categories: (a) protocols interaction with shared certain context (e.g.,
connection status, commands, IP address, virtual connection), which is popular
in cross-layer, cross-domain, and inter-system protocol communications; (b) Out-
of-sequenced signaling delivery. When the designated sequence of control
messages is disrupted, its cost is way beyond lost or delayed messages.
Missequenced signals are reacted based on defined semantics and may trigger
wrong protocol operations. This project will also assess the real-world impact
of both categories of issues through user studies over operational carriers. The
other thrust of this project is to propose fixes to the identified loopholes.
The proposed solutions incorporate new heuristics into cellular signaling
protocols and call for concerted effort on the mobile device and the network
infrastructure.