* 1421494
* Specifying the nature of the vocabulary gap
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* P. Chase-Lansdale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 07/31/2018
* USD 350,342.00

The United States is facing an education crisis as far too many of our children
enter school ill prepared to learn. Challenges to achievement begin early and
are strongly connected to social disparities, with measures of vocabulary
providing a particularly striking illustration. According to previous research,
children from socioeconomically disadvantaged homes enter preschool knowing as
many as 3000 fewer words than their peers. This gap persists into adolescence,
with implications for later literacy and general academic success. This work
moves beyond documenting these disparities to address how and why socioeconomic
disparities lead to vocabulary differences. Specifically, the research
investigates the hypothesis that differences in vocabulary may be the result of
differences in children's basic ability to learn new words when the opportunity
presents itself.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To this end, children from widely varying
socioeconomic strata will be tested on several word learning tasks designed to
index different component word learning skills. Their performance will be
considered in relation to both measures of socioeconomic status and accumulated
vocabulary. This project lays the foundation for an innovative approach to early
intervention that focuses on teaching children how to learn words rather than
solely on teaching words per se. This approach could powerfully facilitate the
generalization of vocabulary gains well beyond the scope of words targeted in
any particular intervention. In order for this approach to gain effective
momentum, however, it is critical that this project first establish the role of
word-learning skills in the 'vocabulary gap', and in so doing, identify which of
a number of specific word-learning skills are in greatest need of educational
intervention.