* 1421496
* CIF: Small: Theory, Methods and Algorithms for Synthetic Aperture Interferometry Using Ultra-Narrowband Waveforms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Birsen Yazici, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Interferometry is a unique sensor that can
provide all-weather, day-and-night, high resolution information about Earth's
dynamic processes on a global scale. This sensor is now an integral part of many
disciplines with a wide range of applications including environmental remote
sensing, geosciences and climate research, earthquake and volcanic research, 3D
and 4D mapping of Earth's topography, ocean surface current monitoring, hazard
and disaster monitoring, as well as defense and security related tasks. The
trend in user requirements show an increasing demand for information content
with the ultimate goal of global monitoring of Earth's surface and dynamic
phenomena continuously. Ever-increasing demand on information requires higher
bandwidth transmission, higher transmit power and consequently more complex and
larger system design.

This project develops a fundamentally new theory and subsequent methods and
algorithms for synthetic aperture interferometry using ultra-narrowband
continuous waveforms (UNB-CW). Unlike pulsed systems, UNB-CW systems are low-
power, low-cost, robust, environmentally friendly, lightweight and suitable for
low-payload platforms, such as micro-satellites. Central to our approach is an
alternative imaging paradigm, which we refer to as Doppler-SAR imaging.
Conventional SAR relies on wideband waveforms to image scatterers that lie on
high resolution range contours. Doppler-SAR takes advantage of high Doppler
resolution and images scatterers that lie on Doppler contours. The objective of
this project is to establish the basic interferometric observable equations in
the Doppler-SAR paradigm. The investigators study the interferometric phase
relationships; the sensitivity to underlying parameters and topography;
corresponding appropriate coherence relations; and study the effect of noise,
clutter and ambiguities for the Doppler-SAR across-track interferometry.