* 1421003
* Conference: 2014 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar to be held on July 5-6, 2014 in Stonehill College Easton, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Gary Daughdrill, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2015
* USD 6,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2014 Gordon Research Conference on IDPs
will expand our knowledge of the structure, dynamics, and function of IDPs, will
provide insights into the diverse biological processes that involve IDPs, and
will drive new discoveries on the molecular mechanisms of IDPs in cell biology,
and will provide a unique opportunity for the training of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and early career investigators. There are a number of
important challenges that must be met before we can develop a general picture of
the dynamic structure, function, and evolution of IDPs/IDRs. Major challenges
include developing new experimental and computational approaches to characterize
structure and dynamics of IDPs/IDRs, understanding the expression patterns,
molecular networks, and evolution of IDPs/IDRs and identifying fundamental
principles of molecular recognition, regulation, folding, allostery, and
mutational robustness for IDPs/IDRs. Speakers for the IDP GRC are directly
addressing these challenges and making important contributions to developing
solutions that will enhance our understanding of IDP structure, dynamics,
function, and evolution. Addressing these challenges will have a profound impact
on our understanding of (a) how IDPs/IDRs contribute to cellular function (b)
how mutations in such regions can cause disease, and (c) how the distinct
physico-chemical properties of IDPs/IDRs can be exploited for applications in
various fields such as nanotechnology, material sciences and biotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
advancing scientific knowledge in Molecular Biology, Structural Biology,
Evolutionary Biology, Bioinformatics, Genetics, and Biophysics, the 2014 IDP GRC
will provide a unique opportunity for the training of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and early career investigators. For the first time in the
meeting series, a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will precede the main
conference. The IDP GRS is designed to further facilitate the participation of
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and early career investigators.
Planned by and for the trainees, it will provide an opportunity for junior
researchers to present seminars and posters in a supportive, interactive
environment. It will act as an important springboard for the development of the
future leaders in the field. The meeting will feature approximately 10 talks and
2 poster sessions. All attendees are expected to actively participate in the GRS
either by giving an oral presentation or presenting a poster. The focus of the
IDP GRS is to introduce the topic of IDPs to those just entering the field while
motivating interest in key areas of IDP research. Topics covered will include:
(i) what characteristics define an IDP, (ii) what experimental and computational
tools can be used to study IDPs, and (iii) what roles IDPs play in vivo. The GRS
will also include a career development session featuring a panel of scientists
at different points in their career path who will offer career advice and answer
questions on the academic job search from a variety of perspectives. Every
effort has been made to include women and members of underrepresented groups in
the conference. The goal is to have attendance in this area in the range of
25-30%, which is the percentage of women and members of underrepresented groups
that are members of the IDP subgroup at the Biophysical Society.