* 1421233
* A Workshop to Explore the Genetics, Paleoecology, Archaeology and Anthropology of Human Migrations across the Arctic, Fall 2015; Boulder, CO
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Scott Elias, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2017
* USD 34,278.00

As recently as Spring 2015 the topic of the origins of the indigenous peoples of
North America has been broadly discussed in the popular press as a result of the
recent findings of an ASSP supported project on Inuit genetics, PI Geoff Hayes,
Northwestern University (see Forbes article, "How Alaska Natives Spurred
Archaeologists To Research Their Origins." May 13, 2015). This led to numerous
additional articles in Tech Times, SitNews, Biology News Net etc. The topic of
the origins of Native Americans continues to be one of great public interest.
However, the academic community spurred by new information coming out of recent
DNA research has yet to fully consider how this new research, that supports a
Beringian origin of early North Americans, fits within the known
anthropological, archaeological, linguistic, and environmental record.

This award will support a workshop planned for approximately 30 participants,
chosen on the basis of their active research on the Beringian model and the late
Pleistocene environment and archaeology of Beringia. It also would include
participation by graduate students from several universities, who are working on
related thesis projects. The workshop would bring together for the first time
researchers from multiple disciplines, researchers who have insight into various
aspects of the Beringia issue but have not yet synthesized their knowledge.

The workshop would be held at the Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research
(INSTAAR) at the University of Colorado in Boulder, which has a long history of
research in the region. The workshop is organized and chaired by the PI John F.
Hoffecker (INSTAAR), and CoPI Scott A. Elias (Royal Holloway, University of
London), and Dennis H. O'Rourke (University of Utah). It is proposed that the
workshop take place in the Fall, most likely October of 2015. An
interdisciplinary workshop on the Out of Beringia thesis offers the most
effective means of initiating progress among geneticists, ecologists, and
anthropologists on the most important idea to emerge from the study of Native
American origins in the past fifty years. The workshop is intended to have a
significant impact on the direction of research on the peopling of the Western
Hemisphere. This workshop would bring together the world's foremost scholars and
students to present the state of the art science on this topic and, more
importantly, by synthesizing this information, discuss the trajectories that new
research on this topic should take.