* 1421957
* CIF: Small: Everlasting Security for Disadvantaged Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Dennis Goeckel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 518,522.00

This project develops techniques to provide information-theoretic secrecy for
messages transmitted in a wireless communication system for the challenging
scenario where an eavesdropper receives a stronger signal than the desired
recipient: for example, the eavesdropper might be significantly closer to the
transmitter than the intended receiver. The approach considered in this project
starts with the transmitter and intended receiver sharing an ephemeral
cryptographic key, which the transmitter then employs to intentionally distort
the transmitted signal. With knowledge of the key, the intended receiver has a
significant advantage over the eavesdropper in reducing this intentional
distortion before analog-to-digital conversion and the recording of the signal.
Even if the eavesdropper obtains the key at some later time, the nonlinearity of
the analog-to-digital conversion and the fact that non-linear operators are not
necessarily commutative implies the eavesdropper cannot remove the intentional
distortion. In this manner, information-theoretic secrecy is obtained. The
project will consider methods of maximizing the rate of secret communications
through this technique. First, approaches to narrowband systems that employ an
additive jamming signal based on the shared key will be developed. Next,
attention will turn to wideband systems, where the shared key can be used to
additionally hide the band of operation of the transmitter, hence further
inhibiting the eavesdropper. Critical to the consideration of wideband systems
is considering broad classes of emerging receiver capabilities for the
eavesdropper. Finally, the project will build on recent analytic techniques to
consider the provisioning of secrecy in network scenarios where the interaction
of the transmissions of different system nodes must be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protection of messages in wireless
communication systems from eavesdropping has clear societal benefit. Standardly
employed cryptographic approaches make critical assumptions on the current and
future computational capabilities of the eavesdropper, who may record a
transmitted message and attempt to break it over a long time period; hence,
information-theoretic techniques are of interest for the provisioning of
everlasting secrecy. However, information-theoretic secrecy generally requires
an advantage for the intended recipient over the eavesdropper, which, per above,
is difficult to guarantee in wireless communication systems, leading to a
significant risk that the contents of a message will be immediately compromised.
The technique considered here exploits the strengths of both cryptographic
approaches, which are not susceptible to an eavesdropper close to the
transmitter, and information-theoretic approaches, which provide everlasting
secrecy if the required advantage is available for the recipient over the
eavesdropper. The result is a method with the potential to provide significant
broad societal benefit through a technique for robust everlasting secrecy in
wireless communication systems. The project also has a significant educational
theme, providing both outreach to K-12 students and significant project and
research opportunities to a diverse set of University of Massachusetts students.