* 1421438
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Automatically Generating Contextually-Relevant Visualizations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Eytan Adar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 379,126.00

Information visualizations, such as charts and maps, can greatly enhance news
articles by adding context, helping the reader understand complex facts, aiding
in decision making, and making information more memorable. Unfortunately,
creating good news visualizations is a difficult and labor-intensive task that
involves numerous complex decisions. A designer must identify data relevant to
the article, clean the data, generate the visualization (a complex process on
its own), and provide annotations to connect the article and visualization.
While some design guidelines have been developed, many decisions are based on
designer intuition, a process that is not scalable to the thousands of news
articles that are published every day. This project seeks to build intelligent
tools to help designers more quickly create good news visualizations and to
develop systems that generate news visualizations autonomously. This research
project will enhance citizen understanding of complex information in the news
and improve numerical, graphical, and geography literacy. Additionally, the
research will provide support for new job categories (e.g., data scientists,
computational journalists, data analysts, etc.) and existing companies (e.g.,
online media, search engines, etc.) in their evolution to new interactive
platforms. The research results will be integrated into a broad set of widely
accessible educational materials for a variety of courses (visualization,
spatial computing, and text analysis) and will serve as research and practical
training for undergraduates, graduates, and professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing a scalable solution to automatically generating
contextually-relevant visualizations requires the understanding and encoding of
the design process. Specifically, the goals of this project are (a) identifying
the decision process of visualization designers, (b) creating automated
components that operationalize these decisions including text processing,
searching through a wide range of heterogeneous data sources and datasets (e.g.
census data, stock market data, government macroeconomic data), and automatic
visualization construction and annotation, and (c) ranking of the visualizations
based on well-known quantitative metrics from information retrieval and
information visualization such as relevance, expressiveness, and effectiveness.
By extracting key comparisons from an article's text through the use of natural
language processing and using existing visualization-article pairs as an
evaluation corpus, the system will ensure that relevant datasets are found and
that the selected visual forms preserve and enhance the information conveyed in
the article. For example, the system will automatically create thematic maps for
geospatial comparisons of population change in the U.S. and time series for
longitudinal comparisons of company financial results. Although the focus of
this work in on the news domain, the research can be extended to other
application areas including textbooks, internal company reports, and more
generally, to any texts that implicitly or explicitly correspond to quantitative
data. Further information, including source code, demos, papers, and datasets,
are available at the project homepage (http://txt2vis.cond.org).