* 1421001
* CCF: AF: Small: Novel Stochastic Optimization Algorithms to Advance the Treatment of Dynamic Molecular Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kenneth De Jong, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 407,997.00

This project aims to advance algorithmic research in computational biology. The
focus is on problems that demand characterizations of molecules, such as
proteins and peptides that are central to the inner workings of cell. These
molecules often switch between different structural configurations to be
compatible and interact with different molecular partners in the cell. Computing
the different configurations a protein or peptide takes on for biological
activity is central to understanding how these molecules operate in the healthy
and diseased cell. Doing so, however, poses many computational challenges, and
the research in this project aims to advance our ability to meet these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project generalizes the problem of
obtaining a comprehensive view of possibly diverse functional states as that of
obtaining a diverse ensemble of constraint-satisfying structures. Novel
stochastic optimization techniques are put forth to deal with the high-
dimensional variable spaces arising in these molecules, as well as the
nonlinearity and multimodality of the energy surface associated with these
spaces. The techniques include hybridization and structurization to effectively
balance computational resources between exploration and exploitation. The focus
is on blending the two in parallel architectures. Novel multi-objective analysis
addresses the inherent noise in energy functions. Accumulated biophysical
knowledge drives the design of novel variation operators for effective global
and local search. The research is made available as software to facilitate
advancement of stochastic optimization while allowing computational biologists
to model specific systems of interest with cutting-edge techniques. The research
supports a number of coordinated teaching and outreach activities across
computer science, bioengineering, and neuroscience, integrating postdoctoral,
college, and pre-college students.