* 1421935
* New Approaches for Spatial Distribution Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Sergio Rey, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 264,999.00

This research project will improve understanding of spatial inequality dynamics
through methodological advances in measurement and modeling. Understanding the
nature of spatial inequality dynamics is vital to both basic social science and
to public policy, yet existing methods and models provide incomplete views of
these spatial dynamics. While a central focus of inequality research has been on
the evolution of the aggregate income distribution, much less attention has been
directed at the spatial pattern of inequality and pattern dynamics. Spatial
inequalities can have important implications for social cohesion, economic
growth, and the design of policies targeted at reducing the level of inequality.
The advances produced in the project will have wide applicability. In addition
to spatial income inequality dynamics, many other social and economic phenomena
have distributions that evolve in space and time. Software packages will be
delivered as open-source projects and accompanied with extensive tutorials and
documentation to facilitate broad dissemination across the social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop new analytical
methods for the study of spatial dynamics of income inequality; specifically,
new approaches will be developed to measuring changes in the distributional
characteristics of those dynamics that incorporate their spatial dependence and
heterogeneity. The new approaches will include both global measures that report
summary properties of the spatial dynamics as well as local indicators that can
be used to identify hot-spots of locations that are important drivers of the
overall dynamics or are outliers from the global trends. Analytical and
simulation based evaluations of the statistical properties of the new measures
will be conducted, and empirical applications involving regional income
inequalities will be carried out. These new analytics will be incorporated into
enhanced versions of two open-source spatial analysis packages: Python Spatial
Analysis Library and Space-Time Analysis of Regional Systems. The former
provides social scientists who wish to develop custom applications with access
to a modular library that can be used in conjunction with existing software to
enable the new space-time analytics. The latter is a user-friendly analytical
and visualization package that can facilitate exploratory investigation of
spatial distribution dynamics.