* 1421576
* NeTS: Small: Dynamic Spectrum Access under Uncertainty: Theory, Algorithm Development, and Evaluation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,926.00

The demand for wireless spectrum is projected to continue growing well into the
future, and will only worsen the currently felt spectrum crunch. Rigid licensing
policies that give exclusive and permanent right of use of wireless spectrum to
lessees further exacerbate this scarcity. This shortcoming has been identified
in the famous 2002 FCC study, which estimates the utilization of licensed
spectrum between 15-85% depending on time and location, thus, underscoring the
critical need for new methods of spectrum sharing. Development of these new
methods, coined as Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) techniques, is very challenging
due to the inherent uncertainty in user traffic demand, spectrum availability,
wireless channel conditions, and user locations. Thus, the overarching goal of
this project is to efficiently manage dynamic spectrum access in the presence of
these uncertainties. The algorithms developed in this project ultimately
encourage both federal and commercial spectrum holders to participate in DSA
systems. Additional wireless bandwidth is being freed up for essential services
to be migrated to the wireless domain, significantly lowering the cost of access
to wireless networks for a significant fraction of the society currently shut
out of this market. These emerging systems also create new communication-based
business models, develop community resources, and improve public safety.

Managing dynamic spectrum access faces three major challenges induced by: (1)
the dynamics and the possibly correlated nature of spectrum resource from a
secondary provider/user's perspective; (2) uncertainty about spectrum
availability in terms of long-term channel statistics and real-time channel
states; (3) uncertainty of secondary traffic and heterogeneous
performance/pricing requirements of secondary users. In this project, efficient
information sharing, spectrum sensing, and scheduling policies are designed that
take all these three aspects into account. Since jointly optimizing across the
three dimensions outlined above is a daunting challenge, the project is
organized across two inter-related thrusts. In the first thrust, a given level
of spectrum uncertainty is assumed, and efficient scheduling policies are
designed for a secondary provider to meet various QoS requirements. In the
second thrust, the case where a secondary provider can control information
inaccuracy by coordinating SUs to sense channels is considered and the joint
sensing and scheduling problem investigated. The developed algorithms are
validated through simulations and via testbed implementations. The effect of
uncertainties is investigated by developing analytical techniques that combine
stochastic optimization, approximation algorithms and game theory. The resulting
joint sensing and resource allocation policies are low-complexity and provably
efficient. This project will engage underrepresented students and K-12 students.