* 1421152
* NSF Support for the 2015 USENIX Security Symposium, Financial Aid; August 2015; Washington, D.C.
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Fabian Monrose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This grant funds approximately 20 U.S.-based graduate students to attend the
2015 USENIX Security Symposium (Security '15), a leading forum for advanced
professionals from academic and industrial backgrounds to meet and discuss the
newest advances in the security of computer systems and networks. Participation
in Security '15 and similar conferences is a valuable and important part of the
graduate school experience. It provides students with the opportunity to
interact with more senior researchers in the field, and exposes students to
leading work in the field. The support enables the participation of students who
would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. In addition, this grant
supports the first USENIX Women in Advanced Computing summit, which will
encourage women to become involved in the security
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USENIX Security '15 will be held in Washington, DC,
in August 2015. The conference consists of a three-day technical program, with
numerous workshops co-located. The goal of the conference is to bring together
researchers, practitioners, system administrators, system programmers, and
others interested in the latest advances in the security of computer systems and
networks. This cross-disciplinary emphasis makes it well suited as a target for
student participation, and this event has always drawn a large proportion of
student attendees. This venue provides an excellent vehicle for students to
learn about the latest advances in computer security research, and participate
in engaging discussions on a wide variety of sub-topics including network and
system security, techniques for developing secure systems, technologies for
trustworthy computing, hardware security, applied cryptography, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new feature in USENIX Security 2014 which will be
continued for 2015 is the creation of a 'shadow' program committee to help
graduate students learn about the publication review process.