* 1421502
* CIF: Small: Transport and other Lagrangian transforms for signal analysis and discrimination
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Dejan Slepcev, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2017
* USD 499,999.00

Signal and image analysis algorithms play an important role in a variety of
applications in science and technology. Biomedical scientists, for example,
routinely use imaging and other sensory devices to characterize normal versus
diseased physiology. Signal and image analysis is also used for numerous daily
life applications including face identification, robotics (e.g. object
identification, automated navigation), and voice recognition. Most of the
mathematical tools currently developed for signal and image analysis (e.g.
Fourier &amp; wavelet transforms) were designed to address problems in
communications and related disciplines, and many are not necessarily well suited
for modern problems related to signal detection and classification. The
investigators study new signal analysis and synthesis algorithms (i.e.
transforms) derived based on comparing images (signals) using on not only their
intensities, but also their respective locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to develop a framework for signal and image analysis that
utilizes a `Lagrangian' point of view. The approach relies heavily on optimal
transport and related mathematical techniques. The study includes the
development of invertible nonlinear signal transforms, efficient algorithms for
their computation, and testing their application in a number of signal modeling
and discrimination tasks (cancer detection, characterization of diseased cell
phenotypes, visualization of variations in signal databases, recognition from
low resolution images, and others). The main emphasis of the study is the
development of Lagrangian transforms that have concrete theoretical and
practical advantages in signal discrimination tasks.