* 1421689
* TWC: Small: Addressing the challenges of cryptocurrencies: Security, anonymity, stability
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Arvind Narayanan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Secure digital payments are essential for e-commerce and cybersecurity.
Cryptocurrencies, which are virtual currencies designed using cryptographic
principles, are well suited for digital payments but face several hurdles to
adoption for legitimate e-commerce. The hurdles include (1) poor software
security that has led to very high rates of theft and closures of services, (2)
users may be deanonymized, negating the putative privacy benefits and (3) there
are concerns over long-term stability, either due to inherent flaws in the
mechanism used to incentivize participants or due to the ability of adversaries
to subvert this mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs and
implements security and anonymity improvements for existing cryptocurrencies
that are immediately and incrementally deployable, and develops a framework to
analyze the behavior of participants of cryptocurrencies. This framework will be
used both to understand and predict the behavior of the current system as well
as to explore alternative, more resilient designs. The main challenge for
research on cryptocurrencies is that these systems rely on an intricate
interplay of three main components: cryptography, distributed systems, and
incentive driven behavior. Accordingly, the project develops tools and
techniques in all three categories and seek to find novel ways to unify and
apply these tools in combination. Successful completion of the project will lead
to a cryptocurrency that is robust against adversaries, paving the way for a
secure, private, and stable payment system, which has long been a research goal
in computer science.