* 1421165
* III: Small: Multi-modal Neuroimaging Data Fusion and Analysis with Harmonic Maps Under Designed Riemannian Metric
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Yalin Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 418,114.00

The rapid development in acquiring multi-modal neuroimaging data provides
exciting new opportunities to systematically characterize human brain structure,
its relationship to cognition and behavior, and the contributions of genetic and
environmental factors to individual differences in brain circuitry. To optimally
use such rich multi-modal data, there is an urgent need for powerful
computational frameworks to integrate and analyze multi-source data. The current
practice usually combines available data features from different sources without
considering the intrinsic geometry and biology structure relationship between
data sources. Shape analysis based approach may serve as a bridge for a general
and integrative approach to multi-model data fusion and analysis. Although
numerous studies have been devoted to imaging data registration research,
limited progress has been made to integrate different modality data with some
physically nature and geometrically intrinsic structures. This proposal focuses
on investigating and developing computational algorithms on harmonic map with
prescribed Riemannian metric, and on producing theoretically sound and
practically efficient solutions for general multi-modal data fusion and analysis
problems. The work outlined in this proposal will have applications in a number
of research fields, including (1) Shape Analysis, neuroimaging and medical
imaging in general. The proposed research unifies and connects a variety of
computational geometry techniques and tackles a few open problems making it an
ideal framework for teaching concepts in shape analysis as well as providing
students a broader context in which various components may fit together. The
algorithms and tools developed in this project will have a direct impact on
neuroimaging research. It may enable discovery of multi-modal imaging biomarkers
for some neurodegenerative disease, such as Alzheimer's disease. Harmonic maps
and their related methods have applications in many other fields, including
medical imaging, computer vision, machine learning, computer graphics, and
geometric modeling. The PI will make the software tools accessible to the
society. This project will facilitate the development of new courses and
laboratory infrastructure for neuroimaging research. It also provides a unique
opportunity for students from computer science to learn neuroscience more
efficiently. The funding will allow continuation of ongoing efforts to actively
recruit and advise students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated research and education plan is
outlined in this project to investigate and develop computational theorems and
algorithms. The first goal is to develop a method to compute the harmonic map
under a designed Riemannian metric between general surfaces. One key novelty is
that the new method formulates multi-source information with a Riemannian metric
and thus the multi-source fusion problem is converted to compute a surface
harmonic map which is adapted to any designed Riemannian metric on the target
surface. Next, a variational formulation that optimizes the diffeomorphic
harmonic map via adjusting the Riemannian metric will be developed. The harmonic
map guarantees that it has the global minimum deformation. It will be a
practical way to optimize diffeomorphisms between surfaces and provide the
flexibility to introduce general objective functions defined by other data
sources. In addition, an algorithm for volumetric harmonic maps under a designed
Riemannian metric and a set of novel multivariate geometry statistics for multi-
source data analysis will be implemented. The framework explores multi-source
data fusion with intrinsic geometry structures and the multivariate statistics
may provide more sensitive, reliable and accessible brain imaging biomarkers for
neuroimaging analysis. The anticipated outcomes of this research project are:
(1) new computational algorithms on harmonic maps with significant applications
in various fields, such as medical imaging, computer vision, machine learning,
computer graphics and geometric modeling; (2) a practical software package with
a rigorous mathematical foundation to analyze multi-modal data and produce
sensitive and comprehensive multivariate imaging statistics. It will be tested
on a large public neuroimaging dataset and evaluated by various classification
tasks.