* 1421452
* CSR: Small: Joint Power Optimization of Data Center Network and Servers with Correlation Analysis and Scalability
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Xiaorui Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Power optimization has become a key challenge in the design of today's data
centers. Many recent studies have shown that there are typically three major
power consumers in a data center: servers, cooling systems, and the data center
network (DCN). While the power efficiency of data center cooling has been
significantly improved in the recent years, it is foreseeable that servers and
DCN are becoming the two most significant power consumers in the future.
Unfortunately, while existing research efforts focus mainly on computer servers
to lower their power consumption, only few studies have tried to address the
power consumption of DCN, which can account for about 20% of the total power
consumption of a data center. This project aims to design a correlation-aware
power optimization framework that jointly minimizes the total power consumption
of the DCN and servers in a data center. The success of this timely project can
greatly impact the data center design by significantly reducing DCN power
consumption.

The main technical approach of the power optimization framework is correlation-
aware server and traffic consolidations. Similar to servers, a DCN is also often
underutilized. As a result, traffic flows can be consolidated onto a small set
of links and switches, such that unused network devices can be shut down for
power savings. Server and traffic consolidations should be conducted jointly
because server consolidation without considering the DCN may cause traffic
congestion and thus degraded network performance. On the other hand, server
consolidation may change the DCN topology, allowing new opportunities for power
savings. This framework is designed based on a key observation that the
utilizations of different servers or the bandwidth demands of different flows
usually do not peak at exactly the same time. Therefore, if the correlations
among servers and traffic flows are considered, more power savings can be
achieved during server and traffic consolidations. The power optimization
framework also includes multi-dimensional DCN power optimization with flow
completion time guarantees and highly scalable optimization algorithms for
large-scale data centers.