* 1421310
* Geomorphology Drives Species Distribution: A Case Study on the Sandy Plains of the Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Navarro, Navarro                 Michael        O
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

In many areas, geomorphology drives species distribution and abundance. On the
continental shelf, the sandy plains habitat comprises one of the largest
habitats of the north-eastern Pacific yet largely remains unexplored in terms of
ecology. This research will investigate how geological and biological structural
changes of the seafloor impact biological habitat for the community of the lower
shelf (30-200 m). This area of the coastal shelf is of great importance to the
U.S. economy, and the results of this research will have value to the scientific
community and to coastal managers and policy-makers. The PI will offer
internships for undergraduates who will be trained for remotely operated
vehicles (ROV) video analyses and surveys conducted in the coastal waters of CA.
In addition, a workshop focused on ROV technology will be held at the Northwest
Indian College (NWIC) in order to provide background information needed for NWIC
to start using their ROV.

The host institution for this 2-year Postdoctoral Fellowship is California State
University Monterey Bay (CSUMB). The PI will conduct research in Monterey Bay,
using the CSUMB Seafloor Lab's small vessels, ROV's, multibeam and side-scan
sonar. GIS analyses, modeling, and boundary image analysis will take place at
the CSUMB Marine Landscape Ecology Lab.

This study will determine the geomorphology dynamics of the heterogenous sandy
plains ecosystem and how these changes drive changes in the megafaunal
community. This research will test for megafauna density changes over time and
for how these changes occur with changes of the structure of the sandy plains
both in terms of structures caused by physical forcing and by layering from
biological structures. It will also investigate how diversity changes with
increased structure.