* 1421304
* Oceanographic Instrumentation R.V. Oceanus 2014
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Daryl Swensen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2016
* USD 49,800.00

A request is made to fund new and replacement instrumentation on the R/V
Oceanus, a 177? research vessel operated by Oregon State University as part of
the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research
fleet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Oceanus is a general-purpose research vessel
owned by the National Science Foundation and operated by Oregon State
University. Until 2012, the vessel had been operated by Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution but was then retired. OSU determined that the vessel was in better
material condition than their ship R/V Wecoma so they took Oceanus and retired
Wecoma. The mission of the ship is to support funded science research in the
Pacific Northwest. R/V Oceanus completed 162 days in 2013, 117 (72%) of which
were for NSF. In 2014, the vessel is scheduled to sail 211 days with 96% (203
days) of the schedule for NSF. With this proposal, OSU provides technical
descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following Oceanographic
Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt; CTD System Connector Upgrade $15,300 &lt;br/&gt;
Multi Sensor Track (MST) Van Maintenance $18,700 &lt;br/&gt; HIAB Crane
Preservation $19,500 &lt;br/&gt; Piston Coring System Synthetic Upgrade $6,000
&lt;br/&gt; Transmissometer Replacement $6,800 &lt;br/&gt; Work Horse 300kHz
ADCP Board Replacement $8,200 &lt;br/&gt; $74,500 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers