* 1421078
* SHF: Small: Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation in Multi-Qubit Block Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Todd Brun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2018
* USD 477,634.00

Quantum computers use the peculiar properties of quantum mechanics---
superposition, entanglement, and interference---to do new kinds of information
processing. Large scale quantum computers could solve certain difficult problems
that are beyond the ability of standard classical computers. Building quantum
computers is challenging due to decoherence---quantum noise---which disrupts the
needed quantum effects. The solution is fault-tolerant quantum computation:
quantum information is encoded in quantum error-correcting codes, and shielded
from the effects of noise. Theory shows that this will work if the decoherence
rate is not too high, but most constructions require a daunting amount of
overhead to do computation. The number of quantum bits (qubits) and basic
operations (quantum gates) needed are multiplied by a very large
factor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will minimize the overhead required
by encoding the qubits of the computation in multi-qubit storage blocks that
achieve higher rates than most codes that have been studied before. A small
number of additional processor blocks will also be constructed, using a
different quantum code. These different codes allow different types of quantum
gates to be done efficiently, so by choosing the right combination of codes, any
quantum computation can be done: such a quantum computer is called universal.
Qubits are transferred between the code blocks by quantum teleportation, and are
protected from decoherence at all times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
takes a somewhat different tack on fault tolerance. Rather than study conditions
that allow quantum computations of arbitrarily large size, this research will
ask, for a fixed choice of codes and a given level of decoherence, how large a
quantum computation can be done. Since in reality only computations up to a
certain size can actually be done, this is the most immediately practical
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support two Ph.D. students at
USC, and will be an active strand of research at USC's Center for Quantum
Information Science and Technology (CQIST). CQIST, and the PI, support education
and outreach in the Los Angeles area and elsewhere, and also organize and
sponsor international conferences on quantum information science.