* 1421196
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation):  Impact of Phytoplankton-Bacteria Interactions on Metal Bioavailability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, Gauglitz                Julia
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

In this two year postdoctoral research fellowship, the fellow will analyze how
bacteria-picophytoplankton interactions impact the utilization of trace metals
from desert dust. Results of these experiments will elucidate biological
advantages conferred by the production of metal chelators, as it reveals the
role that bacteria play in phytoplankton metal acquisition, and will advance
understanding in oceanic primary production and carbon cycling. The fellow will
broaden participation of under-represented groups in ocean sciences at local
high schools and diversity-serving colleges through teaching modules and
research internships focusing on the ocean sciences and marine trace metal
nutrition. The fellow is being hosted by sponsoring scientist Dr. Mak Saito at
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines
how the interactions between bacteria and phytoplankton modulate the
bioavailability of metals from desert dust, and thus impact metal uptake and the
growth of phytoplankton. The work addresses the following hypothesis: The
presence of bacteria in picophytoplankton cultures will (a) enable iron and
cobalt solubilization, (b) spur picophytoplankton metal uptake and growth, and
(c) lead to expression of iron uptake transporters which more closely resembles
their expression in the natural marine environment. Specifically, the
picoeukaryote Ostreococcus and the cyanobacterium Crocosphaera will be grown in
semi-continuous cultures under axenic conditions (control), with bacterial
isolates (laboratory culture experiments) and in the presence of natural
bacterial populations (shipboard culture experiments), with and without addition
of desert dust, under trace metal clean conditions. Ostreococcus and
Crocosphaera are representative model organisms for processes of picoeukaryotic
photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation. Treatment effects on growth rate, metal
uptake, and ligand conditional stability constants will be measured. Siderophore
transporters and other proteins involved in iron uptake will be detected by
proteomic methods. Further, a differential and quantitative proteomic approach
will allow for the detection of proteins involved in iron uptake in subsurface
ocean samples, in order to compare to the transporters and transporter
expression levels of experimental cultures.