* 1421612
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Static-Dynamic Analyses for Region Serializability
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Bond, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 364,979.00

Title: SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Static-Dynamic Analyses for
Region Serializability

Computer systems' performance has grown exponentially for decades, enabling
advances in science, health, engineering, and other areas. However, due to
power, heat, and wire-length limitations, chip manufacturers are now producing
microprocessors that have more, instead of faster, computing cores. To scale
with this increasingly parallel hardware, software systems must become more
parallel. However, writing correct, scalable shared-memory programs is
notoriously difficult. A key challenge is that modern programming languages and
software and hardware systems provide virtually no guarantees for programs that
have a common, hard-to-eliminate behavior called data races -- because no one
knows how to provide better guarantees while retaining high performance. As a
result, software is difficult to reason about and fails unexpectedly, leading to
high development and testing costs, and imperiling reliability and security of
mission- and safety-critical systems. This project provides stronger guarantees
for software, achieving reasonable performance on contemporary systems. The
intellectual merits are novel program analyses and runtime support that provide
strong behavioral guarantees for programs. The project's broader significance
and importance are making software systems automatically more reliable;
eliminating whole classes of errors; reducing development and testing costs by
simplifying programming; and simplifying and reducing costs of program analyses
and software system support. Furthermore, the PIs' educational, mentoring, and
outreach activities enhance the project by helping educate a diverse workforce
of computer scientists trained in the project's work.

A key contribution is a novel hybrid static-dynamic analysis that enforces a
memory model called statically bounded region serializability (SBRS) entirely in
software. This memory model is strictly stronger than sequential consistency
(SC) and has the potential to be more efficient than SC to enforce, since it
allows compilers and hardware to reorder instructions within regions. The
project involves designing, implementing, and evaluating (1) three compiler
transformations for enforcing SBRS, (2) enhancements to the static-dynamic
analysis for performance and flexibility, (3) a novel asynchronous protocol for
overlapping concurrency control with program execution while enforcing SBRS, and
(4) enhancements to a software transactional memory (STM) system to use the
asynchronous protocol to improve scalability. The work provides, for the first
time, support for always-on, end-to-end SBRS that is practical, and it makes
further advancements in providing high-performance runtime support for
atomicity.