* 1421703
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Collaborative: Scalable Techniques for Better Situational Awareness: Algorithmic Frameworks and Large-Scale Empirical Analyses
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Fabian Monrose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 492,000.00

Attacks on computer networks are an all too familiar event, leaving operators
with little choice but to deploy a myriad of monitoring devices to ensure
dependable and stable service on the networks they operate. However, as networks
grow bigger and faster, staying ahead of the constant deluge of attack traffic
is becoming increasingly difficult. A case in point is the attacks on enterprise
name servers that interact with the Domain Name System (DNS). These name servers
are critical infrastructure, busily translating human readable domain names to
IP addresses. DNS is a hotbed of malicious activity, and when properly
monitored, it can offer invaluable information about network attacks and
malicious activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project furthers our collective
understanding of the growing abuse of enterprise name servers whereby infected
clients (bots) use automated domain-name generation algorithms to bypass network
defenses. More specifically, a framework for accurately identifying bots upon
seeing only a handful of unique lookups is developed based on sequential
hypothesis testing. The integration of NetFlow records, with novel their
indexing data-structures, delivers even deeper insight into aberrant traffic. A
live deployment of the system demonstrates the utility of this approach and
provides the opportunity for interactively querying the recorded forensic
information.&lt;br/&gt;