* 1421972
* SHF: Small: Design Tools and their Experimental Validation for Synthetic Biological Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Soha Hassoun, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 309,774.00

The broader aim of synthetic biology is to design and build organisms
specialized to perform pre-designated functions ranging from production of
commercially desirable fuels, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals to remediating
contaminating soil and water. The work proposed here is to develop and validate
computational tools to increase the role of automation in designing synthetic
biological systems. These tools are aimed at creating a streamlined methodology
that integrates biochemical, regulatory, and phylogenetic information into a
single platform to expedite the design and creation of function-based organisms.
These tools will significantly shorten the time taken to re-engineer organisms
and will enable wider usage of synthetic organisms. Students will be engaged in
this research through novel course material, hands-on experimentation through
the iGEM (International Genetically Engineering Machines) competition, and
relevant research projects with the principle investigators. Recruiting efforts
will be put forward to attract women and underrepresented minority undergraduate
students to participate in this research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
address in this proposal two cellular engineering problems that enable
maximizing cellular yield. The first problem consists of identifying and ranking
non-native synthesis pathways that yield desirable biomolecules such as biofuels
or therapeutics. In the second problem, we identify reactions whose fluxes must
be modified to increase cellular yield. While these two problems have been
addressed within the metabolic engineering community, a holistic approach for
engineering biological systems requires extending these approaches to consider
underlying gene interactions and limitations. While the synthetic biology
community has embraced a bottom-up approach for creating design methodologies
and tools to enable creating genetic circuitry, the metabolic engineering
community has relied on pathway-based design approaches. Our proposed approach
lies at the intersection of these two differing approaches. In this proposal,
traditional pathway-based approaches are extended to exploit knowledge and
limitations of the underlying genetic networks. To rank synthesis pathways, gene
similarity and transcript secondary structure are utilized. To identify gene
modifications, fold changes in gene expressions as design variables are used,
while accounting for uncertainties that arise with engineering interventions. To
validate the outcomes of the proposed computational tools, we build synthesis
pathways to produce isoprenoids and implement identified gene modifications,
using Escherichia coli as a host organism.