* 1421065
* RI: Small: Enabling robust visual intelligence using propagators to model human competence
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Patrick Winston, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The investigators approach the question of robust intelligence by asking what it
is that makes humans both intelligent and robustly intelligent. Part of the
answer is that humans are uniquely able to see, to report on what they see, and
to use visual events--- both real and imagined---to answer questions on demand
and to develop a common sense understanding of the physical world. If robust
human-level intelligence is to be understood and engineered, then it is
necessary to understand human visual competence. To understand human visual
competence, it is necessary to understand how the architecture of the brain
enables fragmentary and ambiguous perceptions to be brought into alignment with
expectations so as to produce an understanding of the visual world.

To take understanding of human vision to the next level, the investigators model
the human visual system using the propagator paradigm, a label for a collection
of ideas suited to the computational problems faced by vision systems.
Propagators themselves are stateless, which makes them appropriate for operation
on retinotopic arrays. Also, propagators connect cells in which information
monotonically increases, assuring convergence. Most importantly, bi-directonal
information flow lies at the core of the propagator paradigm, so when augmented
with new capabilities tailored specifically to vision processing, visual
information flows not only from the bottom up but also from the top down and, in
general, from any module to any other module, just as information flows to and
from the many brain centers devoted to vision in the human brain. The
investigators note, for example, that the lateral geniculate, a relay station
for information flowing from the retina to primary visual cortex, receives most
of its input from the primary visual cortex itself.

The investigators are motivated not only by a desire to understand human vision,
but also by a desire to build vision applications now far beyond the state of
the art. To drive their work, they concentrate on a dynamic scene understanding
problem: given an urban scene and one or more stationary cameras, recognize
actions such as walk, run, stop, put down, pick up, drop, give, take, follow,
enter, and leave.