* 1421480
* CIF: Small: Model-based sparse X-ray CT signal processing using polychromatic measurements
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Aleksandar Dogandzic, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 12/31/2017
* USD 149,998.00

X-ray CT measurement systems are important in modern nondestructive evaluation
(NDE) and medical diagnostics. Improving reconstruction accuracy and speed of
data collection in these systems could have a significant impact on these broad
areas. Thanks to recent computational and theoretical advances, it is now
possible to design iterative reconstruction methods that incorporate accurate
nonlinear physical models into sparse signal reconstructions from significantly
undersampled measurements. This research aims at achieving accurate X-ray CT
reconstruction from polychromatic measurements via parsimonious nonlinear signal
models.

The investigators develop sparse image reconstruction methods for polychromatic
CT measurements under the blind scenario where the material of the inspected
object and the incident energy spectrum are unknown. This research builds on
mass attenuation parametrization that leads to a simple signal model of a
polychromatic X-ray CT measurement system. Since both the mass attenuation
coefficient of a material and the incident spectrum of the measurement system
are functions of the photon energy, photon energy can be removed from the signal
model through a change of variables, leading to integral expressions of the
attenuated signal strength having the Laplace kernel form. The investigators
represent the incident spectrum as a function of mass attenuation and estimate
it by using an appropriate basis-function expansion. A major effort focuses on
developing similar simple models and corresponding algorithms for reconstructing
objects consisting of multiple materials.