* 1421993
* Direct Democracy and the Significance of the Framing of Proposals
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Isaac Martin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 163,939.00

What attributes make a law more or less likely to inspire consent of the
governed? Voters may weigh the costs and benefits of proposed legislation, but
in order for voters to form a considered judgment of the costs, they must be
able to correctly perceive them, attribute them to the responsible policy
makers, and evaluate them in terms of their moral values. Many public opinion
surveys and laboratory studies document the everyday cognitive biases that make
these tasks difficult even in the area of tax law where costs are explicit.
Recent theory in behavioral public finance tells us that law itself may be
designed to make informed decision-making easier, for example, by adjusting the
timing of implementation or explicitly stating burdens and benefits in such a
way that voters can more clearly perceive, attribute, and evaluate those costs
and benefits. Insights from behavioral finance have not yet been well integrated
into analysis of democratic processes. The research tests whether policy design
features may help voters evaluate proposed laws. By bringing insights from
behavioral finance to the process of direct democracy, this project will extend
our understanding of both. This study will contribute to our knowledge of the
legal conditions that make possible a sustainable system of public
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one part of testing this framework, the project
will collect and digitize the universe of ballot measures relevant to public
finance in the analytical site, preserving an important record of democracy that
will be made available on-line to researchers and the public. Digitizing these
records will also permit a statistical analysis of which policy features affect
how voters perceive and respond to the costs of public policy. The project will
also train new scholars in the analytics of democracy and public finance,
contributing to deepening citizens' understanding.