* 1421016
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Fast and Precise Dynamic Race Detection: Eliminating State and Checking Redundancy
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Cormac Flanagan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 301,004.00

Title: SHF:Small:Collaborative Research:RUI: Fast and Precise Dynamic Race
Detection: Eliminating State and Checking Redundancy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
national computing infrastructure utilizes multicore processors and
multiprocessor hardware across the entire spectrum of systems from small mobile
devices to huge data centers. These systems can execute many software threads of
control concurrently to improve responsiveness and performance, but the
potential for unintentional interference between threads makes it difficult to
ensure their reliability. Run-time analysis tools for automatically detecting
interference problems can help improve software reliability, but they currently
have significant performance shortcomings limiting their widespread adoption.
Developing more efficient analyses is thus essential. This research examines how
to improve the performance of run-time analyses for detecting data race
conditions. Data races are perhaps the most fundamental type of thread
interference and occur when multiple threads manipulate a shared memory location
without proper synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses both
the space and time overhead of dynamic race detection. The techniques developed
leverage memory access patterns observed during a target program's execution to
adaptively compress the access history information maintained by a dynamic race
detector, as well as new optimizations for eliminating redundant checks and for
replacing multiple checks on related memory locations with a single coalesced
check. The intellectual merits are achieving substantial performance
improvements over existing techniques and enabling comparable improvements in
dynamic analyses for other important non-interference properties, including
atomicity and determinism. Such analyses must also reason about races. The
broader impacts are potentially transforming the principles and practices of
multithreaded software engineering by enabling more widespread adoption of
analysis tools to detect race conditions and other concurrency defects,
contributing to the national software research infrastructure, and increasing
access to science research opportunities and training for students.