* 1421112
* What Can We Learn from Middle School Science Fairs about Teaching Science and Engineering Practices?
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Marian Pasquale, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,999,997.00

For over 60 years annual Science Fairs and Engineering competitions have been
held in schools and communities throughout the country, engaging large numbers
of middle school students and culminating in national and international events.
Science fairs are at the intersection of formal learning in school and informal
science learning in other settings including science centers, after-school
programs, and clubs. However, in spite of their wide implementation and long
history, there are few empirical studies that have examined the relationship
between student participation in these fairs and their learning and interest in
science. Additionally, there have been no studies to understand the real cost of
these programs relative to the student benefits. This educational research
project will fill that gap in understanding. It will systematically document and
describe science fair models; measure their impact on learning; and provide
evidence about the costs of various models and related benefits. The findings
from this study will inform a wide range of stakeholders (including teachers,
science fair leaders, volunteers, parents, and businesses) about these models
and how they impact students' mastery of science and engineering practices. This
four-year study in all regions of the country will be conducted in two phases:
Phase 1 will be a survey of 3800 middle school science teachers will define the
characteristics of science fair models; Phase 2 will use those understandings to
conduct case studies in 20 schools. Deliverables include handbooks for teachers
and the science fair community, articles in journals summarizing findings, the
Science and Engineering Practice and Interest Inventory, and a suite of data
collection instruments for scoring rubrics to describe science fairs and measure
their impact. Research questions will include: (1) What are the basic models of
middle school science fairs? (2) To what extent does participation in a
particular model enhance students' mastery of science and engineering practices
and/or their interest in science? (3) What student-teacher and school-level
factors contribute to or inhibit students' mastery? (4) What resources, human
and financial, are required to implement an effective middle school science
fair? and (5) What are the most cost-effective aspects of the science fair
experience, and how can they be applied or adapted by science fair leaders and
teachers to strengthen students' mastery of science and engineering practices?
Findings from this study will have the potential to improve current practices in
the design and implementation of science fairs and their impact on student
learning; they will be widely disseminated to the various stakeholders through
publications, conference presentations, and educational association channels.