* 1421292
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Design Automation for Block Copolymer Directed Self-Assembly (DSA) Lithography Patterning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* H S Philip Wong, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Block-copolymer Directed Self-Assembly (DSA) lithography is a promising next-
generation chip manufacturing technology which has the potential to produce
chips with minimum feature size down to 7nm or below. This project will
undertake research efforts to address the challenges in developing complex
computer software for the design automation of DSA-based chips so as to enable
DSA as a viable approach for large-scale chip design of the future, and thus
more complex chips may be produced at a much lower cost. Extensive student and
PI exchange and visits throughout the program is expected to instill a broader
intellectual perspective on the student education at both PIs? universities
(Stanford and University of Illinois). The multidisciplinary and innovative
nature of the proposed research will position the graduate and undergraduate
students involved to launch successful careers in the area of chip
manufacturing. To this end, the project has substantial emphasis on
undergraduate research and education, including women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the high throughput and low process cost of the DSA
technology, it has become the most promising candidate patterning the uniform
sized dense patterns (e.g. contacts, vias, cuts, etc.) for the next generation
complementary lithography technology. The development and implementation of DSA
technology require deep collaboration between process research and Electronic
Design Automation (EDA) algorithm development. Since the DSA technology is very
sensitive to the shapes and distributions of patterns, it is necessary for the
EDA software to understand the patterning preferences of the DSA process, such
that forbidden patterns will be disallowed and more preferred patterns will be
used. The project proposes a co-optimization flow between DSA process research
and EDA software development, and following the co-optimization flow, it
proposes to develop DSA aware EDA software targeting the most urgent patterning
problems for the DSA technology.