* 1421590
* Education Systems' Effects on Math and Science Achievement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Soo-Yong Byun, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 130,670.00

This project examines international efforts to improve student performance and
attempts to provide equal opportunities to students from different socio-
economic backgrounds. International educational studies such as the Trends in
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the Program for
International Students Assessment (PISA) provide a unique opportunity for
scholars to look at the different aspects of educational systems over time and
to examine whether and how they affect countries' mean academic achievement. In
the proposed study we will employ all five available waves of TIMSS data for
about forty participating countries to examine the extent to which institutional
characteristics of countries' educational systems - such as a degree of
differentiation, standardization, and privatization - are related to countries'
mean math and science achievement scores, and whether these time-variant
institutional characteristics moderate the socioeconomic gaps in math and
science achievement.

Specifically, we will utilize the 8th grade data from the five available waves
of the TIMSS - 1995, 1999, 2003, 2007, and 2011 - from about forty participating
countries to examine how different characteristics of countries' educational
systems are related to countries' mean math and science achievement, as well as
to socio-economic inequality in this achievement. Our study makes several
important contributions to the field. First, we will create a new knowledge base
by compiling information from different sources and then coding country-level,
time variant institutional characteristics of the countries' educational systems
and will examine how these characteristics changed over time. Second, we will
examine whether and how the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and
academic achievement is moderated by the country level characteristics of the
educational systems. Third, we will capture changes in the countries'
educational systems over a span of sixteen years, as well as examine whether and
how these changes affected the relationships between family SES and math and
science achievement.

Our research design allows for a meaningful within- and between-country
comparison of academic achievement over time. By employing within country fixed
effects models, we will better control for countries' exogenous cultural and
social characteristics, thus estimating more accurately the effects of
institutional characteristics of educational systems on academic achievement.
Future research will benefit from using the data we will create on time-variant
characteristics of the educational systems in the studied countries. The
findings will aid in the design of policies that aim to reduce inequality in
educational outcomes by family SES in the studied countries. The findings will
also significantly contribute to our understanding of educational stratification
and the role educational institutions play in it.