* 1421325
* NeTS: Small: Protecting Privacy While Providing Utility in Published Network Mobility Traces Using Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 478,672.00

Recorded information of an individual's movement among access points in a WiFi
network or among cell towers in a cellular network is typically regarded as
private data and not divulged by network operators. Yet such traces of real-
world individual mobility are critically important for researchers and engineers
in evaluating new mobile network protocols, architectures, and applications.
This project will develop and evaluate techniques for manipulating and then
publishing mobility traces in a manner such that (i) well-defined, formally-
proven, privacy guarantees are provided to the users whose data are contained in
the original traces, and (ii) the published traces provide high accuracy when
used in common computer network and protocol design and analysis tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The differential privacy techniques developed in this
project use a constrained trajectory-prefix representation of the original data
to determine the underlying representation of the original data and judiciously
allocate random noise needed to satisfy differential privacy (DP) constraints.
The utility of the derived DP trajectories - the difference between task-
specific performance realized using the derived DP trajectories and realized
using the original trajectories - will be evaluated for four common and
representative use cases. The original data itself will be obtained from an
operational 4,500-node WiFi campus wireless network. Since a more restricted
output DP data may provide higher utility (than DP traces) for a specific task
for a given privacy budget, this project will also examine utility tradeoffs
from specializing DP output for specific tasks. The project will also develop
error bounds on published DP data to provide the network analyst with a
quantitative measure of the degree of "randomness" associated with the DP data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project allows 'real world' network mobility data to
be made available to networking researchers and analysts, while at the same time
providing formal privacy guarantees to users whose activities are represented in
that data. The specific DP traces of user mobility made publicly available as
part of this project will also be of interest and use, as will the ensuing
community discussion around the most appropriate and useful forms of private
mobility data. More broadly, in the nascent era of "big data," privacy has
become of paramount importance. Mobile wireless users and their trajectories
among network access points are just one example of trajectory footprints -
sequences of physical locations visited, acquaintances met, web sites visited or
any of a myriad of other activities are 'trajectories' of significant interest
well beyond the networking research community. The domain-specific research
undertaken in this project may thus find application in these and many other
areas. The mentoring of a diverse group of graduate research assistants and
undergraduate REU students and incorporation of privacy-related research results
into graduate-level seminars and (more broadly) privacy issues into
undergraduate network curriculum will provide additional broader impact for this
project's research.