* 1421058
* NeTS: Small: Meta-Modelling for Complex Engineered Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Violet Syrotiuk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Complex engineered networks are pervasive in everyday life. A few examples
include the internet, power grid, and transportation networks. The complexity
arises not just from the size of the network, but also its structure, operation,
evolution over time, and the fact that people are involved in its design and
operation. Understanding complex engineered networks is challenging; their size
and emergent properties means that traditional techniques of design, analysis,
and modelling are poorly suited to adequately characterizing their behaviour and
fundamental properties. This project develops a new tool for rigorous design,
analysis, and modelling in the context of wireless networks. The goal is to
improve understanding of the factors and interactions that impact performance.
Experimentation in simulation and testbeds, using the NSF Global Environment for
Network Innovations (GENI) network, is ongoing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Locating
arrays (LAs) are formulated to focus on identification of factor interactions
rather than measurement. Consequently, designs using LAs grow logarithmically in
the number of experimental factors. This makes practical an order of magnitude
more factors in experimentation. Hence, LAs have the potential to transform
experimentation in huge factor spaces such as those found in complex engineered
networks. An iterative approach, similar to that used in compressive sensing, is
applied in model development; this also addresses a grand challenge in wireless
networks for new data-driven mathematical models. Assessing the validity and
robustness of the models developed is essential to understanding their quality
and usefulness for optimization, management, and control of the network.
Overall, this project contributes to understanding of complex engineered
networks that shape modern society.