* 1421025
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation):  Examining the role of anoxic events on coastal micronutrient (Fe) supplies from a novel high-resolution profiling sampler
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Amy Mueller, Mueller                 Amy
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 07/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

This award provides funding for a two-year Postdoctoral Fellowship. The PI
received her PhD in chemical engineering from Massachusetts Institute of
Technology's Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering. The sponsoring
scientists and host institutions are Dr. Jim Murray (University of Washington)
and Dr. John Crusius (USGS - Seattle). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research she
will conduct for her Fellowship is focused on the exploration of what is driving
iron (Fe) cycles in the coastal oceans and on the development of a new
instrument that will improve the sampling of iron in the ocean. Oceans cover
over 70% of the earth surface and are responsible for nearly 50% of annual
primary productivity, yet these ecosystems remain significantly understudied
relative to their terrestrial counterparts. Notably, trace nutrients such as
iron which may be critical in driving (or limiting) primary productivity in the
ocean remain only sparsely sampled. What data are available indicate that iron
concentrations are highly variable and seasonally dependent offshore and
especially in coastal areas where upwelling/downwelling cycles may be
particularly important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will explore the extent to
which coastal upwelling and hypoxia events may drive supply of Fe to overlying
waters from sediments and will develop a methodology for automated high-
frequency trace-metal clean sampling at ocean moorings which stands to improve
data density for iron (and other metals and nutrients) by a factor of ten or
more relative to existing solutions. The PI will develop a system for automated
collection of samples via a novel trace-metal clean sampler for use at profiling
moorings. Deployments at a near-shore validation site (~6 months, ORCA, Puget
Sound) will be followed by sampling for 12 months at a scientifically relevant
coastal shelf site. Ideally, this deployment will take place at the OOI
Endurance Array Newport Line, where water column profilers are scheduled to be
installed at various depths from 25-800m. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also
participate in two educational initiatives, both of which involve
underrepresented students in science projects. She will act as a science mentor
for middle school students in the Seattle area via Project COOL, and she will
mentor undergraduates who are participating in the University of Washington and
Woods Hole internship programs.