* 1421177
* SHF: Small: Using Coding Theory to Optimize the Representation of Information in Computer Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Daniel Sorin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 458,000.00

Computer systems process and store information,
including&lt;br/&gt;instructions, inputs, and outputs. Computers represent, or
"encode",&lt;br/&gt;this information with bits -- zeros and ones -- such that a
given&lt;br/&gt;sequence of bits can describe a number, an instruction, a
character to&lt;br/&gt;print to the monitor, etc. The choice of bit patterns
used to encode&lt;br/&gt;different types of information impacts the performance,
reliability,&lt;br/&gt;and energy-efficiency of a computer. This project --
which is an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary collaboration between a computer systems
architect&lt;br/&gt;and an expert in information coding -- will develop new
information&lt;br/&gt;representations that improve performance, reliability,
and&lt;br/&gt;energy-efficiency. This project will have both technical impact
on&lt;br/&gt;computer system design and information coding, and it will
impact&lt;br/&gt;society through its training of students (both graduate
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate) and an outreach program that brings under-
represented&lt;br/&gt;minorities to Duke for summer research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will make technical advances in
four main avenues.&lt;br/&gt;First, the project will develop new representations
for the&lt;br/&gt;information that is stored in write-limited storage media like
Flash,&lt;br/&gt;with the goal of extending its lifetime. A key coding
technology in&lt;br/&gt;this research thrust is coset coding, in which the
system has multiple&lt;br/&gt;choices for which codeword to write to the storage
and can choose the&lt;br/&gt;option that incurs the least wear. Second, the
project will develop&lt;br/&gt;new codes, based on existing locally repairable
codes, for writing to&lt;br/&gt;all types of storage that can suffer permanent
failures. These codes&lt;br/&gt;can enable efficient, local repair of failures
by minimizing the&lt;br/&gt;number of storage locations that must be accessed to
perform the&lt;br/&gt;repair. Third, the project will develop new
representations of&lt;br/&gt;instructions to improve performance and energy-
efficiency. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the project will develop new encodings of
instructions for&lt;br/&gt;GPUs that enable useful work to be done even in the
presence of branch&lt;br/&gt;divergence. Fourth, the project will develop and
apply network coding&lt;br/&gt;techniques to improve the performance and
reliability of communication&lt;br/&gt;between processor cores.