* 1421508
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Energy Management in New Information Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 399,585.00

Due to the convergence of several trends (most notably Moore's law) about a
decade ago, the related quantities of power, energy, and temperature rapidly
emerged as the most important computational resources and constraints in many
information technologies. We are thus about a decade into a green computing
revolution in which many information technologies are being redesigned with
energy consumption as a first class design criterion. One of the many
technological challenges that arise as part of this green computing revolution
are new algorithmic resource management problems, in which the resource that
must be managed is energy related. Over the last several decades, when computer
instructions ("time") and computer memory ("space") were the dominant
computational resources, computer science researchers developed many techniques
for designing time and space efficient algorithms, and for analyzing the time
and space required by particular algorithms on simple models of a computer. The
ability to reason abstractly about time and space in simple computational models
is undoubtedly a valuable skill for computer scientists and software engineers.
However, the physics of energy is sufficiently different than the physics of
time and space that the standard models for studying time and space as
computational resources do not seem to be the appropriate models for studying
energy as a computational resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus the PI will
develop new models for studying energy as a computational resource. Necessitated
by the nonlinear nature of the relationship between energy and performance, the
PI will develop new nonlinear algorithmic design and analysis techniques. The
long term payoff of the project is expected to be an algorithmic theory of
energy as a computational resource in simple models. This theory will eventually
be taught to future software engineers, and will serve these software engineers,
when faced with problems in which power/energy/temperature is the key scarce
resource, just as the current algorithmic theory of time as a computational
resource now serves them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support training
several undergraduate and Ph.D. students at the University of Pittsburgh in
algorithmic energy management. The project will support visits by outside Ph.D.
students and post-docs interested in beginning or continuing a research program
in algorithmic energy management. The PI will participate regularly in green
computing academic conferences and will facilitate communication between the
algorithmic and computer systems research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will specifically investigate algorithmic energy management problems within
four information technology settings:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Online scheduling
of power heterogeneous processors: Simulation studies indicate that
heterogeneous multiprocessor architectures potentially offer higher performance
than current homogeneous multiprocessor architectures. It is also known that
traditional priority scheduling algorithms that work well for single processor
and uniform processor architectures do not work well for heterogeneous
multiprocessor architectures. The main goal is to find algorithms that provably
work well for heterogeneous multiprocessor
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Computing optimal energy tradeoff
schedules for speed scalable processors: Energy and time performance are
generally conflicting goals. The goal is to understand and efficiently compute
schedules that optimally balance these conflicting
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Computing near energy optimal routings in
networks of speed scalable routers with shutdown: The two most common energy
management mechanisms are power heterogeneous components and components that may
be shut down. When these are both included in a computer network, the standard
routing problem becomes more complex as the energy used per router is neither
concave nor convex. The goal is to understand and efficiently compute good
routings in this setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Energy efficient circuits:
Near threshold computing is a potential approach to more energy efficient
computing on the circuit level. However, while lowering the supply voltage
decreases power, it increases the probability of functional failures, thus
necessitating more fault-tolerant (and thus larger) circuits. The goal is to
understand and efficiently compute the most energy efficient way to balance the
competing demands of the energy used per gate and the number of gates.