* 1421823
* SHF: Small: Introducing Next Generation I/O Accelerator
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Qing Yang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 479,998.00

Big data applications demand high speed, reliable, and energy
&lt;br/&gt;efficient data storage systems. Traditional storage architectures
have &lt;br/&gt;fundamental limitations because of legacy systems that have
centered &lt;br/&gt;on spinning hard disk drives. With rapid advances in
nonvolatile &lt;br/&gt;memory technologies such as NAND-gate flash, phase change
memory, Memristor, and &lt;br/&gt;magnetic RAM, a great opportunity arises for
revolutionizing storage &lt;br/&gt;architectures. The objective of this research
is to start a paradigm &lt;br/&gt;shift in storage architecture to meet the
increasing demand of big &lt;br/&gt;data applications. It is envisioned that
future storage systems will &lt;br/&gt;have machine intelligence that learns,
analyzes, predicts, and &lt;br/&gt;controls the system at runtime dynamically. A
novel accelerator &lt;br/&gt;architecture is introduced with machine
intelligence to enable high &lt;br/&gt;speed processing of storage data
operations that are critical to high &lt;br/&gt;performance computing in general
and big data computing in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The newly introduced
I/O accelerator, residing either in a &lt;br/&gt;many-core CPU chip or on a
storage controller board, enables &lt;br/&gt;sufficiently accurate predictions
for effective optimization of &lt;br/&gt;storage I/Os. With new architecture
features, the proposed I/O &lt;br/&gt;accelerator can carry out complicated I/O
tasks in the speed &lt;br/&gt;comparable to the emerging nonvolatile memories,
which is critical to &lt;br/&gt;I/O performance because it no longer operates in
milliseconds as &lt;br/&gt;spinning disks do. The project will explore and
implement the I/O &lt;br/&gt;accelerator that can effectively deal with the
complexity and high &lt;br/&gt;dimensionality of factors related to diverse
storage technologies, a &lt;br/&gt;large variation of application workloads,
different &lt;br/&gt;reliability/availability requirements, and power
consumptions of &lt;br/&gt;various storage components. The result is a new
heterogeneous storage &lt;br/&gt;architecture that is optimized for future
computing infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;With the accelerator as an enabler,
comprehensive methodology will be &lt;br/&gt;investigated that proactively
learns system behavior to anticipate &lt;br/&gt;long-term trends and to respond
quickly to fast changing I/O events. &lt;br/&gt;The new architecture is believed
to be the first of the kind providing &lt;br/&gt;dynamic optimizations by means
of 1) intelligent data placements and &lt;br/&gt;replacements across
heterogeneous devices, 2) optimal resource &lt;br/&gt;allocation and
provisioning to applications' workloads, 3) effective &lt;br/&gt;data
deduplication based on content locality, and 4) smart policy &lt;br/&gt;decision
on data protection and recovery adaptive to different data &lt;br/&gt;types.
Furthermore, the new accelerator enables fast in-situ data &lt;br/&gt;analytics
in active storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is
expected to have the following broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;1) In today's cloud
computing and big data &lt;br/&gt;applications, servers generate a large amount
of I/Os that can take &lt;br/&gt;full advantage of the new storage architecture.
2) The new accelerator &lt;br/&gt;can be incorporated into many core CPUs as a
specialized core for &lt;br/&gt;future heterogeneous processors. 3) The new
storage architecture will &lt;br/&gt;speed up the adoption of emerging storage
class memories. 4) The new &lt;br/&gt;methodology will stimulate more research
in applying machine learning &lt;br/&gt;to storage systems. 5) The new CPU-and-
data centric Computer Engineering curriculum will train &lt;br/&gt;both graduate
and undergraduate students for real world needs. 6) The &lt;br/&gt;outreach
program will continue the success stories of prior NSF &lt;br/&gt;projects to
help the economic development of the state of Rhode Island and the
&lt;br/&gt;nation.