* 1421925
* RI: Small: Neuroevolution of Brain-Inspired Computational Models Over Vast Timescales
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kenneth Stanley, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 472,542.00

For many years researchers inspired by the idea of natural selection have
experimented with computer programs called evolutionary algorithms. These
algorithms simulate a kind of artificial breeding process in which a set of
candidates generated by the computer are evaluated for their ability to perform
a desired task. The best performers are then allowed to reproduce with slight
variation to form a new and hopefully improved generation. In recent years
evolutionary algorithms have exhibited the ability to evolve brain-like
structures called artificial neural networks in an approach called
neuroevolution. These evolved networks perform tasks often critical to
technological progress and artificial intelligence like controlling robots or
recognizing images. However, unlike evolution in nature, which yields dramatic
changes over hundreds of thousands of generations, evolutionary algorithms have
rarely been run for more than a few thousand. This project for the first time is
applying new evolutionary techniques that reward continual novelty and
diversification to experiments evolving over hundreds of thousands of
generations, on the scale of nature. The driving hypothesis is that modern
evolutionary algorithms run on this scale can yield robotic behaviors, agent
morphologies, and decision-making capabilities significantly beyond the current
state of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate long-term evolution in
practice, artificial neural networks are being evolved in a variety of domains
through new kinds of novelty-driven neuroevolution algorithms designed to avoid
the convergence seen in typical evolutionary experiments. Because this new class
of algorithms tends to avoid convergence, the long-term dynamics and ultimate
potential for discovery of such algorithms over vast time scales (i.e. hundreds
of thousands of generations) is almost entirely unknown. The idea of running
neuroevolution at unprecedented timescales mirrors recent results in related
areas like deep learning where massive computation has proven capable of
fundamentally altering the kinds of problems that can be solved. Because
evolutionary runs over hundreds of thousands of generations yield enormous
troves of evolutionary data, an important component of the project is the
development visualization techniques for exploring and characterizing the
results of such runs. The project overall is producing a new set of tools, a new
set of evolved capabilities for autonomous control and decision-making, and an
increased understanding of the implications of big data and big computation for
simulated evolution in computers.