* 1421498
* CHS: Small: Non-use as a Transformative Lens for Understanding Social Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Geraldine Gay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2019
* USD 511,860.00

This research will analyze the factors associated with non-use of Facebook, in
order to develop a deep, rich understanding of how social technologies more
generally mediate and are embedded in complex sociotechnical milieux. It will
address three primary research questions: How can our understanding of
technology use and "the user" be advanced by exploring its relationship with
different types, degrees, and varieties of non-use? How is privacy
conceptualized and enacted through non-use, and how do those practices help us
reconsider the definition and constitution of privacy? What are the processes
and experiences of leaving online groups and communities? When particular
technologies become nearly pervasive, intentional and pointed absence from them
becomes both analytically conspicuous and potentially informative. Questions of
group persistence or dissolution apply broadly to a wide variety of domains and
contexts integral to the composition of society. This research will help
understand how social technologies mediate these processes, thus contributing to
the design of systems that better meet the needs of people.

Four lines of research will explore these themes. First, a pair of large-scale
surveys, one each during the first and third years, will establish the
prevalence of different practices of and motivations for non-use. Second,
statistical modeling and network analysis, using both survey data and samples of
usage data, will examine how both individual and group predictors relate to
these motivations and practices. Third, a series of focus groups involving
participants with diverse experiences of use and non-use will help understand
conversations and conflicts that may occur around non-use. Fourth, an
intervention wherein study participants will be asked to deactivate their
Facebook account will enable observation of the processes and experiences of
non-use as they happen.

This project will contribute to and expand on the previous limited work on
technology non-use, deepening our conceptualizations both of non-use and of "the
user." The combination of quantitative and qualitative analyses will build an
understanding of the influences on and practices of social technology avoidance.
To facilitate research in this area, the anonymized survey data will be made
available to other researchers. Finally, this work offers non-use as a
potentially transformative lens through which to examine long-standing issues of
privacy and groups in technologically-mediated systems.