* 1421876
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: From Intentional to Enacted Values in a Future Internet Architecture: Values in the Next Phase of Named Data Networking Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Katherine Shilton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 272,992.00

Named Data Networking (NDN) is a long-term research effort that aims to redesign
the underlying architecture of the Internet. This collaborative project studies
NDN's impacts on social issues such as privacy, intellectual property, law
enforcement, governance, and policy. It uses a cooperative research approach, in
which social scientists work alongside the NDN team of networking researchers.
Project outcomes will include a detailed report on critical social, cultural,
and economic considerations for the design of NDN, and future network
architectures more generally. Other expected outcomes include technical changes
to the NDN architecture based on this set of considerations and through cross-
disciplinary dialogue.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project advances Values in
Design (ViD) research by investigating the distinction between values intended
in the NDN core architecture and values enacted in its implementation(s). The
research questions are:&lt;br/&gt;1. How will the NDN application choices
reaffirm or reshape values in the NDN architecture?&lt;br/&gt;2. How do values
embedded in architecture become enacted in application design and
use?&lt;br/&gt;3. What social issues are bound up in NDN technical
problems?&lt;br/&gt;4. How can values-in-design perspectives help solve these
technical problems?&lt;br/&gt;5. What interventions and strategies encourage
values conversations within the technical work of infrastructure
design?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses these five research questions
using qualitative methods and targeted technical interventions. Further, joint
research on four technical challenges - naming, trust management, congestion
management, and evaluation metrics - enable values-sensitive perspectives to
directly influence new technical innovation. Attention to values issues in
active, ongoing NDN research advances networking research by supporting
technical innovations in these key areas that are driven by the
interdisciplinary discoveries of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering
potential social, policy and cultural impacts of the NDN architecture while it
is still in development will shape an Internet that not only works more
efficiently and provides increased reliability and trustworthiness in
communication, but also fundamentally supports privacy, democracy, and equity of
information access. The project's impacts will include new methods to evaluate
future internet architectures (FIA). There are common challenges for FIA beyond
NDN based upon both physical realities (e.g. congestion) and social values (e.g.
security, privacy). This project will generate both policy and technical means
to address these challenges, first for NDN, but with the potential to be adapted
and adopted by other architectures. Finally, this project will further encourage
socially-responsible design of emerging technologies by creating and testing
better methods for engaging network architects in ViD dialogues. It facilitates
the involvement of a broader range of fields in the NSF FIA program and network
architecture research.