* 1421467
* SHF: Small: Disruptive Hardware for Energy-Starved Autonomous Nano-Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Mikhail Erementchouk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Mobile autonomous robotic insects such as dragon flies and virtual bugs that
chiefly rely on energy scavenging frequently languish due to the excessive power
dissipation by digital processors while executing the underlying software
algorithms used in navigation through dynamic environments. This NSF research
will study the underlying adaptive control-theoretic software algorithms to
replace them by energy-efficient hardware capable of brain-like reinforcement
learning. The proposed biology-inspired hardware mounted on robotic insects will
be beneficial to the defense related applications, first responders to disaster
areas for remote monitoring, and mapping of hostile and hazardous environments.
Such algorithmic hardware will also benefit applications in flight control,
biochemical processes, power generators, and telecommunications. Educational
improvement and research integration is a major goal of this integrative and
cross-disciplinary research, thereby providing opportunity to upgrade the
current Computer Science and Engineering curriculum and train engineering
workforce of the future who will apply knowledge from multiple disciplines to
design ultra-low-power autonomous nanosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive
dynamic programming (ADP) algorithms are used in many large-scale engineering
applications involving adaptive optimal control systems and signal processing.
However, the success of ADP on the microprocessor has limited its scope in
mobile computing and autonomous robotic insects where the battery energy
preservation is paramount. Reasonable ADP algorithms cannot run on portable low
power machines because ADP needs a large memory bank and requires parallel
processing for a reasonable runtime. This research aims to develop methods for
porting higher-level algorithms from software implementation on the
microprocessor to a mixed signal CMOS chip design at first and then an ultra-
low-energy chip design by combining CMOS and memristor technologies.