* 1421179
* Multi-Site Public Engagement with Science - Synthetic Biology (Innovations in Development)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Lawrence Bell, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,288,713.00

The aim of this project is to create conversations in science museums among
scientists, engineers, and public audiences about an emerging research field,
synthetic biology. Synthetic biology applies science and engineering to create
new biological systems, and re-design existing biological systems, for useful
purposes. This is an important new area of research and development that raises
societal questions about potential benefits, costs, and risks. Conversations
between researchers and public audiences will focus not only on what synthetic
biology is and how research in the field is carried out, but also on the
potential products, outcomes, and implications for society of this work.
Researchers and publics will explore personal and societal values and priorities
as well as desired research outcomes so that both groups can learn from each
other. Public participants will benefit from knowing about this field of
research, and researchers will benefit from hearing public perspectives directly
from the public participants. This project will be led by the Museum of Science
with partners at the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the
Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center, the Science Museum of Minnesota,
the Ithaca Sciencenter, and several other universities and science museums. It
is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at pushing beyond
traditional modes of communicating with public audiences rooted in "public
understanding of science" modalities into the mechanisms and perspectives
associated with "public engagement with science" (PES). The project will support
informal educational institutions as facilitators of such PES activities through
which mutual learning takes place among research experts and various publics.
Formative evaluation will support the development of evaluation tools that
practitioners can use themselves to measure impacts of public engagement
activities on both scientist and public participants. Summative evaluation will
measure the impacts of the project on informal science education practitioners
and researchers participating in the development of the project. In the first
year of the project, two kinds of engagement activities will be tested at eight
pilot sites across the U.S. The first kind will be the focus of "showcase"
events, in which researchers demonstrate and talk with museum visitors about the
basics of synthetic biology and their research work. The second kind will be the
focus of "forum" events in which the multi-directional conversations focus on
societal implications and participants' priorities for maximizing the benefits
of this new field while minimizing the risks. The work of the first year will
inform development of a kit of public engagement materials that will support
widespread public engagement with synthetic biology in the second year at up to
200 sites across the U.S. Successful practices and infrastructure developed by
the Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network to support NanoDays events will
be use for this broad dissemination of pubic engagement in synthetic biology in
year 2. When the project is complete a set of tools and guides will be provided
online for developing, implementing, and evaluating engagement events that bring
scientists and publics together, specifically about synthetic biology, but
adaptable to other emerging research topics. The informal science education
field will have a better understanding of how to get scientists, engineers, and
publics to engage together in discussions about the societal implications of
emerging technologies, and how to evaluate the quality of that engagement for
both the researchers and the publics involved. The project will also provide a
sense of informed public views on societal issues related to synthetic biology
that emerge through a variety of public engagement activities that take place in
science museums.