* 1421090
* Science of Broadening Participation: Stratification in Academic Career Trajectories
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Jean Shin, American Sociological Assoc
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 457,270.00

SES-1421090&lt;br/&gt;Roberta Spalter-Roth&lt;br/&gt;Marie Mora&lt;br/&gt;Jean
Shin&lt;br/&gt;American Sociological Association&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will complete research that will better theorize and contribute to
better a understanding of the experiences of underrepresented minorities (URMs),
especially black and Hispanic scholars in higher education in sociology and
economics. The study is interdisciplinary in that it compares URM career
trajectories in two STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
disciplines (sociology and economics), and integrates major theoretical concepts
from each. The results can suggest strategies to broaden STEM participation for
URMs and increase the likelihood of their successful academic career
trajectories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful career trajectories in these two
STEM disciplines are normatively measured as full professorships at research-
extensive universities. As such, a major purpose of the study is to measure
specific aspects of the stratification processes and outcomes that may create or
re-create inequalities in the academic career trajectories of underrepresented
minorities in two disciplines: sociology and economics. As a result of this
effort, the researchers will develop two databases for "evidence-based"
evaluations as well as a model for data collection and analysis that will
benefit other science disciplines. The study, conducted by a diverse research
team of sociologists and economists, uses a mixed-methods approach to develop
theory and measure trajectories of scholars from both disciplines. It will test
the interrelationships between several theoretical concepts that the
investigators argue are aspects of stratification processes, and whether they
are associated with career stratification. The key theoretical concepts that
will be tested include the following: human capital and social capital including
professional networks and marginality to those networks; "two worlds" and the
"color line" for racial and ethnic minorities; and the intersectionality of
race, ethnicity, and gender. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study findings are important, first, because of the
emphasis on bringing URMs into STEM disciplines so that they can teach and
mentor an increasingly diverse body of students as well as bring new
perspectives and paradigms to research and policy. These new perspectives may
have the effect of increasing U.S. innovation and competitiveness, as well as
increasing the number of U.S. participants in specific STEM fields, including
the social, behavioral, and economic sciences. Second, given that the number of
adjunct faculty is on the rise at many institutions, who will obtain and succeed
in tenure-track positions? A greater representation of URM scholars as full-
time, tenured faculty is particularly important in light of changing
demographics in the U.S. population. Combined, blacks and Hispanics represent
nearly 30 percent of the entire population, but only 9.6 percent of all full-
time faculty members in degree-granting institutions. The study will evaluate
current intervention programs designed to increase participation (recruitment)
and bolster careers (retention) of URMs in the academy, but also propose new
interventions and strategies. The research results will be widely disseminated
in order to provide insights into how to improve programs and policies across
STEM disciplines, based on interdisciplinary theory from sociology and
economics. The study will also train a group of undergraduate and graduate
students to aid in carrying out all aspects of the study, including exposure to
multiple research methods and types of data analysis.