* 1421788
* Collaborative Research:Examining Contextual Factors Influencing the Implementation of Projects Designed to Improve Cultural Diversity in Informal STEM Programming
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Margaret Glass, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 141,695.00

This project will research factors influencing the implementation of programs
designed to increase diverse participation in informal science. The goal is to
provide the informal science education field with information and tools that
will help them design effective programs that more effectively engage a broad
range of diverse audiences. The project has two major components. First, the
project will research the implementation of a citizen science project, Celebrate
Urban Birds (CUB), in major U.S. cities. Citizen science projects involve public
volunteers in gathering scientifically valid data as part of ongoing research.
Second, building on results of the research, the project will launch a website
and learning community (called a Community of Practice or CoP) supporting
informal science educators that are involved in designing and implementing
informal science programs with an emphasis on engaging diverse participants. The
project will be lead by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology (CLO), a leader in
designing and researching citizen science projects, in collaboration with the
Association of Science-Technology Centers (ASTC) and five science center members
of ASTC, where the CUB program will be implemented and researched.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to better understand
contextual factors and how they impact implementation even when accepted
practices are followed. Such research is key not only to revealing accepted
practices but also to understanding how projects are implemented in the face of
concrete operational, cultural, economic, and demographic variables. The
research will use a comparative case study approach, which is designed for
studies requiring holistic, in-depth investigation. The development of the
website and the CoP will be guided by a Network Improvement Strategy, a
research-based approach to designing educational CoPs. The development of the
CoP will involve the project stakeholders including the informal science
organization practitioners, community organization representatives, CUB staff,
ASTC staff, advisors and consultants. This strategy will allow the project team
and pilot sites to leverage their diverse experiences and skill sets to improve
practice; provide space for researchers and practitioners to work together as
partners; and develop a nuanced set of strategies that can be implemented across
a variety of organizational contexts.