* 1421034
* RI: Small: From Impact to Impulsive Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Yan-Bin Jia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 06/30/2018
* USD 529,502.00

When people work, they often take advantage of impacts between objects, for
example, a worker impacts a nail with a hammer to drive it in. These impacts
generate what are known as "impulsive forces" to do work. People take advantage
of smaller impulsive forces to complete many common daily tasks too; inserting a
key into a key hole, opening a stuck window, and cracking an egg. While the
impacts between a plate and a table is much lighter than that applied to a nail,
it is nonetheless just as useful. Today's robots have not been designed to take
advantage of impulsive forces to accomplish tasks. The PI conducts an
investigation into several fundamental and experimental issues surrounding
impulsive robotic manipulation and develops methods for their use in robot
control. Project results are advancing the theory of multi-body impacts and
widening the capabilities of robots. Direct applications of the results are
leading to faster and more agile robots for civil and military services and
improved efficiency of industrial processes.

The technical goal of this project is to gain in-depth understanding about
control of collision outcomes and, more importantly, integration of impact
planning with motion planning in robot manipulation. The project consists of
three phases. The first phase advances the Principal Investigator's recent work
on compliant and multiple impacts to modeling of n-body simultaneous collisions,
tackling issues that include state space condensation, impulse growth in high-
dimensional space, sensitivity to physical parameters, and area and nonlinear
contacts. In parallel with the analysis is the development of a graphical
interface called MultiCollide for interactive collision simulation. The second
phase investigates how a manipulator can impart via impact a desired motion to
an object, solving an inverse impact problem that connects impact dynamics with
trajectory planning and manipulator dynamics. The final phase focuses on two
impulsive manipulation tasks that respectively address the following important
issues: how to leverage contact compliance and geometry, and how to interleave
impact planning with robot motion planning.