* 1421353
* CCF: Small: Learning Assisted Induced Noise and Error Tolerant Digital and Analog Filters Using Reduced-Distance Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 348,316.00

With increased levels of device integration accompanied by use of transistors
with deep-nanometer feature sizes, analog, switched-capacitor and digital
filters that are used for isolating "wanted" signals in electronic circuits from
"unwanted" ones, have become increasingly susceptible to noise induced by the
operation of vast amounts of circuitry. Such noise leads to degradation of
signal quality and loss of Quality of Service (QoS) of the end application
(wireless communication, sensing, etc). One way to address the noise issue is to
devise a noise-cancellation scheme similar to that used in popular noise-
canceling headphones. Such techniques are difficult to implement on-chip due to
the unknown nature of on-chip noise sources. To solve this problem, we introduce
limited redundancy into the filter implementation, that allows the filter to
check for signals (injected noise) at internal circuit nodes that are
inconsistent with the input signals to the filter and compensate for their
effects on filter operation. As long as the injected noise is localized within
sub-regions of the filter, near-perfect noise/error cancellation is achieved
regardless of the source of the noise and the manner in which it couples to the
filter involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the demand for high speed wireless
communications technology grows, there will be a strong need to develop research
and education programs that produce personnel that can service the relevant
system design, yield management and field maintenance problems in industry.
Students working on this project will participate in summer internship programs
with industry and work on real industry test cases. This will facilitate
technology transfer to industry and will also challenge the academic researchers
and students to address practical technology transfer issues that eventually
lead to commercialization of the technology developed, thus impacting economy
and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical details of the project involve
design of analog, switched-capacitor and digital filters that are resilient to
noise/errors induced by electrical bugs such as due to power/ground bounce and
crosstalk. A key goal is to develop a design methodology that provides maximum
resilience to noise induced errors with the least impact on area and power
consumption. The project will result in a chip design for proof-of-concept and
validation of the fundamental resilience concepts. The approach is based on the
principle of checksum based encodings of the state transformation matrices of
linear as well as linearized-nonlinear analog, switched-capacitor and digital
filters. When noise is injected into a specific node of the filter, the filter
encoding can be used to generate a phase-inverted version of the injected noise.
By feeding the latter into the affected circuit state, perfect or near-perfect
noise/error cancellation can be achieved. A key benefit of this approach is that
it is independent of the source of the noise/error as long as the effect of the
noise/error injection is localized to one or a few system states.