* 1421197
* NSF's National Optical-infrared Astronomy Research Laboratory:  Management and Operations of the Directorate, Mid-Scale Observatories, and the Community Science and Data Center
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Lori Allen, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 144,572,642.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Optical
Astronomy Observatory (NOAO) is a Federally Funded Research and Development
Center (FFRDC), sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF), and operated
by a managing organization under cooperative agreement with NSF. Under this
award, the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), Inc.
will manage and operate NOAO for the period 1 October 2015 to 30 September
2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the award period, AURA will lead NOAO into an
era that focuses on Data Science; helping astronomers obtain and use extremely
large and complex data sets containing observations of millions to billions of
celestial objects. These data sets and the follow-up observations based on them
will be generated by facilities in Arizona and Chile operated by NOAO as well as
other ground-based and space- based facilities. AURA will execute its plan in
partnership with university-based scientists, other leading federally funded
national centers for astronomy and physics, and international collaborations.
Based on an ongoing dialogue with its partners as well as the NSF, AURA will
update its plan on an annual basis to ensure that NOAO is delivering the
services and capabilities needed by the community and most likely to maximize
the scientific return-on-investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Via the NOAO envisioned by AURA, highly qualified scientists from around the
world will use rich data sets as well as individual, targeted observational data
sets obtained at NOAO-operated facilities in Arizona and Chile to investigate a
broad range of research problems such as the detection and characterization of
small (10s of meters in diameter) asteroids near Earth that are potential
threats to humanity, untangling the assembly history of the Milky Way, measuring
small ripples in the cosmic fabric of space-time in order to learn more about
the mysterious dark matter, and creating a more accurate map of how space-time
unfolded and expanded since the Big Bang under the influence of dark energy.
Much of this research will require adopting, adapting, and using the Big Data
visualization and analysis techniques now emerging in almost all areas of
research, commerce, and government. Through NOAO, AURA will also continue to
pioneer new, vigorous research and technology development collaborations with
the Department of Energy (DOE), the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), and NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through
the investment of federal funds, all citizens are stakeholders in the NOAO
program. NOAO will continue to engage the diversity of its community from low-
income primary school students local to NOAO facilities in Arizona and Chile, to
postdoctoral scholars who begin their careers at those facilities, undergraduate
students seeking research experiences, and the tens of thousands of visitors to
NOAO?s mountain-based facilities in Arizona and Chile. AURA will continue its
ambitious program to recruit, train, and retain scientists and engineers from
underrepresented groups, encouraging them to be pioneers in new, vigorous
research and technology development. Training students and early career
scientists in the use of Big Data techniques is a major goal of this award.