* 1421580
* TWC SBE: Small: Building the human firewall: Developing organizational resistance to semantic security threats
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Alexandra Durcikova, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Semantic attacks are efforts by others to steal valuable information by
imitating electronic communications from a trustworthy source. A common example
of a semantic attack is phishing where a phisher sends unsolicited messages to
potential targets. When a targeted individual responds, the phisher then steals
valuable information from the individual. Semantic attacks flow through
established channels of communication (e.g., email, social media) and are
difficult to distinguish from legitimate messages. While a great deal of
attention has focused on training and sensitizing individuals to the risks of
semantic attacks, little research has focused on strategies that organizations
might use to coordinate defensive actions among organization members. This
research integrates expertise in a project design that is theory-driven and uses
multiple research methods, including surveys, interviewing, and experimentation
to investigate how organizations can build a human firewall against semantic
attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project holds strong promise for making new
and important contributions to understanding how to develop organizational
resistance to semantic attacks. To this end, the first stage of this research
will employ a survey and series of interviews with industry practitioners to
quantitatively and qualitatively assess the strategies that organizations
currently employ to counter semantic attacks. In addition to generating
important insights about the current state of the art in semantic attack
defense, the findings will guide experimental studies during stages two and
three. During stage two, strategies including crowdsourcing, gamification, and
other strategies identified during stage one will be tested in a series of
controlled experiments to examine their effectiveness in harnessing the
abilities and attention of organization members to counter semantic attacks. The
third stage of the project aims to examine the design and execution of promising
strategies identified in stage two. The objective of this stage will be to learn
how each strategy can be adopted and followed by the greatest number of people
so as to solidify any protection the strategies offer. Again, controlled
experimentation will be used during this stage and we will examine individual-
level variables to understand how to encourage adoption. By leveraging an
integrated, multi-method approach to the growing problem of semantic attacks,
the series of studies outlined in our proposal will lead to new theories and
models for future research and dissemination of lessons learned serving public
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: New knowledge will be
developed by identifying and systematically testing the efficacy of
organizational strategies for countering semantic attacks. The organization-wide
strategies that rely on crowdsourcing and integrate gamificiation and other
techniques to counter semantic attacks offer a novel approach to developing the
human firewall where individuals fight these semantic attacks as a collective
rather than as individuals. By examining shared explanations for effective
strategies, we would contribute not only effective strategies but the underlying
theory for their effectiveness, which would serve as the foundation of future
innovations in organizational responses to security threats. The research
framework developed here may also be relevant to studying the mitigation of
other security threats in addition to semantic attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Findings from this research are likely to
also have a number of important practical implications for educating
organizational leaders and the general public about strategies for countering
semantic attacks. To disseminate findings from this research, we plan to hold
two practitioner meetings and develop a public service website in which we will
discuss the lessons learned during the project. Additionally, the website will
provide base data, access to research reports, and educational programs produced
by this project. The combination of theoretical and methodological backgrounds
required to conduct the experiments will contribute immeasurably to the research
training of graduate and undergraduate research assistants. Finally, project
results will be shared through professional presentations and publications.