* 1421510
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Attitudes toward Home Ownership, Risk, and Resilience Following the Housing Market Collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Carla Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 13,920.00

A cornerstone of the American Dream has been home ownership, and the capacity
for ordinary Americans to achieve that dream has been seriously challenged in
recent years, particularly following the housing crisis. Among the alternatives
to permanent home purchases that Americans have opted to pursue is the
manufactured (or mobile) home. These make up a significant proportion of the
U.S. housing market and are the primary residence for at least 20 million
Americans. Categorized somewhere between renters and homeowners, mobile home
owners have been subject to intense legal, financial, and social marginalization
for decades. In situating this research around mobile homes and their owners,
this project ask what other factors, apart from financial precarity and/or the
material degradation of particular structures, can explain the changing
complexities of housing in the United States following the housing market
collapse.

Allison Formanack, under the supervision of Dr. Carla Jones of the University of
Colorado at Boulder explores how residents of mobile home communities (MHCs)
across the United States respond to "precarity", a state of uncertainty
characterized by risk, vulnerability, and material and symbolic degradation.
This project will use an array of ethnographic methodologies, including
participant-observation, formal and informal interviews, archival research, and
other methods photographic analysis across three key sites in Lincoln, Nebraska:
1) MHCs scheduled for redevelopment; 2) the management agencies operating these
communities; and 3) the government offices handling redevelopment efforts. This
multi-leveled approach will generate the quantitative and qualitative data
necessary to understand how knowledge about MHCs is generated and circulated
within the process of community closure and redevelopment. The project will
contribute to anthropological, sociolegal, and social scientific debates about
precarity, resilience, symbolic and material conceptions of home, and risk
discourse and calculus. In addition to training a graduate student, this
research will contribute to public policy debates about affordable housing
following economic crisis.