* 1421391
* RI: Small: When Algorithms Trade: Dynamics, Limits, and Economic Implications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jacob Abernethy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2018
* USD 516,018.00

Recent years have seen a dramatic increase in algorithmic trading, to the point
that the majority of orders in major equity exchanges today are generated by
machines without direct human control. Experience has shown that this automation
--particularly at the extremes of high-frequency trading (HFT)--makes a
qualitative difference, due to the unprecedented speed and lack of direct human
control. The emergence of HFT raises fundamental issues for the efficiency,
fairness, and stability of financial markets. The practice is highly
controversial, yet the lack of scientific understanding of HFT's implications
impedes informed public debate bearing on the question.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithmic trading can also be viewed as herald of a wave
of automated behavior with far-reaching effects in a plethora of domains.
Methodological improvements from this project advance our ability to anticipate
effects of autonomous agents in other areas of major economic and societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project conducts a systematic computational
study of algorithmic trading. The investigation combines online learning and
optimization techniques from the point of view of theoretical machine learning
and agent-based modeling (ABM) approaches to develop models of financial trading
substantially more comprehensive and robust than heretofore possible. Modeling
financial markets as multiagent systems affords heterogeneity: traders differing
in objectives, information (access to data and observability of the
environment), and response capability (processing and execution speed). Learning
and decision-theoretic methods provide a principled basis for defining adaptive
strategies that are effective across a broad range of operating conditions and
possess guarantees in adversarial environments. Evidence on algorithmic trading
implications is derived through systematic computational
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes both to scientific
knowledge about algorithmic trading, and to agent-based methodology for
analyzing complex strategic domains. One particularly novel feature of this
study is its emphasis on the effect of temporal structure (e.g., communication
latency patterns, adaptive strategies) on the dynamics of algorithm interaction.
The agent-based methodology developed here provides a unifying framework for
selecting among candidate behaviors based on specified solution concepts, such
as game-theoretic or evolutionary equilibria. It exploits ideas from several
fields, including simulation modeling, stochastic search, statistical analysis,
and machine learning.