* 1421806
* AISL Pathways: The Role of Story in Games to Teach Computer Science Concepts to Middle School Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Elisabeth Gee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 219,200.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. Nationally, the US has a shortage of computer
scientists; a big part of this problem is that girls are discouraged from
learning computer science at a very young age. This project tries to address
this problem by creating a videogame specifically oriented towards getting
middle school girls interested in learning computer science concepts outside
traditional programming classes. Based on evidence that stories provide a
compelling way to present complicated technical subjects and that girls in
particular respond to technology careers as a way to help others, the project is
building a videogame called "Gram's House" in which social workers intend to
move a fictional grandmother to a retirement home unless the player can outfit
her home with sufficient technology for her to remain independent. Solving
puzzles in the game requires learning core computer science concepts. Research
studies will be conducted to determine whether the videogame is effective at
getting girls interested in computer science, at teaching computer science
concepts, and whether using stories makes videogames more effective for
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project based on an earlier successful
prototype uses an iterative research-based design process including paper
prototyping, playtesting, and focus groups (N=20) to create age appropriate
activities, based on the CS Unplugged series, that support learning concepts
from the Data, Internet, Algorithms, and Abstraction sections of the high-school
level CS Principles curriculum. A quantitative, quasi-experimental design will
be used to determine the overall effectiveness of teaching CS concepts under
three types of game conditions: (a) games alone, (b) games with fictional
settings, and (c) games with stories. A novel assessment instrument will be
developed to assess content learning and qualitative observation using a
standard observation protocol will be used to gauge interest and engagement.
70-80 middle school girls will be recruited for afterschool participation in the
study in two states. As part of the dissemination efforts, a facilitator's
guide, rule book, and materials such as maps and storyboards will be created and
shared with the game. In addition, a workshop for computer science and other
teachers who are interested in using games to teach CS concepts will be
conducted.