* 1421214
* Collaborative Research: Scientists' Views of the Public, Public Engagement Practice, and Public Engagement Goals
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* John Besley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2017
* USD 245,158.00

This Michigan State University and University of Texas-Austin project will focus
on making science communication more scientific. It will primarily use interview
and survey research to improve societal understanding of how those involved in
science communication, particularly scientists, think about science
communication. The goal is to use this knowledge to help improve science
communication training and recruiting with a focus on increasing the likelihood
that scientists will adopt evidence-based communication strategies to increase
public interest, engagement, and identification with science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM). A central underlying reason for the study is a
mismatch between scientists' motivations and goals when interacting with public
audiences and what research suggests would be the most positive and productive
with public audiences. This study is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.

The project will be conducted in three phases. The first is interviews with a
wide range of science communication experts to assess priority research
questions. These interviews will be followed by surveys with U.S.-based members
of up to 10 different scientific societies representing a broad range of
academic fields as well as a survey of science communication researchers. The
survey will focus on three different public engagement modes, including face-to-
face engagement, online engagement, and engagement via the news media.
Consistent with the Theory of Planned Behavior, the surveys will assess
scientists' attitudes about public engagement and specific public engagement
goals, as well as perceptions of social norms (both descriptive and injunctive)
and efficacy beliefs (both internal and external). These will be used as
predictors of general and goal-specific engagement willingness, as well as
reported past behavior, using multigroup modeling. Potential communication goals
of interest include transferring knowledge, developing interest and excitement,
building trust in scientists, demonstrating openness and a willingness to
listen, shaping how people think about subjects (i.e. framing), and/or defending
science. The final phase of the project will explore the potential to design
experiments aimed at testing the impact that mention of specific goals has on
communication training recruitment as well as the degree to which online content
about various goals is attractive to scientists interested in developing their
communication skills. The research is the most targeted and largest attempt to
date to understand how scientists' views about the public and communication
processes may shape science communication behavior.