* 1421128
* AF: Small: Symbolic computation with sparsity, error checking and error correction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2018
* USD 469,905.00

A hallmark of symbolic computation is that the outputs are exact. Digital error
correcting decoding produces exact outputs from inputs in which some entries are
incorrect, and minimizes the required redundancy. Symbolic polynomial
interpolation algorithms take advantage of sparsity. Kaltofen proposes to create
algorithms that can interpolate sparse uni- and multivariate polynomials and
rational functions from evaluations where some of the values are incorrect. A
goal is to minimize the amount of oversampling that is necessary to locate and
correct those faulty evaluations. Hybrid symbolic-numeric computation accepts
approximate scalar entries in the inputs, which can be imprecise because they
come from a floating point computation or a physical measurement. Sparse
multivariate polynomial interpolation has been adapted to such data, for purpose
of constructing sparse models for the observed measurements, and Kaltofen
proposes to create hybrid symbolic-numeric versions of our interpolation
algorithms that can correct outlier errors. In addition, Kaltofen proposes to
construct easily verifiable certificates for complex non-linear problems, such
as certificates that a real multivariate polynomial is unbounded or that a
symmetric real matrix is positive definite. Both problems are important for
global non-linear optimization. Lastly, Kaltofen proposes to apply the matrix
generalization of the Berlekamp/Massey algorithm and the multidimensional
generalization by Shojiro Sakata to recurrences with polynomial coefficients,
such as the sequence of the factorials and the binomial coefficients. He will
also study how to correct errors in the linear generated arrays.

Kaltofen's proposed research combines hybrid symbolic-numeric computation with
digital error-correcting decoding for purpose of removing outliers in sparse
model synthesis, which constitutes a brand-new approach for ``cleaning-up''
errors in data sets. Certificates that prove that computed minima are global
minima permit the use of unproven algorithmic heuristics in the optimization
methods, especially algorithms with floating point arithmetic whose stability is
not analyzed, and greatly broaden what can be placed in publishable software:
the programs do not give a false output. Lastly, recurrences are fundamental
tools in symbolic computation algorithms. Kaltofen is making the developed
software for the algorithms freely available.