* 1421961
* NeTS: Small: End-User Behavior and Prospect Pricing in Wireless Data Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Arnold Glass, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Beyond smart phones, of which there are significantly more in developed
countries, the number of mobile phones in the world is approaching 7B, even
creating a reality that in some parts of the world, there are more people with
access to a phone than with access to electricity at home. The advent of
machine-to-machine communications adds increased pressure on wireless system
capacity. In fact, there is a recognition and push in both industry and academia
towards the goal of achieving "1000x" capacity for wireless. The solution
approaches range from spectrally agile cognitive radios with novel spectrum
sharing, to use of higher frequency electromagnetic spectrum as well as smaller
and denser cell deployments referred to as heterogeneous networks (HetNets).
While this is a much needed activity with many challenges to overcome, providing
a spatially high density of wireless/wired backhaul as required for HetNets is
expensive and the overwhelming demands on wireless capacity fundamentally
remain, in that state-of-the-art systems are nowhere near the 1000x capacity
target goals and perhaps even an order of magnitude or two away. Wireless
service providers (SPs) in recent times have therefore resorted to control
access and services being provided to end-users via differentiated and
hierarchical monetary pricing. As such, end-users may have to make decisions on
data rate and price offerings that may be presented to them when they need
service in high user-density dynamic spectrum settings. A complementary approach
termed "prospect pricing" is proposed as a way to support data demand and relies
on influencing end-user (human) behavior using dynamic pricing algorithms when
technological solutions by themselves cannot satisfy the demands of wireless
data. The research agenda seeks to design and study wireless network pricing
from a cognitive psychology perspective, thereby presenting a novel framework to
understand how wireless networks can be influenced by end-user behavior and
vice-versa. The successful completion of this research will serve up useful
pointers to how prospect pricing can be used by the SPs to manage the ever
increasing demand for data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policing mechanisms that
influence wireless device behavior and thereby drive systems to better operating
points have been addressed amply in the radio resource management literature.
These mechanisms essentially are borne out of expected utility theory (EUT)
based microeconomics approaches, and implemented via engineered system design,
i.e., embedding these strategies in the link layer and network layer protocols
that are executed by wireless devices. When a SP controls access to end-users
via differentiated and hierarchical monetary pricing, then the performance of
the network is directly subject to end-user decision-making that has shown to
deviate from EUT. Prospect Theory, a Nobel prize winning theory that explains
real-life decision-making and its deviations from EUT behavior, is used to
design "prospect pricing" for wireless networks. Specifically, dynamic pricing
algorithms for wireless data are designed to enable HetNets to manage the ever
increasing demand for data, especially when both spectrum and infrastructure
resources are constrained. Using a mix of theory, algorithm development and
experimentation, the research agenda proposed by a team comprised of a wireless
networking/systems researcher and a cognitive psychologist includes: (1)
Development of a Framework for Prospect Pricing in Wireless Networks using Game
Theory, (2) Evaluation of the Performance of Prospect Pricing in HetNets for
Load-Balancing and Resource Management, and (3) Psychophysics Experiments to
understand End-User Perceptions and Preferences to Service Offers and Wireless
Network Performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make available as an
open resource the psychophysics testbed developed for wireless network usage
experience. The unique marriage of wireless network pricing and cognitive
psychology offers an innovative educational opportunity to involve both graduate
and undergraduate students from electrical and computer engineering and
psychology.