* 1421279
* Preschoolers' Use Of Statistical Learning To Discover Spelling And Reading Conventions Prior To Formal Schooling
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Brett Kessler, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 620,000.00

In a modern society, strong literacy skills are critical to educational
attainment and employment outcomes. Many pre-literacy skills are typically
acquired before the start of formal education. Reducing the number of children
who enter school with inadequate literacy-related knowledge and skills is an
important societal goal. This project focuses on children before they enter
kindergarten. It examines how children learn about one set of literacy skills:
those involved in the reading and spelling of individual words, prior to
explicit instruction.

The project investigates the types of information that young children acquire
through implicit learning prior to formal instruction regarding spelling and
reading conventions. The goal is to characterize the types of information that
children acquire (e.g., writing conventions dictate that words are written from
left to right in English) prior to formal schooling and investigate how
individual differences in acquisition of this knowledge corresponds to later
reading and spelling abilities. The studies involve both cross-sectional and
longitudinal designs and a wide array of tasks. The prevailing hypothesis is
that children utilize the statistical structure of patterns in their
environments to extract information about conventions that lend support to the
subsequent, more explicit task of learning to read and write.

Broader impacts of this research include the capacity to identify children who
are at risk of literacy problems early on so that intervention can be provided
from the onset of formal schooling. This project will support the research
community by developing and disseminating a computerized scoring tool to be used
with many conventional tasks that will provide a nuanced analysis of the nature
and degree of children's accuracy and errors, rather than simply scoring
responses as either correct or incorrect as is the prevailing convention in
early literacy assessments.