* 1421470
* Workshop: Support for Student Participation: OSA Topical Meeting on Optical Fabrication and Testing (OF&amp;T). To Be Held held on the Kohala Coast, Hawaii, on June 22-26, 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Elizabeth Rogan, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 03/31/2015
* USD 9,900.00

The objective of this proposal is to provide financial support to students who
are full time at an US Institution to attend a leading optical engineering
conference in their field. The Approach is to have recipients give oral or
poster presentations on selected topics relevant to the meeting, and engage with
many experts in their field for encouragement into the profession of optics
manufacturing and the opportunity to get feedback on their work. Intellectual
merit: Presenting research results at a professional meeting and responding to
questions and/or comments regarding the work is an essential part of any plan
for educating students. Understanding and getting educated on the bigger picture
of optical manufacturing is essential for the next generation leaders. Broader
impact: This meeting is important as it addresses manufacturing of optics, a key
enabling technology in our century. An estimated 500 people from academia,
industry, and government laboratories will attend. On the educational level,
concerted effort are made to engage and include students in technical
conferences and meetings, with strong consideration at equal technical merit to
underrepresented students. The overall goal is also to get "new blood" into the
profession for our collective future.