* 1421122
* TWC: Small: Intrusion Detection and Resilience Against Attacks in Cyber and Cyber-Physical Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Stephane Lafortune, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 513,324.00

This project develops a novel methodology for designing secure cyber and cyber-
physical systems that can detect attackers and protect against malicious
behavior after the system has been compromised. &lt;br/&gt;Networked control
systems contain actuators and sensors that can be compromised by a malicious
attacker intent on altering the system behavior by corrupting sensor values or
actuator commands, thereby enabling or forcing the execution of unsafe behavior.
The PIs investigate the intrusions that resulted in compromised system
components (sensors or actuators) and design remedial control strategies that
not only combat malicious attackers upon detection of intrusion but are also
resilient to potential intrusions, thereby preventing damage from being
inflicted upon the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach has its
foundations in the theories of diagnosability, opacity, and supervisory control
of discrete-state event-driven dynamic systems. The research plan to the
problems of intrusion detection and resilience against attacks contains a
creative blend of these theories with game-theoretic approaches to reactive
synthesis problems, in order to capture the dynamic game between the control
system (acting as the defender) and the attacker. The goal of the defender is to
optimize its trade-off between functionality and vulnerability. Given the
prevalence of feedback control loops in cyber and cyber-physical systems, the
methodology being developed will impact a large class of technological systems
that are of great societal importance.