* 1421828
* CIF: Small: Computer assisted rate regions for multi-source distributed storage and network coding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Steven Weber, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 475,000.00

Distributed information storage architectures that are resilient against drive
failures and organized in a manner that allow themselves to heal efficiently are
a key component of the emerging area of big data systems. Moreover, the
transition by companies and individuals to storing data in the cloud are
enabling gigantic economies of scale, and distributed storage architectures are
one of the most important components of such a large scale computing services
system. The architectures modern distributed storage systems are using are
still, from the standpoint of the coding utilized, archaic. More efficient
distributed storage architectures would deliver better, more responsive,
services to customers including faster access, better reliability, and more
responsive processing, and at a lower aggregate long term cost. To reap these
long term benefits, new science has to be developed to understand and determine
the fundamental limits for these systems. These fundamental limits can be
expressed in terms of the capacity regions of networks under network coding,
which are themselves as of yet only implicitly characterized in all but the most
symmetrized and simplified forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
the capacity regions of networks and distributed storage systems, and the
classes of codes that achieve them. Automated methods of computing these rate
regions for small networks will be developed that harness the detection of
problem symmetries, specialized polyhedral computation, and the enumeration of
classes of matroids associated with optimal codes. Larger networks and storage
systems will also be studied via the introduction of network embedding
operations that preserve the sufficiency of classes of codes to achieve the
entire capacity region.