* 1421824
* TWC: Small: STRUCT: Enabling Secure and Trustworthy Compartments in Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Long Lu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 11/30/2017
* USD 512,932.00

Society's dependence on mobile technologies rapidly increases as we entrust
mobile applications with more and more private information and capabilities.
Existing security research follows a common threat model that treats apps as
monolithic entities and only captures attack surface between apps. However,
recent research reveals that app internal attacks are emerging quickly as
complex entities with conflicting interests are commonly included inside a
single app to allow for rich features and fast development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, known as STRUCT, systematically investigates
app compartmentalization as a novel and general approach to mitigating the
critical yet unaddressed internal threats of apps. It applies this approach to
major mobile platforms via solving four challenging and interesting research
problems: (1) Deriving principles and models for designing intra-app security
mechanisms; (2) Building compiler toolchains for automatically and securely
compartmentalizing apps; (3) Building system-level enforcement mechanisms for
open platforms; (4) Building app-level system-agnostic enforcement mechanisms
for closed platforms. Solutions to these challenges together form a foundation
to the design and implementation of intra-app security isolation and policy
enforcement, which is currently nonexistent but in high demand.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STRUCT has its broader impact in fostering a new direction
in mobile security research and education as well as increasing society's
adoption of mobile technology in security-sensitive scenarios.