* 1421879
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Collaborative: Integrated Smart Grid Analytics for Anomaly Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Samir Tout, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 238,668.00

The modernized electric grid, the Smart Grid, integrates two-way communication
technologies across power generation, transmission and distribution, in order to
deliver electricity efficiently, securely and cost-effectively. On the
monitoring and control side, it employs real-time monitoring offered by a
messaging-based advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), which ensures the grid?s
stability and reliability, as well as the efficient implementation of demand
response schemes to mitigate bursts demand. The efficient implementation of
these features presents a number of challenges, but also opportunities for
technology development in engineering, networking, and data analytics.

The intellectual contributions include the development of a framework that
encompasses fast signal processing and machine learning algorithms, together
with multi-sensor information to assess the health of the network. Specifically,
the study will investigate algorithms for adaptive detection over streaming,
high-dimensional and potentially missing value data. Furthermore, the project,
via industry collaborators and power provisioners, will provide a comprehensive
empirical evaluation with real-world data; this includes an open-source proof-
of-concept prototype for quickly inferring nefarious activity in home-area
networks, and a cloud-based testbed for examining realistic scenarios in a wide-
area setting.