* 1421918
* NeTS: Small: Impact of Wireless Network Characteristics on Distributed Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Nitin Vaidya, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 474,680.00

Wireless networks have current and future applications in many domains,
including emergency response and rescue, monitoring and surveillance,
distributed sensing, swarm robotics, and smart grids. In such distributed
systems, wireless networks are useful to allow the different agents in the
system to communicate and jointly coordinate their activities. This project
investigates design of efficient algorithms for implementing the distributed
primitives while taking into account the properties of the communication
network. Coordination primitives of interest include consensus, fault-tolerant
broadcast, and distributed optimization. For instance, the consensus primitive
allows the different agents to agree on a common course of action, as a function
of potentially different actions suggested by different agents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this project is at the intersection of
communication and computing. The project investigates the impact of wireless
network characteristics such as error-prone links, dynamic topology, broadcast
medium, and capacity constraints, on the design and performance of algorithms
for important distributed computation problems. Two classes of algorithms are of
interest, namely, iterative algorithms and unconstrained algorithms. Iterative
algorithms have a simple iterative structure, and they maintain a small amount
of state and require only limited information about the underlying network
topology. Unconstrained algorithms utilize more information about the network,
and can achieve better performance. Thus, iterative and unconstrained algorithms
achieve different trade-offs between complexity and performance. The goals of
the project include investigation of the impact of topology control, resource
management, and dynamic adaptation on the performance of the distributed
algorithms. The project will improve the understanding of how robust distributed
algorithms can be designed for practical wireless networks. The project will
involve undergraduate and graduate students. The students will gain valuable
experience working on distributed computing problems that are relevant in a
variety of applications.