* 1421678
* SHF:Small:Collaborative Research: Compositional Verification of Heterogeneous Software Protocol Stacks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Zvonimir Rakamaric, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 268,996.00

Developing a software protocol stack is a complex task with many parties and
products &lt;br/&gt;involved over multiple years. There are many issues that
have to be resolved in the &lt;br/&gt;process, and it is incredibly hard to get
all of them correct for all platforms and &lt;br/&gt;all possible states of a
system. Hence, there are numerous examples of serious errors&lt;br/&gt;that
ended up in production, where the cost of fixing them is high. Software protocol
&lt;br/&gt;stacks are widely used in many domains, and rigorous methods to
improve their &lt;br/&gt;reliability would have a very broad impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a more rigorous approach to
developing and maintaining such complex software&lt;br/&gt; protocol stacks.In
particular, formal methods are used to find errors early through rigorous
&lt;br/&gt;verification and testing, as well as to assist the analysis in
locating reported errors. The approach&lt;br/&gt; is based on automatically
learning abstract and succinct protocol models at different layers of
the&lt;br/&gt; target software stack. Compositional reasoning is then applied to
find errors effectively and &lt;br/&gt;precisely. The generated models are
leveraged to help with error localization and diagnosis. The
&lt;br/&gt;usability of the approach is assessed through a real-life case study
on the Android Bluetooth&lt;br/&gt; software stack.