* 1421642
* CSR: Small: Network-Level Design of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Andreas Gerstlauer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 488,281.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are engineered systems that are built from, and
depend upon, the seamless integration of computational algorithms and physical
components. CPS promise to revolutionize how we approach global societal-scale
problems, through application of machine intelligence and autonomy in areas such
as energy, healthcare, and transportation. A key element of the CPS promise
depends on achieving effective networking of hitherto disconnected computer
systems. However, the networked aspect of CPS also poses new design challenges.
Machine-to-machine communication comes with inherent uncertainties, such as data
losses, yet CPS have to perform under tight real-time, reliability, safety,
efficiency and performance guarantees. When combined with rapidly growing
increases in complexity, traditional approaches in which computation and
communication aspects of such networked systems are designed separately, and in
an ad-hoc manner, hinder achieving system-wide correctness guarantees and leave
a large optimization potential untapped. The long-term goal of this project is
to close this gap by investigating novel, systematic, and ultimately automated
design approaches that enable network-wide optimization and validation of CPS
across computation and communication boundaries. This is expected to advance how
future intelligent and autonomous cyber-physical systems are designed, enabling
whole new classes of smart applications to emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
foundation for any rigorous design process is a sound formalization with well-
defined abstractions and models that allow users or automated tools to reason
about intended behavior before a system is built. While the integration of cyber
and physical models has been studied, comparable theories for a unification of
computation and communication are lacking. A key question is how application-
specific notions of real-time behavior and quality-of-service can be provided
for overall optimized implementations in the presence of inherent uncertainty,
adaptivity and reactivity in networked and distributed CPS. This project aims to
answer such questions by exploring formal foundations for a network-level
computation and communication co-design science for cyber-physical systems.
Specific innovations include: formal models of computation and communication for
system specification, including associated analysis and synthesis algorithms;
fast yet accurate performance models for rapid, early validation, including
associated model generation, synthesis and design space exploration
capabilities. These innovations are evaluated in the context of specific cyber-
physical system case studies, including virtual and physical testbeds. Research
is combined with an educational agenda aimed at establishing a holistic view of
networking and embedded computing, including public release of models and tools
as they are developed, as well as development of online teaching materials for a
broad audience.