* 1421354
* Doctoral dissertation research: First language impacts on second language component reading skills, word skills, and overall reading achievement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Alan Juffs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,120.00

Learning to read a second language is fundamentally different from learning to
read a first language. Unlike children, adult second language (L2) learners have
limited knowledge of their new language but may already have fluent reading
skills in their first language (L1). These reading skills develop differently
based on characteristics of the orthography, such as the amount of phonetic
information and the consistency of the written unit-spoken unit correspondences.
Good evidence exists that L1 orthography experience transfers and impacts L2
literacy skills, but the range of these effects, in different tasks for learners
from different L1 types, are not well understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this dissertation project is to understand the influence that a
learner's L1 orthography has on basic literacy skills and on how these skills
are interrelated. In the first two studies, behavioral data will be collected on
a set of language and literacy-related skills from native French, Hebrew, and
Mandarin speakers. These languages were selected to represent three major
orthography types: French, an alphabet; Hebrew, a consonant-based abjad, in
which vowels are generally not written; and Mandarin, a character-based
morphosyllabary. Participants will complete measures of phonological awareness,
orthographic knowledge, word recognition, pseudoword decoding, reading
comprehension, and English proficiency. The primary goal is to investigate the
impact that L1 has on the phonological unit size at which speakers have greatest
awareness, and the extent of their lexical and sublexical orthographic
knowledge. Another goal is to explore the interrelations among these skills and
how they differentially contribute to word recognition and more general reading
ability. In the third study, data will be collected on literacy skills from
adult ESL classroom learners to examine these skills in a classroom setting,
rather than in a laboratory, and to test the effectiveness of an instructional
intervention designed to boost students' strategies for dealing with unfamiliar
words.