* 1421697
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Infrastructure Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Srihari Nelakuditi, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2016
* USD 59,414.00

Mobile computing has traditionally implied mobile clients connected to a static
infrastructure. This project breaks away from this point of view and envisions
the possibility of injecting mobility into infrastructure. The PIs envision a
WiFi access point on wheels that moves to optimize desired performance metrics.
Movements need not necessarily be all around the floor of a home or office,
neither do they have to operate on batteries, or connect wirelessly to the
Internet. At homes, they could remain tethered to power and Ethernet outlets
while moving in small areas (perhaps under the study table). In offices of the
future, perhaps APs could move on tracks installed on top of false ceilings. The
cloud could perhaps coordinate their mobility based on how users move within the
environment, or how traffic and interferences change in the network. This
project explores the viability of this vision and will present thorough
measurements from various home/office environments.

Initial measurements with moving WiFi APs in residential and enterprise
environments exhibit promise. Analysis finds that complex multipath
characteristics of indoor environments cause large fluctuations in link quality
even when the antenna moves in the scale of one foot. Mobile APs can leverage
this spatial variation by relocating to a pixel that is strong for its own
clients and yet weak from its interferers. When multiple APs are coordinated by
a central controller, the motion paths of the APs need to be jointly planned to
optimize global network parameters. Heuristics will be developed that first
assume the knowledge of AP locations; based on the outcome of this heuristic,
the assumption might be relaxed. The project will also consider client mobility
and how APs adapt to them, perhaps based on the quality of channel changes
available from channel state information (CSI) in today's WiFi cards. If
mobility proves to offer additional gains despite the advances in current
technologies, robotic wireless networking might become an important and exciting
direction of the future.