* 1421734
* RUI: Intermediate-level Vision:  Grouping of generic features for image and video processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Toshiro Kubota, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 187,449.00

The human vision system is able to recognize objects and understand the scene
from the boundary of the objects alone. It is astonishingly robust so that it
can sustain this capability under distraction by non-boundary points and sparse
sampling of the boundary points. How the system achieves this feat is largely
unknown. This project investigates how a computer can replicate it
algorithmically. The problem is fundamental and closely related to perceptual
organization and intermediate level vision problems. Thus, this research has the
potential to impact a wide range of computer vision applications. Since the
input (a small set of isolated points) is small compared to the whole image and
has no color information, the algorithm is efficient, robust against changes in
illumination and contrast, and applicable to any imaging modalities.

The main problem is to interpolate boundary points into a perceptually salient
set of surfaces without being distracted by spurious non-boundary points.
Interpolation by straight skeletons brings a time-reversible, multi-scale
representation of a point set where salient boundary points tend to form a
polygonal surface persistently while spurious non-boundary points tend to
disappear quickly as the scale increases. Because of the time-reversible nature,
a surface at each scale can be traced back to the original scale or the original
point set. Thus, this technique can be used to form a set of salient surfaces
from the original point set. This research develops a general purpose feature
grouping algorithm using the straight skeleton interpolation and applies it to a
number of intermediate vision problems in 2D and 3D domains. The investigator
actively involves undergraduate students into the research and promotes STEM
education in the northeastern part of the U.S.A through presentations,
demonstrations, and outreach activities. The source code and toolboxes will be
made publicly available and used to promote STEM education.