* 1421022
* CSR: Small: DARP: Promoting Energy Efficient System Design Through a Dynamically Adaptable Resilient Pipeline
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Sanghamitra Roy, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 441,734.00

Variability of transistor behavior including delay has traditionally been
mitigated through overly conservative design choices at the circuit level that
come at the expense of energy efficiency. The objective of this project is to
develop techniques for more effectively managing delay at the architectural
level through the study of variable-delay pipelines. The long-term goal of the
project is to improve the energy efficiency of
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves managing application
induced pipeline delay variability, both at the core level and at the system
level, outlining a transformative approach to promote sustainable computing. The
project advocates cross-layer circuit-architectural design themes, which are
becoming indispensable for future system designs. Various research tasks of this
project explore circuit level delay variability in a pipelined microprocessor by
demonstrating three intriguing axes: (a) temporal--delay variation within a
given pipe stage during different phases of a program; (b) spatial--distinct
delay distributions among different pipe stages of a microprocessor; and (c)
workload--unique delay profiles of various pipe stages seen among various
workloads. These are carefully analyzed to design a Dynamically Adaptable
Resilient Pipeline (DARP), which outlines a next wave of innovation in pushing
the energy efficient frontier of pipelined microprocessor design. Through
educational activities with the cross-layer infrastructure, this project will be
instrumental in creating a future work force well placed to exercise cross-layer
themes in sustainable computer design.