* 1421407
* CSR: Small: Behavior Based User Authentication for Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Alex Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Mobile devices equipped with touch screens have increasingly rich functionality,
enhanced computing power, and greater storage capacity. These devices often
contain private information such as personal photos, emails, and even corporate
data. Therefore, it is crucial to have secure yet convenient user authentication
mechanisms for touch screen devices. However, the widely used
password/PIN/pattern based solutions are susceptible to shoulder surfing (as
mobile devices are often used in public settings where shoulder surfing often
happens either purposely or inadvertently) and smudge attacks (as oily residues
left by fingers on touch screens can be recognized by impostors) and are
sometimes inconvenient for users to input when they are walking or driving.

The goal of this project is to develop a behavior based user authentication
approach for touch screen devices. Rather than authenticating users solely based
on what they input (such as a password/PIN/pattern), Behavioral Authentication
is based upon how users provide input input. Specifically, a user is first asked
to perform certain actions, such as gestures/signatures, on touch screens and
then the behavior feature information (such as velocity magnitude and device
acceleration) is extracted from the actions to authenticate the user based on
machine learning techniques. The intuition behind the proposed approach is that
people have consistent and distinguishing behavior of performing gestures and
signatures on touch screens. Compared with current user authentication schemes
for touch screen devices, the proposed approach is significantly more difficult
to compromise because it is nearly impossible for impostors to reproduce the
behavior of others doing gestures/signatures through shoulder surfing or smudge
attacks - they can see it, but they cannot do it.

This project will advance the knowledge and understanding of behavior based user
authentication on touch screen devices. This is potentially transformative
research with high-impact. If successful, this project will not only yield a
theoretical foundation for behavior based user authentication on touch screen
devices but also invite future research along this direction.