* 1422803
* RAPID: Assessing the hazard and fate of 4-methylcyclonehexane methanol in a drinking water distribution system post contamination
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Jennifer Weidhaas, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 01/31/2015
* USD 69,419.00

Weidhaas&lt;br/&gt;1422803&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An accidental spill of a
currently unknown quantity (estimated between 3,000 and 7,500 gallons) of
4-methylcyclohexane methanol from a coal preparation plant in Charleston, WV has
compromised the drinking water supply for up to 300,000 water users in
Charleston and nearby counties. This tragedy has caused the ban of use of
potable water and has resulted in closure in several establishments including
schools and business. President Obama issued a federal disaster declaration for
the state on Friday, January 10, 2014 to provide federal aid for the state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Assess the short- and
long-term chemical fate of 4-methylcyclonehexane methanol in the drinking water
and riverine systems through sampling efforts,&lt;br/&gt;2. Evaluate potential
risks of the spill to public health and the environment, and&lt;br/&gt;3.
Develop quick remediation measures and strategies for more resilient water
treatment and&lt;br/&gt;distribution operations in future
disasters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental disasters resulting from accidents
happen and will continue to happen. In the case of the spill of the coal
conditioning chemical it happened to affect about 15 % of the population of West
Virginia. This project will try to determine what might be done in the future to
prevent such catastrophes and how can we build more resilience, in water
treatment plants for the future.