* 1422665
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: CAM: A Cloud-Assisted mHealth Monitoring System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jinyuan Stella Sun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Mobile Health (mHealth), particularly mobile healthcare monitoring, has been
perceived to be the most dynamic mobile apps which play a crucial role in
revolutionizing healthcare industries and steadily improving the quality of
individuals' lives. Unfortunately, due to the sensitive and private nature of
the health and fitness related data handled by mHealth monitoring services,
privacy issues become the stumbling blocks to wide deployment and must be
addressed. With limited capital investments, small to medium sized mHealth
companies may have to seek cloud computing facilities to reduce the cost on IT
support. However, outsourcing to the cloud will aggravate the privacy issues
since companies' monitoring programs are also proprietary information.

This project focuses on designing an architectural framework, called CAM: a
cloud-assisted mHealth monitoring system, developing it into a middleware, and
outsourcing expensive computations to the cloud. At a high level, the proposed
research is to develop an enabling technology for the potentially wide adoption
of mHealth monitoring services. In particular, a security framework is designed
to preserve the privacy of users' health and fitness data and companies'
monitoring programs while still allowing the cloud to correctly execute the
programs and return proper advices to users. The design takes the outsourcing
paradigm into account by shifting most computationally intensive tasks to the
cloud while still preserving privacy, which is the key to producing a
practically deployable system. The framework is then developed into a middleware
by tackling practical issues such as a suitable programming model, balancing
between security guarantees and flexibility for app developers, etc.
Comprehensive penetration testing is conducted by simulating unique attacks to
evaluate the security of the proposed framework in practical system settings.
Although motivated by mHealth monitoring applications, the proposed security
framework can be generalized for privacy-preserving outsourcing of diagnostic
programs which have many other important applications such as financial analysis
and software fault diagnosis. The proposed research will thus have broader
impact by contributing to multiple disciplines and offering both graduate and
undergraduate students plentiful opportunities for multidisciplinary research.