* 1422532
* Investigating STEM Literacies in Maker Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Gravel, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2018
* USD 978,107.00

Many communities across the country are developing "maker spaces," environments
that combine physical fabrication equipment, social communities of people
working together, and educational activities for learning how to design and
create works. Increasingly, maker spaces and maker technologies provide extended
learning opportunities for school-aged young people. In such environments
participants engage in many forms of communication where individuals and groups
of people are focused on different projects simultaneously. The research
conducted in this project will address an important need of those engaged in the
making movement: evidence leading to a better understanding of how participants
in maker spaces engage with science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) as they create and produce physical products of personal and social
value. Specifically, this research will generate new knowledge regarding how
participants: pose and solve problems; identify, organize and integrate
information from different sources; integrate information of different kinds
(visual, quantitative, and verbal); and share ideas, knowledge and work with
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand and support STEM literacies involved
in making, the investigators will study a number of different informal learning
sites that self-identify as maker spaces and serve different-aged participants.
The project will use ethnographic and design research techniques in three cycles
of qualitative research. In Cycle One, the researchers will investigate two
adult-oriented maker spaces in order to generate case studies and develop
theories about how more experienced adult makers use the spaces and to create
case studies of adult maker spaces, and to develop methodological techniques for
understanding literacy in maker spaces. In Cycle Two, the study will expand into
two out-of-school time youth-oriented maker spaces, building two new case
studies and initiating design-based research activities. In Cycle Three, the
team will further apply their developing theories and findings, through rapid
iterative design-based research, to interventions that support participants'
science literacy and making practices in two maker spaces that exist in schools.
Through peer-reviewed publications, briefs, conference presentations, presence
on websites of local and national maker organizations, project findings will be
widely shared with organizations and individuals that are engaged in broadening
the base of U.S. science and mathematics professionals for an innovation
economy.