* 1422152
* AF: Small: Using Notions of Simulation to Explore the Power of Self-Assembling Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Matt Patitz, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 487,474.00

A wide variety of self-assembling systems exist in nature. These are systems in
which complex structures are formed from individual molecules that combine with
each other autonomously, obeying only local rules of behavior and without any
external guidance or placement. This process is responsible for the formation of
a huge diversity of inorganic structures (such as crystals like snowflakes), as
well as numerous biological structures (including cellular membranes and
viruses). Hoping to harness the power of self-assembly to create advanced
materials, complex nanoscale structures, and perform molecular computing,
researchers have begun developing artificial self-assembling systems. This work
has consisted of laboratory implementations as well as mathematical and
computational modeling. Theoretical computer science has provided numerous
insights into the creation and understanding of theoretical models of self-
assembly, and these models have provided valuable understanding which has
productively guided laboratory experiments. In this project, the body of work in
defining, developing, and comparing the relative powers of theoretical models of
self-assembling systems will be extended by the PI. In particular, the relative
powers of various models will be studied by comparing their abilities to
simulate each other. Additionally, the abilities of systems within existing and
new models to mimic biological processes such as evolution and immune system
behavior will be investigated.

This project is divided into two main components. The first consists of a series
of studies of the abilities of various theoretical models to simulate each other
when certain parameters are fixed, especially the so-called "temperature"
parameter fixed at 1, making cooperative behaviors difficult or impossible.
Whether or not certain models, again with fixed parameters, are intrinsically
universal will also be explored. Additionally, while most current theoretical
work comparing the relative powers of models is concerned with a strong notion
of simulation which includes both the productions and dynamics of the simulating
systems, relaxed notions which focus solely on the structures produced (i.e. the
productions) of simulating systems will be investigated. While the previous
method has produced great theoretical understanding, this new approach is geared
toward a more practical understanding which can guide experimentalists desiring
to build predefined structures.

The second main component of this project involves work related to studying the
abilities of various self-assembling systems to simulate complex and important
biological activities such as protein folding, the formation of prion-like
structures, self-replication, evolution, and immune system behaviors. For much
of this, an existing model utilizing dynamically changing basic components, the
Signal Tile Assembly Model, will be employed. Further, a new model based on
square 2D components which can fold along their boundaries, allowing for the
formation of 3D structures by "foldable" 2D building blocks, will be developed
and studied, with special focus on their abilities to abstractly mimic protein-
like behaviors.

The work will consist of mathematical modeling as well as computational modeling
in the form of simulation software. Results and software, will be made freely
available with already existing software and content on www.self-assembly.net.