* 1422031
* CSR: Small: Dynamically Reconfigurable Architectures for Time-Varying Image Constraints (DRASTIC) Based on Local Modeling and User Constraint Prediction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Marios Pattichis, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 459,870.00

The use of digital video in embedded and communications systems has risen
dramatically in recent years. User needs and interests in digital video vary
based on video content and available computing resources such as battery life
and communications bandwidth. Thus, there is a strong need to develop methods
that can dynamically reconfigure hardware and software resources in real-time to
respond to changing video content, user needs, or available computing resources.
The proposed research will develop methods that will provide run-time management
of hardware and software resources for video processing and communications that
are jointly optimal in terms of energy, bandwidth, and throughput.

Digital video processing and communication often consumes the majority of
computing resources and bandwidth. With the emergence of the High-Efficiency
Video Coding (HEVC) standard, there is a focus on the development of parallel
architecture solutions that can effectively provide real-time coding of high-
resolution video while reducing the bandwidth requirements up to 50% from the
previous coding standard (H.264/AVC). However, the HEVC's focus on rate-
distortion optimization does not consider how computing architectures should
adapt to time-varying energy constraints. The proposed research will be focused
on the development of Dynamically Reconfigurable Architecture Systems for
satisfying Time-varying Image processing Constraints (DRASTIC) that optimize
computing resources to satisfy time-varying constraints on energy, bandwidth,
and image quality for HEVC and video analysis based on 2D/3D filterbanks. The
research is transformative in two different ways: (i) it supports the automatic
generation of real-time varying constraints based on video content and available
energy while eliminating the need for user inputs, and (ii) it uses a local
model to significantly reduce the requirements for estimating large Pareto
fronts over a large space of videos. These transformative approaches can
significantly expand the applicability of the proposed system and methods.