* 1422331
* SHF: Small: A Brick in the Wall: Achieving Yield, Performance and Density Effective DRAM Beyond 22nm Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Bruce Childers, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 473,999.00

For more than four decades, computer main memory has predominantly used Dynamic
Random Access Memory (DRAM). This technology is a mature commodity that has been
optimized and balanced among cost, performance, capacity and energy. Much of
DRAM?s success is due to continuous shrinking of the silicon devices in the
memory, which allows DRAM capacity to double roughly every two years, satisfying
the aggressive need for more memory capacity of today?s and tomorrow?s
applications. Yet, a critical problem lies in the shrinking of the device
dimensions: It is coming to a halt largely due to the inability of the
manufacturing process to precisely control the sizes of a device, which is
termed process variation (PV). There are some known problems with PV. However, a
vital problem that has rarely been investigated in the past is that PV can cause
critical memory operational timing violations. Such violations slash DRAM chip
yield, and immediately increase the chip cost. Solving this challenge is crucial
to the future of the DRAM industry, which is highly sensitive to cost and
profit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to address the challenge imposed
by PV on DRAM device timing to chip yield. Our key approach is to expose inherit
operational timing variations caused by PV, so that they can be managed
externally by the memory controller. This approach trades exposed timing
variability for enhanced chip yield, without harming chip density, by allowing
more DRAM chips to meet design specifications. Since the timing variations lead
to application performance loss, we propose a suite of techniques that
progressively mitigate the loss arising from increasing variance with deeper
technology scaling. Our hypothesis is that the threat to yield loss due to
technology scaling and PV can be well controlled with our progressive
mechanisms, if existing timing constraints for memory operations can adapt to
PV-induced speed variations. The broader impact of this research is to enable
the continuous scaling of the DRAM technology to achieve the cost, capacity and
performance requirement for future computing in engineering, scientific,
biological, environmental, business and consumer applications. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will be recruited and trained through
research and education opportunities provided by this project.