* 1422923
* CSR: Small: Host-Assisted, Software-Defined Solid-State Disk
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Carl Sechen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,960.00

Over the past two decades flash-based storage has crept up from a niche and
relatively unknown storage technology to the mobile and embedded medium of
choice, and made significant in-roads in the laptop and server arenas in the
incarnation of Solid State Disk (SSD). Increasingly, many applications use SSDs
and trends indicate that SSD usage will grow significantly. However, SSDs are no
silver bullet - in reality, the flash firmware in all commercial SSDs is very
rigid and highly unadaptable across input/output (I/O) workloads creating
sincere challenges which include the added cost of firmware per SSD, firmware
inflexibility, and assisting SSD hardware limitations. This work will address
these key issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will investigate how SSDs
should achieve the flexibility they need to perform best for a variety of I/O
workloads by being software-defined. This manages the repeating cost of a copy
of inflexible firmware for each SSD, and will push the current firmware into the
more general and malleable software space. Another area of exploration will be
to investigate how SSDs could be made capable of collaborating with the host
such that resources on both sides can be shared towards a more flexible and
higher-performing I/O device. This will prevent on-board SSD assisting hardware
from being vastly over/under utilized, enabling the host to take advantage of
workload-specific optimizations on the SSD itself instead of pushing the data
back to the host. Increased flexibility in the mechanisms that drive flash-based
SSDs will provide system administrators the ability to tune their flash storage
for workloads in use. Increased cooperation and transparency between the host
and the flash device should enable improved application/library/device-level
optimizations that are impossible under the current rigid and protocol-
obfuscated regime. Intelligent sharing of assisting hardware (mainly compute and
memory) across the host and SSD will enable more expensive SSD optimizations to
be performed given the host's compute and memory power, and more clever I/O
optimizations to be performed given the SSD's locality to the underlying data.
Further, bringing SSD related tasks to the host side can enable co-optimization
of application threads and I/O threads, improving potentially computation,
communication, and I/O, and similarly, SSD tasks can be co-optimized with
application threads on the SSD side, leading to a more efficient active flash
system.