* 1422304
* NeTS: Small: Power-Performance Tradeoffs for Mobile Devices in Next Generation WiFi Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Ramalingam Sridhar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 515,924.00

With the tremendous growth in smartphones and other mobile devices, and the
increasingly complex applications they run, the impact of the energy consumption
is felt by every user. Smartphone batteries need to be charged too often or the
devices are run in modes that limit their capabilities, to save energy. A major
fraction of the energy consumption in smartphones comes from the WiFi radio. The
next generation WiFi radios include a rich set of features offering increased
bit rates, longer range, and more reliable coverage. However, these benefits
often come at the cost of significantly higher power consumption. Consequently,
smartphone manufacturers often restrict the features available to the users,
thus trading performance for power savings. Also, the increasing demand for
computational features such as multimedia in mobile devices has led to the use
of complex computational hardware and peripherals for graphics and memory with
higher contribution to the overall energy consumption. Hence, there is a need to
develop a holistic approach to power analysis that considers both the
communication and the computational paradigms, and novel protocols that
efficiently utilize the battery power without compromising performance, which
this projects aims to achieve. This work can have a lasting impact on better
energy utilization in the mobile environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to develop models that capture the power-performance tradeoffs in WiFi-
capable mobile devices and the impact of different features of the next
generation WiFi standards on these tradeoffs. The models are to be developed
based on extensive measurement studies using different mobile devices in a
variety of scenarios. Further, it seeks to build realistic power models that
consider diverse components of the system and their interactions, beyond just
the CPU, as well as models for power-performance tradeoffs at the system level.
Power analysis of the computational elements and peripherals will be developed,
with considerations to varying factors that affect the power consumption, such
as the applications, environment, and usage profile, through power modeling and
measurements. The results will then be integrated with the WiFi models resulting
in a holistic power model and profile. The developed models will guide the
design of novel power management, rate adaptation, and WLAN management protocols
that will allow mobile devices to realize more of their potential, while
minimizing the power consumption and the impact to other WLAN clients. The
project will bring increased awareness of energy consumption issues in modern
mobile devices through outreach activities.