* 1422750
* Pathways: GrACE: A Procedurally Generated Puzzle Game to Stimulate Mindful and Collaborative Informal Learning to Transform Computer Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gillian Smith, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 288,528.00

Northeastern University will design, test, and study GrACE, a procedurally
generated puzzle game for teaching computer science to middle school students,
in partnership with the Northeastern Center for STEM Education and the South End
Technology Center. The Principal Investigators will study the effect of computer
generated games on students' development of algorithmic and computational
thinking skills and their change of perception about computer science through
the game's gender-inclusive, minds-on, and collaborative learning environment.
The teaching method has potential to significantly advance the state of the art
in both game-based learning design and yield insights for gender-inclusive
teaching and learning that could have broad impact on advancing the field of
computer science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and evaluation of
GrACE will consist of two, year-long research phases, each with its own research
question. The first, design and development, phase will focus on how to design a
gender-inclusive, educational puzzle game that fosters algorithmic thinking and
positive attitude change towards computer science. The content generator will be
created using Answer Set Programming, a powerful approach that involves the
declarative specification of the design space of the puzzles. The second phase
will be an evaluation that studies, by means of a mixed-methods experimental
design, the effectiveness of incorporating procedural content generation into an
educational game, and specifically whether such a game strategy stimulates and
improves minds-on, collaborative learning. Additionally, the project will
explore two core issues in developing multiplayer, collaborative educational
games targeted at middle school students: what typical face-to-face interactions
foster collaborative learning, and what gender differences exist in how students
play and learn from the game. The project will reach approximately 100 students
in the Boston area, with long-term goals of reaching students worldwide, once
the game has been tested with a local audience. Results of the project will
yield a new educational puzzle game that can teach algorithmic thinking and
effect attitude change regarding computer science. Through the process of
creating a gender-inclusive game to teach computer science, it will provide
guidelines for future educational game projects. Beyond these individual project
deliverables, it will improve our understanding of the potential for procedural
content generation to transform education, through its development of a new
technique for generating game content based on supplying educational objectives.