* 1422653
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Development of a Wearable 3D Integral Imaging Augmented Reality Display Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Hong Hua, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

An augmented reality (AR) display which enables the ability to overlay 2D or 3D
digital information on a person's real-world view has long been portrayed as a
technology that will transform the way that people perceive and interact with
digital information. Although several types of display devices have been
explored for AR applications, the ideal display would be a lightweight and
compact optical-see-through head-mounted-display (OST-HMD) which enables digital
information to be optically superposed onto the direct view of the physical
world, and which at the same time maintains a see-through view of the world.
With recent advances in mobile computing, image sensors, and cloud computing,
the single remaining barrier to realizing ubiquitous AR technology is the
display technology. The lack of high-performance, compact, and low-cost AR
displays limits the ability to explore its potential benefits. One of the
specific display problems that has not yet been adequately addressed, and is
thus a specific barrier to widespread use of AR technology, is the visual
discomfort and fatigue experiences by users of OST-HMDs. Visual discomfort is a
critical concern in applications where users need to work with AR displays for
an extended period of time. One of the key factors causing visual discomfort is
the accommodation-convergence cue mismatch between digital information rendered
by the display and the real-world scene. This is a fundamental problem inherent
to existing AR displays. This project will address the human factor issues that
persist in existing AR displays by developing a compact, lightweight, glasses-
style 3D AR display technology that integrates wearable AR display technology
with a microscopic integral imaging method. 3D products will soon pervade daily
activities in education, transportation, computers, medicine, defense, and
security. The U.S. has substantially contributed to the original innovative
concepts for 3D imaging and 3D display, and will benefit from further
development of 3D technologies, and from research and development in U.S.
universities. This project, a collaboration between two experts in 3D vision
technologies at two U.S. universities, will address the human factors issues
that persist in existing AR displays. Project outcomes will readily transition
to commercialization of new 3D displays, and will train of the next generation
of experts in the field of 3D displays, who will contribute to industry, high
tech firms, commerce, government, education, and health related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation of the project is that it will
investigate and develop an innovative optical approach to OST-HMD design that
uniquely integrates a 3D microscopic integral imaging (micro-InI) display and
visualization method for full-parallax lightfield creation with an emerging
optical design approach - freeform optical technology - for OST-HMD viewing
optics. This approach enables the development of a compact 3D integral imaging
optical see-through HMD with full-parallax lightfield rendering capability,
which is anticipated to minimize the accommodation-convergence discrepancy
problem plaguing existing AR displays, and thus substantially reduce the visual
discomfort and fatigue for users. The project will design, develop, and
implement a custom compact prototype system; develop system calibration and
assessment methods; and perform preliminary user-based assessment experiments to
evaluate the effects of our proposed technology on visual perception and visual
fatigue.