* 1422854
* SHF: Small: Variation "Immune System" for Ultra Low Power Systems-on-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Benton Calhoun, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 425,000.00

A wide variety of emerging applications require electronics that operate at
ultra-low power levels. To achieve extreme energy efficiency, such circuits
operate at low voltages where they are "off" by conventional definitions and use
tiny leakage currents, analogous to dripping faucets, to do useful work. This
approach promises to revolutionize design on the power side, but a critical
obstacle is the heightened sensitivity of low voltage circuits to variations in
the transistor fabrication process, voltage and temperature, which limit product
yield. An adaptive system that adjusts chip operation to account for such
variations could potentially solve this problem and provide adequate yield to
deploy ultra-low power circuits in high volumes. This project's objective is to
create a new paradigm for ultra-low power chips in which a variation "immune
system" internally adjusts circuit level knobs to meet system level requirements
across variations. The technical results from this project could improve
manufacturing yield, lower costs for commercial products, and enable a swath of
applications that are currently not commercially viable. While the scope of
applications is in wearable computing having a broad societal appeal, the
project also plans to heavily involve of female and minority students in
educational outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While current efforts to
build ultra-low power ICs forcibly apply the conventional fixed voltage, fixed
frequency approach, this project recognizes that chips should guarantee certain
system level metrics and then release constraints on parameters that are
conventionally fixed, which can instead act as knobs to compensate for
variations in the process technology or environment. These knobs are used in the
feedback controlled "immune system" to compensate for variations. Specific
research in this effort creates low overhead hardware knobs for managing
variations, and co-designs software for managing chip operation in a resource
constrained space. At the chip level, this approach combines variants of dynamic
voltage scaling and adaptive voltage scaling methods with mode based power
management control and block specific tuning to maintain proper function and
meet system metrics. Additionally, the proposed scheme uses co-design of
integrated components and system design to ensure robust operation despite the
exponential impact of process, voltage and temperature variations at low
voltage.