* 1422671
* CHS: Small: Gestural Image Annotation Systems in Coordinated Surgical Practice
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Helena Mentis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 310,648.00

Gestures, deictic referencing (pointing at objects and regions of interest), and
manipulation of digital images are an integral aspect of decision making in
collaborative scientific and medical work. In modern minimally invasive surgical
interventions, medical imaging has come to play an increasingly important role,
but due to concerns of asepsis image manipulation during surgical decision
making are typically constrained. In this project, the PI will explore the use
of new technology such as the Kinect to address this issue, by developing
techniques for "touchless" interaction to coordinate and enhance communication
among team members in the operating room. The results of this research will
provide a deeper understanding of collaborative practices around image use and
the benefit of technological tools for annotating and referencing those images,
which will significantly benefit patient outcomes. The findings will have broad
impact, in that they will be translatable to other expert collaborative
environments that utilize imagery in order to have a positive effect on team
work practices. The PI will disseminate project outcomes broadly to both the
medical and the human-computer interaction (HCI)
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of how new imaging
interaction techniques can be integrated into and, in turn, shape coordinated
practice will constitute an important contribution to the state of the art. To
achieve these goals, the PI will identify coordinated practices and their
relationship to imaging use through a detailed field study of laparoscopic
surgery. She will then iteratively design and implement a gestural image
annotation prototype for laparoscopic surgeons to reference and annotate
endoscopic video. And she will determine the effects of the imaging manipulation
on coordinated surgical practice through an experimental study.