* 1422436
* WISE Guys and Gals - Boys & Girls as WISEngineering STEM Learners
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* David Burghardt, Hofstra University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,742,600.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will further develop, roll out,
and conduct research on a set of materials that will introduce middle school age
youth to innovative and engaging engineering challenges in the Boys and Girls
Club (B&GCs) context. Building on substantial prior work and evaluation-based
learning, WISE Guys and Gals - Boys & Girls as WISEngineering STEM Learners
(WGG) will: (1) combine engineering design activities with the (open source,
online) WISEngineering infrastructure; (2) scale-up the infrastructure; (3)
engage youth in informal afterschool experiences; and (4) collect a wealth of
rich data to further our understanding of how youth learn through these
experiences. This work will be conducted by Hofstra University's Center for STEM
Research in conjunction with Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), The CUNY
Graduate Center's Center for Advanced Study in Education (CASE), the Boys &
Girls Club of America, and 25 B&GCs in New York and New Jersey.

The underlying theoretical framework builds on proof-of-concept work supported
by NSF and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. An open source, on-line
interface (WISEngineering) provides numerous virtual tools (e.g., social
networking, Design Journal, embedded assessments) that promote learning and
collaboration through challenging, thoughtful, and creative work. WGG will
explore how to incorporate creativity, social networking, connections to real-
world STEM needs/careers, and teamwork into challenges that can be completed in
a one-hour period, an activity time constraint in many B&GC settings. Staff from
the clubs will participate in face-to-face and virtual professional development
in an effort to build their capacity as facilitators of STEM learning. Research
will focus on: (1) how activities developed for 60-minute implementation and
guided by informed engineering design and interconnected learning frameworks
support youth learning and engagement; and (2) characteristics of the
professional development approach that support B&GC facilitators' capacity
development. By the end of the project, over 6,000 middle school aged youth, the
majority from groups underrepresented in STEM areas, will gain experience with
engineering design as they develop engineering thinking, new STEM competencies,
STEM career awareness, and an appreciation for the civic value of STEM
knowledge.