* 1422511
* Network Capacity when Some Common Information Theoretic Assumptions Break Down
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Daniela Tuninetti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The proposed research seeks to understand the impact of two common assumptions
in multi-user information theory on the capacity region of networks: global
codebook knowledge and global synchronism. Under these assumptions,
sophisticated coding schemes and coordinated transmission strategies are
possible. In distributed networks, as well as networks with a large number of
nodes, maintaining synchronicity and keeping track of all users' codebooks may
simply not be possible; in today's cellular networks this incurs a severe
overhead. The goal of the proposed research is to understand, from an
information theoretic perspectiv,e how relaxing these assumptions affects
network performance in terms of capacity regions. The core of the proposed new
technical approach lies in coding over discrete alphabets rather than by using
standard Gaussian-like coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding from a
fundamental perspective the impact of sharing codebooks and guaranteeing
synchronism in networks is of direct relevance to improving communications in
heterogeneous, distributed, WiFi, cellular, ad hoc military and first responder
wireless networks of the present and future. Having accurate network capacity
predictions for networks under more realistic assumptions not only acts as a
benchmark for engineers building systems, but also provides guidelines on the
tradeoffs between acquiring codebooks or synchronism and the corresponding
capacity regions. The results may prove that codebook knowledge or synchronism
may not be as vital as one might suspect if one tailors transmission schemes
properly, which could have dramatic impact on the design of wireless networks.
The results of this research are expected to be of immediate as well as far-
reaching use to private and public sectors alike.