* 1422215
* SBE TWC: Small: Collaborative: Privacy Protection in Social Networks: Bridging the Gap Between User Perception and Privacy Enforcement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 295,154.00

Online social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter, and Google+, have become
extremely popular. They have significantly changed our behaviors for sharing
information and socializing, especially among the younger generation. However,
the extreme popularity of such online social networks has become a double-edged
sword -- while promoting online socialization, these systems also raise privacy
issues. To protect user privacy without compromising socialization functions,
this project articulates a unifying framework that bridges the gap between the
human-oriented and technology-centered perspectives. In particular, this project
is developing methods to (1) detect the discrepancies between users' information
sharing expectations and actual information disclosure; (2) design a user-
centered yet computationally-efficient formal model of user privacy in social
networks; and (3) develop a mechanism to effectively enforce privacy policies in
the proposed model. The potential long-term social benefits are significant,
since such awareness may gradually change people's privacy perceptions and
affect their behavior in privacy-centric scenarios.

This project develops a concept of "Social Circles" to model social network
access within a Restricted Access and Limited Control framework. Methods are
being developed to derive social circles from a variety of types of existing
information within the social network; these are used to determine appropriate
access control settings. The project is assessing information flow and risk of
leakage given such settings, including the issues raised by heterogeneity of
systems. In addition to theoretical analysis of potential information flows with
respect to a variety of adversary models, the project is conducting user studies
to determine if this approach reduces the gap between perceived and actual
privacy.