* 1422224
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Gesture in Word Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Susan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 07/31/2018
* USD 339,338.00

When people talk, they gesture. Gesturing helps speakers to organize their
thoughts and words, and also helps listeners to more fully understand the
information being conveyed. Instructional techniques have begun to incorporate
use of speech-accompanying gestures to facilitate learning. However, it is
unclear how and why gestures aid learning. The goal of this research is to
investigate whether, and if so how, observing gestures differs from observing
actions performed on objects in facilitating young children's word learning. The
research employs both behavioral measures of learning and brain imaging
techniques to address this issue. The research will ultimately help to optimize
learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
hypothesis that gesture's facilitative effect on learning is distinct from
effects of observing actions because gestures are more abstract forms of
representation, in that they highlight the important components of an action
without being tied to a specific learning context. The project explores the ways
in which gestures versus actions facilitate word learning in 4 to 5 year old
children. The research goals include (1) comparing the impact that learning a
word through gesture, compared to action, has on the word's learning trajectory;
(2) evaluating how well words are generalized and retained over time after they
are learned through gesture or action; (3) exploring the neural mechanisms
underlying each of these types of learning experiences. The results will clarify
whether and how gesture promotes learning that goes beyond the particular, and
extends over time.