* 1422347
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Energy Harvesting Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Aylin Yener, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 246,942.00

This project seeks to establish fundamental performance limits and the ensuing
design principles for wireless communication networks composed of devices that
operate with energy harvested from the environment. These energy harvesting
systems are envisioned to enable energy self-sufficient, energy self-sustaining,
perpetually operating wireless networks, and untethered mobility. As such, they
will enable new societal, medical, environmental, monitoring/surveillance and
safety applications which are otherwise difficult or impossible with
conventional battery-powered operation. These applications range from enabling
perpetual remote environmental monitoring and surveillance, structural
monitoring to on and in-body networking for health monitoring, medical diagnosis
and treatment.

The project identifies the randomness, intermittency, and causality of energy
availability, as well as the uncertainty about the energy states of the
transmitters at the receivers, as new ingredients to be incorporated in
determining the fundamental performance limits of energy harvesting wireless
communication systems, and seeks to determine the information theoretic capacity
of an energy harvesting link and the accompanying optimum coding and
transmission scheme by incorporating energy harvesting constraints into the
information theoretic capacity formulation. The project also seeks to identify
the information capacity of multi-user, multi-hop, cooperative energy harvesting
networks, as well as incorporating practical issues such as imperfections in
storage and retrieval of energy to/from battery, leakage of energy over time,
etc., into rigorous information theoretic capacity formulations. Furthermore,
the project will make connections to estimation, privacy and security by
investigating state amplification, state masking and secure data transmission
problems.