* 1422438
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Robustness of Spatial Learning in Flickering Networks: The Case of the Hippocampus
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Yuri Dabaghian, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 278,828.00

The reliability of our memories is nothing short of remarkable. Thousands of
neurons die every day, synaptic connections appear and disappear, and the
networks formed by these neurons constantly change due to various forms of
synaptic plasticity. How can the brain develop a reliable representation of the
world, learn and retain memories despite, or perhaps due to, such complex
dynamics? Answering such questions is the natural evolution of recent work by
the Dabaghian lab, which has been studying spatial cognition by modeling
mechanisms of learning, based on algebraic topology methods developed by the
Memoli group. This approach rests on the insight that the animal brain must
first construct a rough-and-ready map of the environment before being able to
fill it in with geometric details, which would be too computationally costly in
light of typical navigational goals such as evading predators, returning to a
nest, or finding a cafe. This basic map pays particular attention to the
connectivity between places in the environment and is thus based on spatial
topology; as such, the investigators hypothesized, it would be amenable to
analysis by topological methods.

By simulating exploratory movements through different environments Dabaghian and
Memoli will study how stable topological features arise in assemblies of
simulated neurons operating under a wide range of conditions, including
variations in firing rate, the size of the space each cell "senses," the number
of cells in the population, and electrical oscillations in the brain that alter
the behavior of the ensemble. They will use several novel methods from
Persistent Homology Theory to understand how connections between cells
(synapses) influence the speed and reliability of spatial learning. One might
assume that learning would be enhanced if synapses never disappeared, but
biology has clearly evolved to favor great synaptic plasticity. One reason may
be that the loss of certain connections allows more room for mistakes to be
unlearned. The objectives of this project are to study synaptic plasticity in a
computational model, which will allow the influences of different parameters on
the outcome of learning to be studied in detail. Principles that emerge on
spatial learning in the hippocampus should be translatable to spatial cognition
in machines.