* 1422473
* Dust transport and deposition in the American West:   a record of climate and land-use change from the Upper Fremont Glacier, Wind River Range, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Sarah Aciego, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2017
* USD 89,127.00

a. Non-technical explanation of the project's broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human influences on climate are global, such as
through atmospheric greenhouse gases, and also regional, from dust that spreads
from soil disturbance. Increased human activity such as agriculture and
livestock grazing in the American southwest and the Colorado Plateau during the
past several decades has been correlated with greater dust production and
deposition. Changes in dust production on a seasonal to annual basis can be seen
in the amount incorporated into mountain snow and these changes are preserved in
the ice of alpine glaciers that span the last several hundred years. Variations
in the origin of dust particles reaching an ice sheet or glacier can indicate a
shift in dust production, sources, and atmospheric transport pathways, and are
therefore valuable indicators of land use and climate change. This project will
examine a semi-continuous record of North American dust in an ice core from the
Upper Fremont Glacier (Wind River Range, Wyoming). This ice core spans the
Agricultural and Industrial Revolution and will assess how changing land use,
climate and weather in the western United States from the end of the Little Ice
Age (1350-1850 AD) to today is recorded by dust compositional
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b. A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will evaluate the change in
atmospheric dust levels due to anthropogenic activities using ice from the Upper
Fremont Glacier in the Wind River Range, Wyoming. The primary objective of this
research is to measure the physical and chemical characteristics of aerosol
mineral dust in order to construct a record of dust load and provenance
variability in the American West from the end of the Little Ice Age through the
Industrial Revolution and into the dramatic expansion of agriculture across the
United States. An existing ice core from the Upper Fremont Glacier will be used
to measure variations in the dust amount. Grain size, trace element
concentration, and radiogenic isotopic compositions (Sr, Nd, Hf) will also be
determined. Potential sources of the dust in North America will be collected
from spatially distributed sites and chemically characterized. The data from the
ice core and field-collected source areas will be compared to determine the
variations in dust amounts and sources, and to examine the relationship to
regional climate and land-use changes.