* 1422830
* AF: Small: Geometry and High-dimensional Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Mikhail Belkin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 01/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Data analysis is ubiquitous in a broad range of application fields, from
computer graphics to geographic information systems, from sensor networks to
social networks, from economics to medicine. It represents a fundamental problem
in computational science. The project will advance the theoretical understanding
of fundamental issues behind data analysis, and develop practical algorithms
that will be useful for a broad range of problems in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the fundamental problem
of reconstructing structure of probability distributions from sampled data. It
will investigate the use of tensor-based and other higher order methods, in
particular those that allow for efficient optimization. The project lies at the
interface of theoretical computer science, machine learning, signal processing
and statistics and will have potential impact in all of these fields. In recent
years there has been a resurgence of interest in tensor methods in data analysis
and inference, particularly in theoretical computer science. These methods will
prove useful in a variety of applications in machine learning, signal processing
and other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop algorithms for
solving a range of problems including blind source separation, spectral
clustering, inference in mixture models and estimating geometry of
distributions. It will analyze the complexity of these and related problems. In
particular, it will strive to understand the computational efficiency  and
dependence on the dimension of the space, studying "the curses and blessings of
dimensionality". It will also address a somewhat mysterious discrepancy between
sample and algorithmic complexity in our understanding of many high dimensional
inference problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will be
disseminated to the broad scientific community through publications in journals,
conferences and presentations in various venues, including tutorials. The goals
of this project include to implement the practical algorithms and to make the
software available online. The research results will also be incorporated in the
curriculum of graduate classes taught by the PI and the co-PI. Graduate students
supported by this project will receive extensive training in theory, algorithm
development and applications.