* 1422034
* CIF: Small: Low-Light 3D Imaging: From Fundamental Limits to Practical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Vivek Goyal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 465,189.00

Forming images with focused, spatially resolved light is an area of rapid
innovation due to the growing use of computational methods and the variety of
meanings of ?image.? Aside from being photograph-like, an image acquired through
optical means could show distances, thicknesses, chemical concentrations,
molecular energy transfers and many other properties, depending on the methods
of collection and analysis. In many settings, it is desirable to form images
from very little detected light; collecting more light could take more energy,
time, or space, or it could damage a biological or molecular sample under
investigation. This project will develop new methods for computational image
formation from very little detected light. The goals are both theoretical and
practical: to understand the fundamental trade-offs between accuracy and amount
of detected light, and to approach the best possible performance. The project
has the potential to improve long-range remote sensing as well as various forms
of microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semiclassical model of light detection
dictates that light field intensity translates to the rate of a Poisson process
observed at a single-photon detector output. There are significant intellectual
challenges in fully exploiting this prevailing model. While progress has been
made in recent years to incorporate piecewise smoothness (e.g., wavelet-domain
sparsity) and other structure that is commonly found in natural signals, this
progress has largely relied on measurement likelihood functions being Gaussian.
Signal processing methods designed for Poisson processes are uncommon, and most
of them apply pointwise rather than to allow the inclusion of useful signal
priors. Naive combinations of convex signal priors with Poisson likelihoods can
lead to intractable nonconvex optimizations. This project will develop
alternative approaches, especially toward real-time 3D acquisition.