* 1422680
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Studying and Improving the Performance of Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Nicholas Feamster, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 84,714.00

The United States will see increasing penetration of high-speed connectivity
into homes as a result of the national broadband initiative and related
infrastructure investments. Similarly, more users around the world are using
broadband access networks as an important (if not primary) means of Internet
access-for example, these networks are becoming increasingly prevalent in
developing regions of sub-Saharan Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers,
operators, and policymakers need to understand the performance of broadband
access networks, how the performance of the network affects the services that
people commonly use, and how ultimately to improve the performance of these
networks and services. Many factors, ranging from a user's choice of equipment
in their home network to congestion on network links to business arrangements
between Internet service providers, can affect the performance that users
experience for different applications. Yet, despite our dependence on Internet
connectivity from broadband access networks, we have little understanding of how
various factors affect the ultimate performance of popular services. A better
understanding about the performance that users experience from the edge of the
network and the causes of poor performance -- driven by data from real
deployments and sound empirical methods -- can better inform our discussions
about both policy and technology investment and ultimately improve the
experience for billions of Internet users around the world. Understanding and
improving performance in both home networks will require an underlying network
infrastructure that is flexible, extensible, and easy to manage. The algorithms
and tools that we develop to help users and network operators troubleshoot and
improve network performance to users will ultimately lead to better performance
and lower operational costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards this goal, this
project is developing platforms and first-of-their-kind datasets that will help
users, operators, and researchers better understand the nature of performance in
access networks. The project has two parts: (1) Characterizing and improving the
performance of access networks; and (2) Characterizing and improving application
and service performance from access networks. In contrast to previous studies of
residential access networks, which have focused on the performance of the wired
access link between the home network and the Internet service provider, this
effort takes a holistic approach by also exploring the performance of the home
wireless network and a range of factors inside the home that may ultimately
contribute to the performance that users experience. Additionally, this project
is developing better ways to help service providers determine why (and where)
these performance degradations occur, such as whether problems are caused by the
user's home network or device, the failure or degradation of some aspect of the
service (e.g., the user?s domain name system (DNS) server may be slow), or some
other cause. Building on existing collaborations with several large service
providers, the investigators will explore the underlying causes of service
performance degradation from the edge of the network, as well as ways to
mitigate such degradation. The researchers will also work with policy
organizations in developing regions to better understand the nature of their
network and application performance, as well as possible mechanisms and
recommendations for improving the performance in these
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's outcomes will be disseminated in
many ways, including integration into on-campus courses and, where appropriate,
massive open online courses. The researchers have close relationships with
Internet service providers, content providers, policy organizations, and
regulators in several countries and plan to communicate the results of the
research to these groups, through publications, talks, tutorials, and workshops.
They also have a history of involving undergraduates and minorities in research
and will extend these efforts as part of this project. For example, given the
importance of measuring broadband in developing regions, the researchers will
make specific concerted efforts to engage students in developing regions,
through lectures, seminars, and, where applicable, direct advising.