* 1422018
* TWC: Small: CrowdVerify: Using the Crowd to Summarize Web Site Privacy Policies and Terms of Use Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jason Hong, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2017
* USD 515,290.00

Everyday web users have little guidance in handling the growing number of
privacy issues they face when they go online. Many web sites - some legitimate,
some less so - have behaviors many would consider unexpected or undesirable.
These include popular and well-known web sites, as well as web sites that aim to
dupe customers with "free" trials. These kinds of sites often detail their
behaviors in privacy policies and terms of use pages, but these policies are
rarely read, hard to understand, and sometimes intentionally obfuscated with
legal jargon, small text, and pale fonts. The goal of this research is to
develop new techniques to pinpoint and summarize the most surprising and most
important parts of policies. The results of this research will be made publicly
available on a web site and through web browser
extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major research activity for this research
will be to design, implement, and evaluate CrowdVerify, a system that combines
crowdsourcing with machine learning techniques to flag the most important and
unexpected behaviors of web sites. The core idea is to slice up a given policy
into smaller text segments, have crowd workers compare different segments, and
then aggregate the results together. A number of competitor scoring systems will
also be evaluated for rating the importance of segments, including ELO, Glicko,
and TrueSkill. Using these results, computational models will be built that can
predict what people find most surprising as well as most important in web
policies.