* 1422054
* SHF:Small:Design Validation Using Multiple Concurrent Abstract Models and GPGPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Hsiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 434,345.00

A critical bottleneck in the design of large, complex hardware systems is
verification and validation, whose goal is to check if the implementation meets
the specifications. An ill-verified design compromises not only reliability, but
also security of the hardware. Therefore, having a sound and effective
verification framework plays a critical role in designing today's large scale
circuits. However, the exponential growth in circuit complexity over the past
few decades has made verification and validation an extremely daunting task.
Hence, in many projects the level of effort needed to verify the correctness of
systems often far exceeds efforts spent on design. Thus, much-needed
verification and validation breakthroughs hold the key to ease this mounting
challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project is to address
this need via four coherent tasks: multiple abstractions for extracting various
core functional behaviors and diversifying search perspectives; swarm-aggregate
learning of branching behavior and necessary loop repetitions; combined particle
swarm optimization with ACO in generating long sequences; and GPGPUs for
enhancing performance and scalability. Together, these tasks elicit the
collective power of diverse perspectives, thus aiming to advance the knowledge
of verification. The proposed approach is flexible and is not restricted by the
inherent depth limitation imposed by deterministic methods. Furthermore, with
swarm-aggregate learning applied to GPGPUs, the computational cost can be
significantly reduced. It is expected that the synergy from simulation, swarm
intelligence, multiple concurrent abstractions, and GPGPUs will bring out the
best from each domain to achieve a common goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making
significant strides in the field of verification and validation will not only
reduce time to market products, but also will increase national competitiveness
both from the technical and economic standpoint using design optimizations
previously deemed unattainable. Through the Multicultural Academic Opportunities
Program (MAOP) at Virginia Tech the PI will advise a diverse team of graduate
students, including both women and minority students under-represented in
engineering. The project also plans continued expansion of downloadable
resources (tools, benchmarks, etc.), benefiting both industry and academia.