* 1422925
* NeTS: Small: Big Data and Optical Lightpaths-Driven Software Defined Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* T. S. Eugene Ng, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 443,431.00

Science and engineering are increasingly relying on data and the ability to
process a massive amount of data to solve hard problems and drive fundamental
discoveries and innovations. Challenges arising from this trend are often
referred to as "Big Data" problems. Examples of big data processing applications
include seismic data analysis, data-intensive text processing, assembly of large
genomes, machine learning, data mining, and social-network analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate new directions in software
defined networking (SDN) that are motivated by the networking challenges
stemming from big data processing applications and by the potential benefits of
using optical lightpaths for big data transport. The project will develop
effective solutions for jointly configuring a rich set of optical devices and
SDN switches to realize network services that meet the needs of big data
applications. Specifically, the project will develop optical device resource
allocation algorithms, topology design and routing algorithms, comparisons
between greedy and guaranteed resource allocation policies, co-scheduling
systems for traffic and network, techniques for data shuffle transmissions, and
co-designed application and network controllers. The approaches, algorithms, and
software developed by this project will be evaluated in a realistic experimental
infrastructure called BOLD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project may have far
reaching societal impacts beyond the computing discipline. Results from the
project can dramatically speed up a wide range of computational scientific
discoveries. Optical networking devices consume very little power, yet can
support enormous data rates; the project results could lead to a more
environmentally sustainable future for the IT industry. The project activities
will provide exciting opportunities for training and education of undergraduate
and graduate students, and particularly under-represented minority students, in
cutting edge big data-driven networking. Finally, software, data, and curriculum
materials produced by this project will be disseminated as free open-source
resources for the wider community's use.