* 1422332
* TWC: Small: Automated Security Testing for Applications Integrating Third-Party Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* David Evans, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Modern web and mobile applications increasingly rely on code and services from
multiple parties, including services that provide security-critical functions
like authentication, payments, and sharing. Developers often make mistakes in
integrating these services into their applications that lead to serious security
vulnerabilities. These integration failures are mainly due to failures to
understand and ensure assumptions necessary for secure use of the external
service. This project is developing a systematic explication process to uncover
security-critical assumptions necessary for secure use of an external service,
along with tools for automatically testing applications for vulnerabilities in
integrating services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is creating a partially
automated method that combines static and dynamic analysis techniques for
building models of external services that are not available for direct analysis,
and for using those models as part of an explicating process that explores the
space of all reasonable applications that can be constructed using a service
under threat from an unconstrained adversary. The uncovered vulnerabilities lead
to automated testing tools for checking applications for vulnerabilities
uncovered. Since these vulnerabilities concern sequences of interactions
involving authenticated users, they cannot be detected by superficial analysis
but require deep testing where a scanner can simulate the actions of a logged-in
user. The scanner takes advantage of single sign-on services that are becoming
increasingly popular to automate account registration and logins to enable deep,
automated scanning of deployed applications. Expected results of the project
include open source tools and web services that will enable large-scale deep
scans of deployed applications, and that will provide developers with a
convenient and easy to use tool to test their implementations for common
vulnerabilities.