* 1422569
* AF: Small: Randomized Algorithms and Stochastic Models
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Aravind Srinivasan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The fundamental role played by randomness in computation is one of the key
discoveries of research in algorithms and complexity over the last four decades.
This manifests itself in at least two ways: through randomized algorithms, and
through stochastic models for uncertain data and/or processes. This fundamental
role has been accentuated in our Big Data age through tools such as sampling
which are vital for streaming and sub-linear algorithms, as well as through the
stochasticity that is often inherent in machine learning. In this project, the
PI aims to develop or improve some basic techniques in randomized algorithms and
stochastic optimization, as well as to apply them to classical and modern
problems in combinatorial optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this project will be in several directions including the following. Graduate
students will be involved closely in this research, and undergraduate research
teams will be exposed to related ideas in algorithms, probabilistic methods, and
optimization. High-school students will be taught the foundations of this
research, especially the Lovasz Local Lemma and its facets, both through
individual mentoring and through group-based teaching. Appropriate aspects of
this work will be integrated into the PI's classes. Finally, this work will
extend to key applications in areas including vaccination problems and the
operation of alternative-energy plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to develop tools that will be general and useful in their own right, as well as
techniques that will lead to improvements for targeted, fundamental
applications. These applications include well-known problems in combinatorial
optimization including asymmetric traveling salesperson, k-median, and
stochastic matching, as well as basic issues in application areas such as public
health and social networks (vaccination) and alternative energy (operations
planning for wind and solar energy plants under stochastic uncertainty). The
proposed techniques encompass "going beyond" the powerful Lovasz Local Lemma,
new iterated applications of Local Lemma-like techniques and their
generalizations to problems such as asymmetric traveling salesperson, the nexus
of dependent rounding, submodularity, and (matrix) concentration bounds, as well
as new types of differential-equation techniques in discrete optimization. As a
particular example, work of the PI and his collaborators has shown that the
Moser-Tardos algorithm has facets that can help us get well beyond what is
guaranteed by the Lovasz Local Lemma; this project aims to go significantly
further in this broad direction, with the goal that generalizations of a
powerful tool such as the Local Lemma will have new applications in discrete
optimization.