* 1422291
* Conference Travel Funding: Manifolds, K-Theory, and Related Topics, June 23-27, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Brenda Johnson, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2015
* USD 48,378.00

The conference on Manifolds, K-theory, and Related Topics will take place June
23-27, 2014 at the Inter-University Center in Dubrovnik, Croatia. Focused
international research conferences such as this one play a fundamental role in
the development and dissemination of ground-breaking research in mathematics.
This conference will serve as a forum in which researchers can announce major
new results and explain their ideas to other experts in the field, long before
such results will appear in refereed journals. Researchers in topics related to
the conference are widely scattered geographically. This conference will provide
the opportunity for them to work together in the same place. Participants will
be able to meet and learn from others in the field, continue collaborations, and
develop new ones. Funding for participants from U.S. institutions will make it
possible for these participants to learn about what is happening at the
forefront of topology, and to share their ideas and learn from topologists from
Europe and other parts of the world. This is especially important for early-
career mathematicians as they are expanding their research interests, and
looking for new collaborations.

The conference will bring together experts in manifold topology, K-theory, and
homotopy theory to learn about recent advances and promote collaboration among
researchers in these fields. Plenary speakers for the conference will be Gunnar
Carlsson (Stanford), Michael Ching (Amherst), Ralph Cohen (Stanford), Bjorn
Dundas (Bergen), Kathryn Hess (EPFL), John Klein (Wayne State), Nick Kuhn
(Virginia), Ib Madsen (Copenhagen), Randy McCarthy (UIUC), Charles Rezk (UIUC),
Hiro Lee Tanaka (Harvard), Ulrike Tillmann (Oxford), Nathalie Wahl (Copenhagen),
Shmuel Weinberger (Chicago) and Michael Weiss (Munster). The work of the plenary
speakers reflects the major themes at the interface of manifolds, K-theory, and
homotopy theory that will be the focus of the conference. These themes include
mapping spaces of manifolds, the calculus of functors, factorization homology,
the local and global structure of algebraic K-theory, homotopy theory, and
applications of topology. The conference program will consist of lectures by the
plenary speakers, together with parallel sessions of contributed talks by
conference participants. More information about the conference can be found at
https://sites.google.com/a/wellesley.edu/dubrovnik-topology-2014/.