* 1422955
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Efficient Codes and their Performance Limits for Distributed Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,504.00

The explosive growth of data being generated and collected has rekindled
interest in efficient means of storing such data. Large data centers and
distributed storage systems have become more widespread, playing an ever-
increasing role in our everyday computational tasks. While a data center should
never lose data, disk failures occur on a daily basis as confirmed by the
industry statistics. Methods and ideas from error correcting codes developed in
this project enable the system to provide better guarantees against data loss as
well as to reduce the amount of data that needs to be moved in order to enable
recovery of information lost due to disk failures. Another related goal of this
project is the reduction of storage overhead needed to support the recovery
procedures. These goals are accomplished by relying on algebraic methods of
constructing the data encoding procedures as well as on novel algorithms of data
exchange and recovery. Overall the research performed in the course of this
project contributes to the development of more efficient data management
procedures in large-scale distributed storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project puts forward new algebraic procedures for data encoding and recovery
that enables one to achieve tradeoff between overhead and repair bandwidth based
on the concept of local recovery. The project studies both the case of
recovering from a single disk loss, which is the most frequent problem in
systems, as well as from the failure of multiple disks, addressing the problem
of correcting one erasure as well as multiple erasures in data encoding. New
bounds on the distance of codes with the locality requirement derived in this
research are attained with new constructions of optimal locally recoverable
codes equipped with simple recovery procedures. The project also addresses the
problem of simultaneous recovery of data from multiple locations, enhancing data
availability in large-scale distributed storage systems which are a key backbone
component of the 21st century economy.