* 1422917
* Walking in Two Worlds: Engaging the Community and Future Native American Scientists in Environmental Science and Managing Natural Resources on Tribal Lands
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Emi Ito, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 296,856.00

Native Americans exert sovereignty over vast amounts of United States land and
water resources, yet are underrepresented in the disciplines that train our
nation's future land and water resource managers. Native American resource
managers must walk in two worlds, accommodating both traditional and modern
methods that may come into conflict. Building on an existing, NSF-funded
Manoomin Science Camp, the Walking Two Worlds (W2W) project will employ a
systems view of resource management in considering a broad range of resource
management issues affecting the region (including its lakes and wetlands,
fisheries, forestry, wildlife, and air quality), with the goal of engaging the
entire community in environmental and resource management issues of immediate
relevance to the community. W2W will incorporate both Western science concerning
the physical, chemical, and biological worlds, and traditional environmental
knowledge, culture, language, and the judgment of elders. This holistic approach
will not only facilitate effective resource management for the community, it
will also serve as a 'hook' for engaging students and the community in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A partnership of the Fond du Lac Band (of Lake Superior
Chippewa) and the University of Minnesota (UMN) planned collaboratively with the
community, W2W will focus on community-inspired, participatory science research
projects related to resource management and environmental science. W2W will be
facilitated by local teachers, with former participants as mentors, researchers
and resource manages as mentors, and UMN faculty as lecturers. W2W recognizes
the critical importance of strong STEM education for natural resource
management. Using a mixed-methods approach to external evaluation, the project
will build knowledge on the contributions of the W2W holistic, systemic approach
and theme of community resource management. This will provide the foundation for
a future development project that builds a community of place-based learning and
community-inspired research projects.