* 1422262
* CIF:  Small: A comprehensive framework for dynamic network tracking and clustering with applications to functional brain connectivity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Selin Aviyente, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 380,048.00

Complex network theory has proved to be a versatile framework to represent and
analyze relational data that is abundant in many disciplines including the
social sciences, information systems, biology and neuroscience. Until recently,
the research on network theory has mainly focused on static graphs, i.e. the
relationships between nodes of the network do not change with time. However,
almost all real networks are dynamic in nature such as social networks with
connections that change over time or functional neural networks that reorganize
rapidly in response to stimuli. Most of the current studies of dynamic networks
focuses on two major and interrelated problems: anomaly or change point
detection in a time series of graphs and evolutionary clustering to identify the
time-varying structure of networks. This research addresses these two problems
simultaneously in a unified framework to monitor and track the changes in
network topology and to characterize each ?network state? with a single
community structure. In particular, this research focuses on the functional
connectivity networks (FCNs) of the human brain that reorganize themselves
dynamically during perception, cognition and execution of mental processes.

The investigator develops two complementary approaches to address dynamic
network monitoring problem: 1) A multi-scale framework for joint anomaly
detection and network state identification in time-varying networks; and, 2)
Consensus spectral clustering methods along with tensor decomposition for
succinct topographic representation of network states. Finally, this dynamic
network monitoring framework is applied to electroencephalogram (EEG) data
collected using an experimental protocol designed to assess well-known salience
and control functional networks associated with affective regulation and
cognitive control.