* 1422402
* TWC: Small: Building Efficient and Accountable Multi-User ORAM Systems for Protecting Data Access Patterns
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Daji Qiao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Cloud-based data sharing is increasing in popularity, but there is also an
increasing privacy consciousness. Continued growth in cloud computing will
require reconciling these issues. While data encryption can provide some
protection, it has been shown that even access patterns to encrypted data can
reveal private information (e.g., knowing encrypted data was uploaded by the
Centers for Disease Control and later accessed by a particular user suggests
that the user is concerned about some disease, even if the specifics are not
known.) There is a lack of study and understanding of how to protect data access
pattern in practical scenarios, where there are multiple users and cloud servers
and the users and server may not trust each other. The first objective of the
research project is to deepen the understanding of the challenges in protecting
data access patterns as well as the collateral security
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will develop formal
models for protecting data access patterns and initial approaches to that
protection, laying a solid foundation for developing novel solutions to protect
data access patterns and strictly evaluating the security properties of the
solutions. The project also plans to deliver security-provable, oblivious,
efficient and accountable multi-user access protocols to outsourced data, for
the sake of preserving each individual user's access pattern under a selected
set of representative adversary models.