* 1422354
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Multi-Element Illuminication for Mobile Free-Space-Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Murat Yuksel, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 01/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

As anyone who has used WiFi in urban environments knows, there is interference
between multiple competing users and loss of throughput. Wireless home networks
are not just for casual web browsing, but are also being used to stream high-
quality video to tablets and other portable devices. Interference between access
points degrades the user experience for these applications. One method being
proposed to address the increased demand for high-capacity local-area wireless
networking is Free-space-optical communication (FSOC). In parallel, solid-state
lighting (SSL) devices with multiple light emitting diodes (LEDs) are being
deployed and commercialized due to their superior durability and energy
efficency. Though stemming from the same core optoelectronics technology, SSL
and FSOC have inherent tradeoffs: the illuminated area is larger when the
divergence angle of the optoelectronic transmitter is high, whereas the
transmission range is longer when it is small. This project envisions multi-
element "illuminication" modules that perform joint and adaptive optimization of
two conflicting goals: illumination and communication. Such modules and
protocols are potentially deployable in many settings such as residential and
commercial buildings, airplanes, and other RF-limited
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects is developing a framework to
design, optimize and test illumination-communication technologies considering
needs and requirements for both functionalities. To attain mobile illuminication
with high spatial reuse and throughput, and uniformly high illuminance; the
project designs (i) multi-element illuminication modules which uses spherical
structures for spatial reuse and uniform illumination, (ii) adaptive intensity
control for energy saving and chromacity control over red-green-blue LEDs, (iii)
transceivers with varying field-of-view and divergence angle, (iv) automatic
realignment protocols using electronic steering and focusing for mobility, (v)
cognitive algorithms for transceiver selection, and (vi) optical wireless
localization with high accuracy.