* 1422119
* CSR: Small: Moving MapReduce into the Cloud: Flexibility, Efficiency, and Elasticity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Xiaobo Zhou, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

MapReduce, a parallel and distributed programming model on clusters of commodity
hardware, has emerged as the de facto standard for processing large data sets.
Although MapReduce provides a simple and generic interface for parallel
programming, it incurs several problems when running in the cloud including low
cluster resource utilization, suboptimal scalability and poor multi-tenancy
support. This project explores and designs new techniques that let MapReduce
fully exploit the benefits of flexible and elastic resource allocations in the
cloud while addressing the overhead and issues caused by server virtualization.
It broadens impact by allowing a flexible and cost-effective way to perform big
data analytics. This project also involves industry collaboration, curriculum
development, and provides more avenues to bring women, minority, and
underrepresented students into research and graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Running MapReduce in the cloud offers many
benefits, including rapid deployment, high availability, on-demand elasticity
and secure multi-tenancy. However, a simple migration of MapReduce to the cloud
environment does not fully exploit these benefits. The semantic gap between
MapReduce runtime and cloud resource management, and the lack of optimizations
of MapReduce workloads in cloud hypervisors, together make it difficult to
attain flexibility, efficiency and elasticity. This project develops a
synergistic approach for coordinating MapReduce and the cloud. This research
centers on two key designs: 1) para-virtualized MapReduce, an enhancement of
MapReduce to actively adapt job execution to the cloud dynamics, including
interference and hardware heterogeneity; 2) MapReduce cloud, a collection of
optimizations for MapReduce-aware cloud resource allocation and scheduling. This
project combines computer system experimentations with rigorous system design to
improve the flexibility, efficiency and elasticity of MapReduce in the cloud. It
emphasizes the adaptability of MapReduce in a heterogeneous and dynamic cloud
environment, proposes cross-layer optimizations to unlock the potential of cloud
systems, and ensures that optimizations for MapReduce workloads do not
compromise the requirements for high resource utilization and multi-tenant
fairness.