* 1422914
* CIF: Small: High Resolution EEG Signal Analysis for Seizure Detection and Treatment
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 494,663.00

The investigators have developed flexible, active, multiplexed recording devices
to enable interface with thousands of electrodes implanted on the surface of the
brain. While this technology has enabled a much finer view of the electrical
activity of the brain, the analytical methods to process, categorize and respond
to the huge volumes of data produced by these devices are presently lacking.
Many existing neurological data analyses rely on manual inspection. With new
neural interfaces with thousands of channels, the data volume is infeasible for
manual review. Further, manual inspection can miss subtle features that
automated machine learning techniques can detect. In this research, the
investigators develop efficient and sensitive automated methods to analyze
micro-electrocorticographic (µECoG) data from patients with epilepsy. These
methods are used to segment, categorize and predict spatiotemporal epileptiform
discharge (or spike) patterns. Understanding the ordering and relationships
between these patterns is a key to developing better seizure detection and
prediction techniques and ultimately better therapies for patients with
epilepsy.

This research comprises four interconnected components. The first component
develops techniques for detecting and isolating spike segments, and for
extracting features that capture the spatio-temporal pattern of each spike. The
second component develops unsupervised clustering algorithms that can identify
distinct clusters of spike motion patterns based on carefully chosen features.
The thir-d component develops classifiers that can categorize each spike into a
few classes (inter-ical, pre-ictal, ictal and post-ictal) based on not only its
spatio-temporal pattern, but also the patterns of past spikes. The final
component develops methods to predict spike wavefront locations. The combination
of these methods will enable seizure prediction and real-time responsive brain
stimulation to suppress seizures.