* 1422802
* III: Small: MESH: A Hypergraph Analysis Engine for Understanding Large-Scale Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jaideep Srivastava, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 515,802.00

Rapid growth in the amount and richness of online interactions through social
networking applications is creating data at unprecedented scales. This includes
data about individual's characteristics as well as their connections and
interactions. Many real-world applications have complex group dynamics involving
multiple people. The analysis of such group interactions has the potential to
revolutionize social sciences, business, and commerce domains. The goal of this
project is to develop a novel computational framework to support scalable
analysis of group dynamics in large social networks. The key idea is to
explicitly model groups of individuals rather than simply capturing links
between pairs of individuals. The broader impacts of this project will consist
of enabling richer analysis of complex interactions in real-world networks. It
will also enhance the University of Minnesota Computer Science curriculum
through courses and research experiences with synergy between the areas of
computer systems and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To model group
interactions in networks, this project will use hypergraphs, a generalization of
graphs, where hyperedges represent relations between one or more entities.
Hypergraphs have the potential to provide higher modeling accuracy for many
group phenomena, as well as higher storage and computational efficiency,
compared to their graph counterparts. This project will develop an analysis
framework called MESH: Minnesota Engine for Scalable evolving Hypergraph
analysis, that will provide algorithms and system components to support scalable
analysis of evolving hypergraphs. The MESH algorithms will be designed to model
and compute several common data-driven questions related to group dynamics in
real-world networks. The MESH system-level techniques will be designed to
support the execution of these algorithms in a distributed and scalable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at: http://mesh.cs.umn.edu