* 1422375
* III: Small: Specification and Analysis of Multi-Actor Data-Driven Business Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Victor Vianu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 508,000.00

Businesses and other organizations increasingly rely on electronic workflows
underlying business processes. These workflows are often centered around a
database and involve multiple interacting actors carrying out different roles.
They are typically very complex and prone to costly bugs, which leads to the
need for computer-aided design and analysis tools. These are critical for
increasing confidence in the robustness and correctness of complex business
processes. The general objective of this project is to develop new techniques
and tools for specifying, analyzing, managing, and optimizing complex data-
driven business processes, with an explicit focus on the multi actor setting.
This includes data sharing and updating, designing actor interface
specifications to the global workflow tailored to different roles, and
specification of contractual obligations among interacting actors. It will also
consider runtime analysis tasks, including the distributed monitoring of
critical global properties, the use of local actor observations to infer
information about the global workflow, and validating autonomous offline partial
workflow executions by actors. The techniques and tools resulting from this
project will increase confidence in the robustness and correctness of such
systems, and enhance their functionality and efficiency. This will benefit a
wide variety of applications such as supply-chain management, e-commerce,
digital government and electronic health-care management. The project will
contribute to the development of human resources by training graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge specification and static analysis
techniques which are crucial to business process
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the objectives of the project
requires fundamental advances in our understanding of data-driven workflows
involving multiple interacting actors. In the broader context of software
verification, the goals are particularly challenging because they involve the
analysis of infinite-state systems, whereas classical software verification
typically deals with finite-state abstractions. The project will extend the
techniques recently developed for data-driven workflows to the multi-actor
scenario, and provide insight into the trade off between expressiveness of the
specification language and tractability of analysis tasks. The technical
problems raised are intellectually challenging, and will bring into play
techniques from logic, automata theory, computational complexity, algorithms,
and computer-aided verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information
see the project web site at: http://db.ucsd.edu/nsf/actors