* 1422995
* CIF:Small: Dynamic Dictionary Learning with Low-rank Interference
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Trac Tran, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 266,000.00

By 2020, it is projected that every human being will contribute 1,000GB of the
sensor data individually. These sensors include but not limited to GPS,
accelerometer, gyroscope, microphone, camera, all kinds of wearable biomedical
sensors, etc. Beyond the domain of monitoring human activity, multi-sensor data
processing has been an active research topic within the context of numerous
practical applications, such as medical image analysis, remote sensing, and
military target/threat detection. One powerful tool to tackle these critical Big
Data problems is sparsity-driven signal-processing techniques. A sparse
representation not only provides better signal compression for bandwidth/storage
efficiency, but also leads to faster processing algorithms as well as more
effective signal separation for detection, classification and recognition
purposes since it focuses on the most intrinsic property of the data. Sparse
signal representation allows one to capture the hidden simplified structure
present in the data jungle, and thus minimizes the harmful effects of noise in
practical settings.

This research investigates the problem of dynamic dictionary learning to obtain
the most effective and adaptive sparse data representation even in the presence
of low-rank interference. The investigator seeks to develop a general framework
that takes advantage of diversity, yet complementary, features in vast
correlated data sources collected from multiple, possibly heterogeneous, sensors
co-located in the same spatio-temporal physical space, recording the same
physical event. Such scenarios ensure that interference noise patterns are very
similar, hence justifying the low-rank property of the interference, while allow
specific structural sparsity pattern of the signal of interest to be captured in
the dictionary and/or in the sparse codes.