* 1422021
* RI: Small: Geometry- and Symmetry-Driven Computer Vision Methods for High-Throughput Automated Microscopic Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Davi Geiger, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 427,208.00

Humans not only outperform current Computer Vision methods in complex general
problems such as object detection/recognition, but also in domain-specific tasks
such as counting cells and detecting cell divisions in time-lapse videos of
mammalian embryos. This project develops a key computer vision component to
reach human-like recognition performance in shape recognition for biology
applications. The project provides automated methods and software tools for
biology research. The project also develops a framework for addressing
fundamental issues in geometry to contribute to computer vision research.

This research is rooted on pair wise symmetry and the construction of six
dimensional histograms from symmetry measures. It hypothesizes that shape
properties of objects can be robustly represented by marginalizing this
histogram. The research team develops a method to build shape properties by
performing products of marginalized histograms as to create higher level shape
descriptions. The short-term goal of this project is to apply this concept to
count and track overlapping cells in early mouse and human embryos. The outcome
of the work includes a database of hierarchical trees of cell divisions in a
mouse-embryo up to the 8-cell is essential for the analysis of particular genes
in the early phases of life. The mid-term goal is to develop a shape database
available to all researchers, where other computer vision methods can be tested.
The long-term goal is to crack the challenging problem of understanding shapes
in images. This project impacts the development of detection and recognition of
objects in images and the mathematical description of shapes. It also impact on
the development of a theory of leaning from big data, as it investigates shape-
structures of high dimensional data.