* 1422277
* NeTS: Small: Social Tie Aware Spectrum Sharing:  Physical-Social Game and Cloud-Based Cooperative Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2018
* USD 443,468.00

To meet the rapidly growing demand of wireless applications, there is an urgent
need to develop innovative spectrum sharing techniques that enable cognitive
radio devices to dynamically sense the communication environment and adapt their
transmission schemes. One key observation is that wireless devices are carried
by human beings and people typically behave with rationality in social
interactions. Indeed, social trust is built upon human relationship, and
altruistic behaviors are often observed in many human activities. With this
insight, in this project a cognitive radio network is viewed as an
overlay/underlay system where a "virtual social network" (i.e., the social tie
structure among users) overlays the physical communication network. Then, the
social tie structure is leveraged to facilitate cooperative sensing and spectrum
sharing, and such cooperation has potential to achieve substantial gains in
spectral efficiency. This project serves as an excellent example for exploring
innovative research on the interplay among engineering, social sciences, and
economics for improving spectrum efficiency. The findings on exploiting social
tie structure for spectrum sharing contribute to advancing the state-of-the-art
of cognitive radio network design, and have great potential to open a new avenue
for enhancing spectrum sharing and hence benefit the society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an innovative agenda, this project focuses on
developing social tie aware spectrum sharing mechanisms, while taking into
account both physical coupling and social coupling among cognitive radio users.
Specially, under this common theme, this project is organized into two well
coordinated thrusts: 1) Thrust I focuses on database assisted spectrum access
when primary user activities change relatively slowly; and social-aware channel
allocation among secondary users is cast in a manner in which each user carries
out channel selection to maximize its social group utility, defined as the
weighted sum of its own utility and the utilities of other users having social
ties with it. Then, social group utility maximization (SGUM) for the physical-
social game is investigated and distributed algorithms are devised to achieve
social tie aware Nash equilibrium. 2) Thrust II is centered around devising a
social-aware spectrum sensing framework when primary user activities change
fast, in which a cloud-based platform is employed to incentivize secondary users
to participate in sensing tasks by leveraging social trust among them.
Intuitively, by leveraging the wisdom of crowds, cooperative sensing enables
secondary users to overcome the challenges due to incomplete information and
limited capability of individual users, leading to more accurate detection of
spectrum opportunities. Besides extensive simulation studies, the devised
techniques will be evaluated in a realistic wireless network testbed. Overall,
this project aims to develop a social group utility maximization framework to
capture complex social structure among mobile users, consisting of diverse
positive social ties (e.g., between friends and allies) and negative social ties
(due to malicious behavior).