* 1422153
* NeTS: Small: Coexistence and Cooperation in Future Spectrum Sharing Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Alhussein Abouzeid, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2018
* USD 515,680.00

The world has witnessed an exponential growth in the number and demand of
wireless devices, and an increase in the array of wireless broadband network
applications that has permeated virtually all aspects of our daily lives.
However, this progress cannot be sustained with the current wireless
communication network technologies, and this fact has spurred research
innovations towards the next generation of wireless systems, typically termed 5G
technologies. Two key paradigm shifts that will help meet these demands in 5G
networks are the deployment of heterogeneous small cell networks combined with
device to device and multi-hop wireless communication, and the adoption of more
innovative ways of sharing the spectrum through cognitive radio and dynamic
spectrum access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides tools for
quantifying the design trade-offs in future spectrum-agile heterogeneous
networks, as well as the theoretical performance limits. Several networks are
expected to exist in the same geographical area, each with varying access rules
and access protocols. The project studies co-existence and possible cooperation
between such networks. Two modes of cooperation are considered: relay
cooperation and content cooperation. Two approaches are considered for the
analysis of each of these modes, which compose the two thrusts of the proposal:
Thrust I: queuing network approaches, which characterize finite as well as
asymptotic performance, and focus on random-access based schemes; and Thrust II:
scheduling and optimization approaches, which characterize the theoretical best
possible performance. The broader impacts of the work include the development of
course projects and modules for two graduate level courses that integrate
results from the two thrusts of this research, K-12 outreach, enhancement of
student diversity and increase of number of women and under-represented groups
in engineering, and international collaboration that offers international
exposure for students.