* 1422408
* SHF: Small: Leveraging Dynamic Pin Switching to Power Up Dark Silicon and Increase Off-Chip Bandwidth
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ashok Srivastava, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The end of Dennard Scaling, i.e., as transistors get smaller the power density
is no longer constant, has led to a large number of inactive or significantly
under-clocked transistors on modern chip multi-processors in order to comply
with the power budget and prevent overheating. This so-called ?dark silicon? is
one of the most critical constraints that will hinder scaling in accordance with
Moore?s Law in the future. Additionally, off-chip memory bandwidth has also
proven to be a major performance limiting factor, especially for multi- and
many-core processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these concerns, this
project proposes a novel design in which off-chip pins can dynamically switch
between supplying power and transmitting signals. The circuit implementation for
the proposed dynamic pin switching design, requiring only minor changes to
existing processor and motherboard circuitry, will be investigated. Many issues
including the impact of interfacing with the DRAM and the power delivery
network, signal transmission and integrity, thermal issues, and area overhead
will be thoroughly and carefully considered. A switchable pin design could be
used to mitigate dark silicon by delivering extra power or to boost processor
performance by increasing memory bandwidth. The broader impacts include
incorporating the research advances into undergraduate and graduate education,
as well as K-12 outreach activities.