* 1422764
* Innovations in Development: The Use of Mobile Applications for Informal Learning in the Cuyahoga Valley National Park
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Cheng-Chang Lu, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2017
* USD 951,808.00

This project will bring STEM content knowledge to visitors to Cuyahoga Valley
National Park via mobile device applications. Visitors will be able to use their
mobile phones to access details about Park features (such as where they are in
the park, what they are looking at, and where are related features), supporting
just-in-time STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cuyahoga Valley National Park
receives around 2.5 million visitors every year and experiences multitudes of
inquiries. Until this project, visitors were subjected to less than optimum
signage for information and background about a given feature that may or may not
be of interest to them. In this project, knowledge building information will be
selected by the visitors and delivered to them with convenience and speed. The
data base supporting this effort will provide the visitor with identification
and the history of park features as well as more in depth knowledge building
information while they are in the park and after the leave, providing a more
holistic experience than is currently available. The investigators will build
the system in parts, testing the feasibility at each stage and evaluating
affective and cognitive outcomes of each portion. Research questions that will
be addressed in the course of this project include: (1) What outcomes associated
with use of this GPS-base system could inform future development and
implementation? and (2) What contributions do these GPS-based mobile learning
applications have on informal science learning as understood within the Six
Strands of Informal Science Learning? It is expected knowledge generated in this
project will stimulate additional programing for increasing efficacy and use in
other widely ranging venues. If successful, it is easy to imagine how this STEM
knowledge-building application could be extended for use in other venues across
the country.