* 1422975
* AF: Small: Sublinear Algorithms for Real Data
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Sofya Raskhodnikova, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

The area of sublinear algorithms aims to establish algorithmic foundations for
processing big data. What global properties of the data can we understand while
reading only a small portion of it? What if the data is noisy? Can we quickly
restore a corrupted data point while ensuring some global property of the data?
This project focuses specifically on sublinear algorithms for real-valued
numeric data and on real-world challenges associated with it.

Effectively exploiting big data can provide significant societal benefits. This
project has the potential to change how real-valued data is processed and
analyzed, and how privacy of sensitive datasets is handled. In addition, this
project includes educational activities designed to ensure the work's broader
impact and to improve workforce training. They include advising and mentoring
graduate students; continuing to build a strong theoretical foundations group at
Penn State; including the results of the proposed research in the PI's graduate
course on sublinear algorithms; widely disseminating the results of this
research and, more broadly, algorithmic and computational ideas via talks and
publications; and fostering diversity by providing mentoring and educational
activities targeted at women in computer science and mathematics.

While there are established and successful lines of research in sublinear
algorithms and property testing on Boolean functions, codes (and, more
generally, algebraic properties), graphs, and discrete distributions, several
recent applications of sublinear algorithms require working with real data.
These include the study of Lipschitz functions with applications to data privacy
and the study of submodular functions with applications to economics. To achieve
their full potential, sublinear algorithms need to be able to handle real-valued
data. The aim of this project is to lay the foundations for this area of study.
This will require the development of new tools and will open up new connections
and new areas of application. The research activities are grouped into three
parts: 1. testing and local reconstruction of Lipschitz functions with
applications to data privacy; 2. new measures for accuracy guarantees, with the
focus on L_p metrics; and 3. new models for data access.