* 1422012
* Collaborative RUI: Quadrilateral Surface Meshes with Provable Quality Guarantees
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Dianna XU, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,432.00

The representation and reconstruction of complex three-dimensional objects is
critical in a wide range of applications in computing today. Polygonal meshes
have become the industry standard for the representation of surfaces with highly
complex geometry and arbitrary genus in computer graphics and geometry
processing applications. While triangle meshes are the most popular type of mesh
representation for surfaces, quadrilateral meshes are better suited than
triangle meshes in several applications such as character animation, texture
mapping, spline-based surface modeling, mesh compression, and some specific
finite element analysis applications. Provably good algorithms for generating
triangle meshes from surfaces given by parametric or implicit functions or as
point point clouds are widely available. However, algorithms to generate
quadrilateral meshes with provable quality guarantees for such surfaces are not
as prevalent, in part because the problem of generating a quadrilateral mesh
from a given surface is intrinsically harder than its triangular counterpart.
The goal of this project is to develop algorithms for quadrilateral meshes for
various surface representations with provable guarantees on element quality as
measured by commonly used metrics such as angle bounds or aspect ratio, and mesh
quality as measured by mesh size or anisotropy. Direct and indirect methods
(which generate a quad mesh from a triangle mesh), as well as parameterization
guided methods will be utilized. Techniques from computational geometry and
graph theory will play a central role in the design and development of
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The automated generation of provably good
quadrilateral meshes for surfaces is a fundamental problem that is of interest
both in theory, as it raises several geometric, combinatorial, and graph-
theoretic questions, as well as practice, where the computational pipeline from
designing a model for the surface to the end stage of simulation or animation is
frequently dominated by the meshing process. A formal understanding of these
questions is critical not only for the theoretical underpinnings of automated
mesh generation, but also for the sound practice of utilizing the meshes in a
wide range of applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a collaborative effort
between PIs at three undergraduate institutions, involvement of undergraduate
students in research projects is an integral part of this project. An important
and particular goal for this project is the creation of a larger peer group for
female and minority undergraduate Computer Science majors by providing
opportunities for collaboration and joint research projects between students
across all three institutions. Through early and active involvement of
undergraduates in the project, the PIs also seek to create a pipeline of female
and minority students bound for graduate school in Computer Science.