* 1422284
* CIF: Small: New inroads into finite-length distributed information coding
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Sandeep Sadanandarao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 344,725.00

The objective of this project is to develop a new coding technique for three
basic multiuser communication problems that form the building blocks of many
networks: (a) distributed source coding, (b) multiple description coding and (c)
broadcast channel. This project is based on two recent preliminary
investigations. In the former, a new coding phenomenon was uncovered in
distributed source coding. In the latter, a new unified algebraic coding
framework for all three problems was developed that strengthened the connection
among them, and thus suggesting that the new phenomenon is also at play in the
other two. It is well-known that for point-to-point communication problem (both
source coding and channel coding), as the block-length of the code is increased
the performance keeps improving more or less all the way to infinity. For the
problem of distributed source coding, with a particular class of technique
called quantization and binning using identical codes at multiple terminals, it
turns out that as the block-length is increased, the performance improves
initially, reaches a plateau and then decreases after that. So the best
performance is achieved when the block-length of the code is at some finite
value but not infinity. This project addresses the problem of reliable
transmission and processing of information over general networks by developing a
new framework based on these codes to construct efficient encoding and decoding
systems. The performance of these codes for the distributed source coding
problem is analyzed and computable bounds on the performance limits are
provided. This project uses this framework for the broadcast channel problem and
the multiple description problem using a fundamental connection that exists
among the three problems. This project also pursues code construction with
computationally efficient encoding and decoding algorithms toward practical
implementation of the coding systems developed above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have an impact on (i) the exchange of ideas and concepts among
different research fields, (ii) the design and development of the next
generation of communication networks such as ad-hoc wireless and sensor
networks, and (iii) education of future engineers by incorporating research
advances into a curriculum development program and an effort toward recruitment
of underrepresented minority and women graduate students.