* 1422325
* III: CGV: Small: Designing an Adaptive Method for Solving Large Linear Systems of Equations in Two and Three-Dimensional Space
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Michael Kazhdan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,999.00

In numerous engineering and scientific disciplines, ranging from-image
processing to simulation of fluid dynamics, the state of a system is easy to
describe in terms of local relations (e.g., at each point in the image, a pixel
should be brighter/darker than its neighbors). Transforming these local
relations into a global set of values (e.g., assigning a brightness value to
each pixel that satisfies these relations) requires solving a large system of
linear equations, called the Poisson system. The proposed research is motivated
by the observation that although the linear system is global, with properties at
one point in space affecting the solution at points far away, in many cases the
details of the solution are only required at particular locations (e.g., when
merging multiple images into a single panorama, a detailed solution is only
needed near the seams). As a result, computational effort expended on estimating
the details of the solution away from these regions of interest is wasted. Using
this observation, this project aims to develop a new method for solving the
Poisson system -- providing a way to adapt traditional techniques so that
computation is only focused where it is needed, reducing both the memory
requirements and running times by orders of magnitude. This will have
significant impact across a broad range of disciplines, making it possible to
find the desired part of the solution that satisfies the local relations in less
time and with less memory than is currently possible. In addition to providing
significant impact in computational sciences (where solving such systems is a
standard part of many simulations), such an approach could also have an impact
on science education, as it can enable real-time simulation of physical
processes, making it possible for students to interactively explore the effect
of different physical variables, thereby enriching intuitive
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key observation enabling a multigrid
solution of the Poisson equation over an adapted grid is that, in a Poisson
system, long-distance effects are dominated by lower frequencies, so high-
resolution components of the solution need only be computed in regions of
interest. The approach investigated in this project will leverage this
observation and extend traditional multigrid so that it can be implemented over
quadtrees/octree that are adapted to the regions or interest. This enables
replacing a space/time complexity that is determined by the dimension of the
embedding space with a space/time complexity that is determined by the dimension
of the manifold over which an accurate solution is desired. To implement such a
solver, the traditional multigrid approach will be modified in two ways. First,
to compensate for the fact that the coarser solution cannot be up-sampled to the
finer resolutions, the solution of the linear system will be represented as a
linear combination of functions at all levels of the hierarchy, not just the
finest one. Second, instead of using traditional restriction and prolongation
operators to transition between successive levels of the hierarchy, the solver
will proceed by iterating through the levels of the hierarchy (fine-to-coarse
and then coarse-to-fine as in a typical V- or W-cycle), relaxing the system
within each level, and adjusting the constraints at the other levels, accounting
for the components of the solution that have already been met. For example, in
the prolongation phase, the coarser solution will be incorporated into the finer
levels by adjusting the constraints, rather than updating the current estimate
of the solution. The research will explore the general design of such a system,
as well as domain-specific implementations developed in collaboration with
domain experts. The resulting framework will facilitate deployment in the areas
of physical simulation, computational fluid dynamics, surface reconstruction,
and image processing. In these applications, the reduction in the number of
degrees of freedom should result in a ~100-fold increase in efficiency and
should enable the solution of very large-scale systems on commodity PCs; whereas
previously these were relegated to the context of high performance distributed
computing. Results will be made publicly available in the form documented C/C++
source code for constructing adapted quadtrees/octrees, formulating the system
constraints, and evaluating the computed solution. Project web site
(http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~misha/Code/AdaptiveMG/) provides access to further
information and results.