* 1422756
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating generalization, transfer, and representation resulting from non-native speech category training
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Ran Liu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 16,164.00

Globalization has increased the importance of information transfer across
traditional language boundaries. This has created a demand for new approaches to
adult language learning that are both efficient and effective. This need is
real; there are more second-language speakers of English in the world than
native speakers. Bilingualism also confers a competitive advantage with respect
to enhanced cognitive abilities and protection from neurodegenerative decline,
so developing next-generation approaches to promoting bilingualism may have even
broader impact. One of the significant challenges to this endeavor is teaching
adults the sounds of a new language. The speech sounds that form the building
blocks of language vary considerably across languages. A long history of
laboratory research demonstrates that the brain "commits" to the speech sounds
of the native language. This supports efficient native speech processing but
confers a cost to learning a new language that uses a different sound system.
Perceiving non-native speech sounds in adulthood is a case where it has been
thought that the adult brain simply cannot be trained to learn. This consensus
has arisen from decades of attempts to devise effective learning regimens for
training adults to improve non-native speech perception. To summarize this
literature very briefly, learning gains are modest even with extensive training
over the course of weeks. Moreover, learning does not generalize well to
unfamiliar instances of the sounds or to new voices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
the direction of Dr. Lori Holt, Mr. Liu will target a promising new approach to
this problem. Prior research from this team led to the counterintuitive finding
that directing attention away from the task of language learning can lead to
more efficient learning gains than the traditional approach of making overt
judgments and getting explicit feedback. Examining adult learning when training
is "hidden" in other engaging tasks is a novel and potentially more effective
approach to teaching adults new language sounds. Mr. Liu's dissertation project
builds on proof-of-concept evidence within this implicit training task. This
study will examine whether extended (1-week) implicit perceptual training
targeting improvement of speech sound representations impacts underlying neural
representations (assessed via electrophysiological brain responses) and transfer
to improvements in vocabulary-learning, modeled after classroom learning.
Parallel studies will investigate conditions that optimize robust adult learning
and generalization to new talkers and words. Results from this research will
contribute to the understanding of the limits of adult perceptual plasticity and
the nature of language learning. It also will inform the development of
effective and engaging next-generation educational tools.