* 1422431
* TV Weathercasters and Climate Education: Expanding the Reach of Climate Matters
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Heidi Cullen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,998,178.00

The goal of this three-year initiative is to expand the implementation of a
currently active and proven climate education method delivered by TV
weathercasters around the country. The work is a partnership of George Mason
University, Yale University, Climate Central (a non-profit climate science
research and media production organization), the American Meteorological
Society, and NOAA and NASA. This project will include four activities: (1)
recruiting 200 TV more weathercasters nationwide (currently just over 100 are
participating); (2) providing participating weathercasters with professional
development activities and training on use of Climate Matters materials to help
them become confident and competent climate educators; (3) developing and
distributing to participating weathercasters timely, localized, broadcast-ready
graphics and science information, when possible tied to local weather and
climatic events, to make it easy for them to educate their viewers about the
local relationships between the climate and the weather; and (4) research and
evaluation activities to improve the rate of use and effectiveness of Climate
Matters materials by weathercasters over time and to study the effect on
learning about climate by the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning outcomes by
the public will be evaluated using a quasi-experimental method with nationally
representative surveys of the public, conducted twice per year over the course
of the project. The guiding hypothesis is that there will be a dose-response
relationship between the extent of TV weathercaster use of Climate Matters
materials in a community (i.e., a media market) and change over time in viewers'
understanding of the climate. The development of Climate Matters is based on
theories of informal and experiential learning. The scaling up of the initiative
applies methods derived from diffusion of innovation and social marketing
theories.