* 1422106
* CHS: Small: Toward a More Reflective Approach to 3D Model Building
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Francois Guimbretiere, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 571,944.00

There is something of a parallel between the recent dramatic rise of 3D printing
and the rise of desktop printing in the 1980s, but there is also a major
difference between these two phenomena: While it was relatively easy to create
digital documents that could leverage the capabilities of the new personal laser
printers, it is proving far more difficult to create complex 3D models that can
leverage the potential of the new 3D printers. The 3D printing work cycle
requires a high level of skill for all but the simplest models, and is hampered
by the separation between the design and production processes. The design of new
objects for 3D printing generally requires the use computer-aided design
software, but using such software to build physical objects stands in sharp
contrast with traditional 3D craft activities in which design and construction
can occur at the same time, such as in pottery in which coils of clay can be
depositing in a circular pattern to create a bowl. In such physical craftwork,
the intimate interaction between the designer and the material at hand
establishes a constant reflective feedback loop promoting faster convergence
towards a satisfactory design. This project will simplify the creation of new
artifacts by directly bridging the gap between the physical hands-on design and
digital modeling of objects for 3D printing by creating a pen that can
effectively draw in 3D by depositing clay, wax, or plastic coils in physical
space, while simultaneously using the same movements and depositing of material
to create a digital 3D model of the object that could then be printed with a 3D
printer.

The project will address numerous challenges in parallel. (1) In terms of the
depositing of material to build a physical model, the project will build on the
existing D-Coil extrusion system but broadly explore the physical material that
is deposited to find one that can be smoothly and steadily extruded, that dries
with minimal shrinkage, that permits free standing and overhanging structures,
and that is visually appealing. (2) The project will explore not just additive
operations, but also subtractive, which would permit a designer to mill or drill
a physical model that has been extruded and have these reductions registered in
the corresponding digital 3D model. (3) The project will explore different ways
to engage a designer in a tighter, more reflective loop with the physical
instantiation of their 3D printed object than is currently possible by providing
the designer with a quick, incremental, medium-resolution printout as they
create it. This more iterative approach will be explored through a variety of
innovations, such as by extending existing 3D printers to permit more optimal
scheduling of printer movements, and by developing techniques to ensure proper
realignment of the object in the printer after it has been removed for
inspection and consideration.