* 1422488
* III: Small: Database Algorithms for Modern CPU Memory Hierarchies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kenneth Ross, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,998.00

A modern database server typically runs on a cluster of machines with a large
amount of RAM, to ensure fast query responses when the commonly accessed data
(or even the whole database) can fit in main memory. Data may reside in remote
or local memory, or in one of several levels of cache; each type of memory has
its own characteristic size and performance properties. This project will
develop query processing algorithms and a query processing system tailored to
such memory hierarchies. Analytic database systems have emerged as a key
technology for extracting actionable information from "big data" collections
ranging from medicine to science to business. Improvements in the performance of
core database operations achieved by the project will have impact on many
application domains. The project will also contribute to education by
contributing technology for use in teaching database system implementation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a database
architecture with efficient partitioning as the core operation, using different
partitioning techniques at each level of the memory hierarchy. In-place
partitioning will be employed where appropriate to avoid allocating extra
memory, with only a small decrease in partitioning speed. Partitioning will be
used as a building block for other operators such as sorting, joins and
aggregation. A variety of database algorithms will be implemented, taking
advantage of the efficiency of partitioning to perform well at scale. Network
transfer volumes will be reduced using specialized join algorithms, since such
transfers are likely to be the bottleneck for queries involving large
distributed joins. These algorithms will form the basis of a database system
prototype to be developed during the course of the project. The project will
provide new techniques to exploit modern machines for efficient analytic query
processing. The proposed system will significantly improve the throughput of
data-intensive queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the
project web site at: http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~kar/cpumem.html