* 1422104
* CIF: Small: Integrating Imaging Detectors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Keigo Hirakawa, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,101.00

The ubiquity of integrating detectors in scientific and engineering applications
suggests that a variety of real-world measurements are high-dimensional count
data. Count data, however, is usually an indirect means of measuring the
underlying vector-valued signal of interest - whether it be light intensity in a
pixel sensor, energy in charged gas particles, or energy in inelastic scattering
detected by scanning electron microscope - that cannot be measured directly. The
two dominating sources of heteroskedastic noise in an integrating detector are
the Poisson process that describes the stochasticity in photon arrival and the
Fano noise stemming from particle-to-electron conversion. As such, the
estimation of this signal from the observed count data therefore plays a
prominent role across diverse applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
is comprised of four investigations. First is the classical task of estimating
the raw signal value from the Poisson count data, for which an optimal wavelet
transform-based denoising method is being developed. Second, the noise model is
extended from the cannonical Poisson corruption to Fano noise - a challenging
task since the distribution of Fano noise is not known exactly. Third is a study
aimed at objectively valuating the visual information loss in noisy image sensor
data, where the problems of image signal recovery and visual image quality are
reasoned jointly. Fourth is an effort to make precise the trade offs between
integrating detector resolution and noise, where the goal is to quantify the
discernibility of information in signal rather than the raw signal values.