* 1422795
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: An accelerated numerical solver framework for simulation of solid-fluid dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Hossein Kavehpour, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 261,014.00

Modeling and simulation of complex fluids, or intricate systems involving
interaction of solid and fluid phases are highly relevant to industrial and
engineering applications, and also provides a valuable tool in disciplines such
as the study of biofluids and the functional modeling of the circulatory system.
The challenges of this task are accentuated by the complexity of the governing
physical laws, the demands for accuracy of discrete approximations and the need
to accommodate the high resolutions mandated by common applications. Modern
hardware offers a unique opportunity: as computational capacity continues to
increase, simulations that would have taken days now have the potential of being
completed within minutes. However, capitalizing on this potential necessitates a
concerted effort of algorithmic development and theoretical innovations in
numerics and discretization techniques that promote regularity and expose
parallelization opportunities. Alleviating resolution limitations will enable
revolutionary new uses of simulation. A promising possibility is the use of
simulation in real-time decision making and control. Several ground breaking
studies utilize control of solid/fluid interaction but they are limited to
linear equations (low Reynolds number flows where Green's functions can be
efficiently used). However, the more general nonlinear cases, for example higher
Reynolds number Newtonian flows and complex viscoelastic fluids (at all Reynolds
numbers) cannot be considered with the tools available in the linear case. This
activity will combine expertise from computer engineering, numerical analysis,
applied mathematics and experimental physics to jointly address these
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We promote the potential for scalable parallel
performance via the adoption of discretization schemes that leverage regular
data structures; in particular we will focus on embedded cut cell methods that
couple a Lagrangian representation of the solid with an Eulerian representation
of the fluid. We will develop higher order methods that are highly
computationally efficient while remaining compatible with linear algebra solvers
that are parallel-friendly by design. The key developments will be implicit
methods  specifically designed to accommodate novel parallel multigrid
preconditioners for symmetric Krylov solvers. Finally, our modeling approach for
the governing equations will be validated against experimental data obtained in
Co-PI Kavehpour's research group. The study of complex solid-fluid dynamic
interaction can serve as intuitive proving grounds for the development of
scalable, parallelism-oriented numerical solvers. Although there are several
existing methods in the general field of solid/fluid interactions, there is
still considerable room for improvement especially in the case of viscoelastic
flows. There is a clear demand for methods that improve accuracy and efficiency.
Very few methods achieve higher order accuracy without incurring burdensome
computational expense from associated numerical linear algebra. However, bold
performance gains require novel algorithms specifically designed for these new
architectural specifications. This collaborative activity will engage in cross-
cutting interventions to maximize the benefit of computing innovation while
striving for an accurate simulation framework validated against experimental
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach activities include mentoring
underrepresented high school students in scientific computing and large-scale
engineering projects.