* 1422658
* CIF: Small: String Submodularity and Near-Optimal Adaptive Control and Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Edwin Chong, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,962.00

In a great number of problems in engineering and applied science, we are faced
with optimally choosing a sequence of actions over a finite horizon to maximize
an objective function. The problem arises in sequential decision making in
engineering, economics, management science, and medicine. However, in such
problems, optimal strategies are hard to compute in general. On the other hand,
greedy strategies, though suboptimal in general, are easy to compute because
they only involve finding an action at each stage to maximize the step-wise gain
in the objective function. This research provides a systematic method to bound
the suboptimality of greedy strategies relative to optimal strategies. This
research has broad impact both in application areas and
educationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New results extend the notion of submodular
functions over sets to submodular functions over strings. These results
establish that, under string submodularity, the greedy strategies achieve a
performance that is no worse than a factor of (approximately) 63% of optimal
strategies in sequential decision problems. Under additional curvature
conditions, this bound becomes even sharper. This research involves a number of
issues related to this new string-submodularity framework as follows: 1)
Identifying canonical problems in sensing and control that can be treated
systematically using the string-submodularity framework; 2) Bounding the
performance of approximate dynamic programming (ADP) by reducing a given ADP
method into a greedy strategy associated with an induced submodular string
function; 3) Going beyond submodularity by investigating relaxed definitions of
submodularity and curvature in order to greatly expand the scope of the
applicability of the theory.