* 1422840
* AF: Small: Programmable Nanowalkers:Models and Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

All nanoscale devices are subject to random diffusive forces that lead to slow,
uncontrollable transport of materials and information. Synthetic nanoscale
systems designed for computational and self-assembly tasks, require more precise
control over energy- and information-carrying molecules. Such systems include
nanoscale devices currently being developed for delivery of diagnostic logic
circuits to cells, querying the state of health of specific cells or subcellular
structures, and conditional release of therapeutic cargo molecules. Ideally,
such systems could employ programmable synthetic molecular motors to ferry
information and materials in directed motion over a complex network of tracks,
analogous to natural molecular motors in living cells, thus enabling behaviors
otherwise not possible in a purely diffusion-driven environment. In this project
computational models, simulation algorithms, and data visualization tools will
be developed that will help synthetic chemists build the next generation of
nanoscale walker systems. In the project, students at all levels (high-school to
postdoctoral) will be trained in interdisciplinary research. High-school
students will be engaged on the project through already established, tracked
science involvement programs that emphasize participation of traditionally
underrepresented groups. In the context of the project, a regular seminar will
be developed on nanoscale technology, molecular computing, and molecular
robotics within the biomedical engineering degree program, to educate future
generations of students (undergraduate and graduate) in this emerging field of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has shown that simple DNA-enzyme
driven synthetic walkers can move superdiffusively along nanoscale tracks, and
can do mechanical work. In this project more advanced walker designs with large,
complex body shapes and heterogeneity in their interactions with other walkers
and molecules in their environment will be modeled and simulated. This class of
structured walker scaffolds will exhibit modes of motion not available in
symmetrical walkers, e.g., rotational persistence, orientation-aware sorting,
chiral walker-walker and walker-track interactions. These features will be used
to break symmetries in the walker's local environment, leading to stronger
directional biases and more efficient directional transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand the algorithmic
basis of how a walker's shape and structure affect its motion, and how these
features can be composed, modularly, into larger nanoscale transportation
systems with programmable control, to achieve directed transport even under the
randomizing and disorienting influence of Brownian motion. The models developed
will enable more complex nano systems to be engineered to take advantage of
programmable nanoscale transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken in the
project is computational. Walker motion is treated as a continuous-time Markov
process, at a level of abstraction that balances physical detail and
computational tractability. A hierarchy of Monte Carlo simulations will be
developed to approximate physical and chemical processes at the appropriate
relative scales, while maintaining computational tractability.