* 1422241
* CIF: Small: Fundamentals of Energy-Efficiency in Delay-SensitiveWireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Erik Perrins, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 07/31/2016
* USD 122,734.00

This project aims to improve the understanding of delay-sensitive communications
over modern wireless systems and networks where the physical layer transmission
is based on transport blocks. Information theory, communication theory, and
queuing theory will be integrated to provide a framework to analyze wireless
system performance by jointly considering decoding error probability and delay-
violation probability. To be specific, a transport block-based channel
dispersion will be developed to understand the interplay among channel coding
over finite transport blocks, channel knowledge feedback, modulation, and
probability of decoding error for modern wireless systems. Performance of hybrid
automatic repeat request (HARQ) systems will also be analyzed under this
framework.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project is expected to
provide design guidance for modern and future wireless systems and networks that
supports delay-sensitive traffic. Wireless devices are an integral part of
society and are currently used by over 95% of the global population. Research
that leads to improving their performance under delay-sensitive traffic offers
the potential to improve how these devices serve the needs of their users. In
addition to global technological impact, this project has an educational plan
that will immerse students from various backgrounds in the exciting field of
mobile wireless communications.