* 1422927
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Cloud Performance with On-Demand Isolation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Ada Gavrilovska, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The modern trend in computing systems is towards system architectures containing
a large numbers of heterogeneous computational and I/O resources. Unfortunately,
while the increase in scale allows increased workload consolidation, wherein a
single system runs multiple independent applications in parallel, it does come
at the cost of introducing increased interference across the different
application workloads. Workload interference is the result of the behavior of
one application impacting the performance of another, even if both applications
are running on different hardware resources. This can be due to contention on
shared hardware resources (such as last level caches, memory controllers, or I/O
devices) or even software resources managed by the operating system. Cross
workload interference is especially problematic for large scale shared
infrastructures such as cloud hosting services, which rely on co-hosting large
numbers of widely disparate workloads inside a single datacenter environment.
Preventing interference effects is critical for cloud computing to fully deliver
on its promise as a universal computing substrate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the problem of cross workload interference, by providing a
holistic system that both detects the impact of interference on applications and
mitigates its effects by providing dynamic isolation capabilities in the
underlying system software. This approach relies on the ability to dynamically
partition the underlying hardware resources such that isolation is achieved at
the hardware layer, while also allowing the partitioning of system software to
avoid contention on more abstract resources present in the system software
itself. To achieve these goals this work implements a "Virtual Platform"
abstraction representing an individual and isolatable system domain assigned to
a particular task or workload and consisting of one or more virtual machine
instances. The virtual platform itself is assigned an allocation of hardware
resources consisting of independent "isolatable units." These units are created
through the decomposition of local hardware resources into the finest grained
subdivision of resources that can be both individually allocated and effectively
isolated from the rest of the system. While providing partitioned hardware
resources to a virtual platform provides hardware level isolation, it does not
address interference generated by the system software. Avoiding software level
interference is achieved by partitioning the system software itself through
Multi-Stack Virtualization. Multi-stack virtualization allows multiple
independent system software layers to co-exist on the same local system by
restricting their managed resources to the set allocated to a virtual platform.
Taken together this system provides full isolation capabilities at both the
hardware and software layers.