* 1422245
* CSR: Small: System Support for Transiency in Data Center and Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 516,000.00

Today's distributed applications are built using the implicit assumption that
the underlying data center servers will be stable and normally available,
barring for occasional faults. In many emerging scenarios, however, data centers
and clouds only provide transient, rather than continuous, availability of their
servers. Transiency in modern distributed systems arises in many contexts such
as green data centers powered using renewable intermittent sources, cloud
platforms that provide lower-cost spot server instances which can be preempted
from their users, or smart data centers that voluntarily curtail their energy
usage when signaled by the smart electric grid. This project proposes new
research in distributed systems design that treats transiency as a first-class
design principle. Since traditional fault-tolerance methods are too expensive or
not well suited to handling the intermittent availability of servers caused by
transiency, this project proposes new low-cost transiency mechanisms for modern
data center and cloud platforms. For transiency in green data centers, the
project focuses on a new virtualization mechanism based on bounded migration,
and applies it to design system-wide transiency management algorithms. For cloud
platforms, the project focuses on transiency algorithms that intelligently
manage different mixes of stable on-demand and transient spot servers. Finally,
to handle transiency due to smart grid interactions, the project proposes new
mechanisms to judiciously modulate energy use without impacting application
performance. The project employs a systems-driven approach based on prototype
implementation and experimental evaluation using realistic application to
demonstrate the benefits of these transiency mechanisms. The design of
distributed systems that incorporate transiency have the potential to
significantly increase the use of renewable energy sources within data centers
and better integrate modern data centers and cloud platforms with the smart
grid. Broader impacts of the project will include graduate courses that
incorporate research results, undergraduate summer research projects, outreach
to local K-12 schools in green computing, and the release of source code for the
transiency algorithms to the research community.