* 1422676
* III: Small: Using Knowledge Resources to Improve Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 498,554.00

Current search engines understand how humans use language, but they do not
understand the language itself. They match the words in a query to the words in
a document and words that are linked somehow to the document (e.g., "Click here
to get the employee handbook") to find documents that might satisfy the query.
Then they use statistical methods and the behavior of other people who searched
for similar information to rank these potential matches. Although current
technology works well most of the time, it sometimes fails badly because the
search engine does not really understand the meanings of the documents that it
ranks. Recently, companies, research organizations, and volunteer communities
have begun to create large knowledge graphs that describe important, essential,
or well-known information. Knowledge graphs are similar in spirit to Wikipedia,
but they are designed to be used by computers instead of humans. For example, a
knowledge graph might contain the entities "Cleveland Cavaliers" and "LeBron
James", and these two entities might be connected by an "employs" relationship.
Information can be entered by people with moderate expertise, and by machine
learning software, thus it is practical to build large knowledge graphs that
cover a wide range of human knowledge. Freebase, which is now owned by Google,
is a well-known knowledge graph that contains 2.5 billion "facts" about 44
million "topics" and is growing rapidly. Currently knowledge graphs are used for
just a few well-defined tasks, for example, to produce the info boxes that
Google displays next to some search results. New methods of using knowledge
graphs for more varied tasks are of significant scientific and commercial
interest. This project develops new methods of using knowledge graphs to improve
the accuracy of search engines, especially for vague, ambiguous, or poorly-
specified queries. The search engine uses the knowledge graph to identify the
probable meanings of query terms, and then uses this knowledge to improve its
ability to identify documents that match those meanings. The project is of
practical significance for its potential to improve search engine accuracy on
queries that are currently difficult. It is of scientific significance for its
potential to inject greater understanding of meaning and relationships into
search engines. The project is of educational significance because it provides
opportunities for graduate student to do class projects and independent studies
that lead to participation in the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's (NIST) annual TREC conference, which is a semi-competitive annual
event that attracts some of the best research groups from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge graphs are less structured than typical
relational databases and semantic web resources but more structured than the
text stored in full-text search engines. The weak semantics used in these semi-
structured information resources is sufficient to support interesting
applications, but is also able to accommodate contradictions, inconsistencies,
and mistakes, which makes them easier to scale to large amounts of information.
The typical use of a semi-structured resource treats it like a structured
resource that has somewhat restricted functionality. The application must
understand the semantics associated with each type of entity, attribute, and
relation that it uses. Although this approach is effective, the need to
understand the semantics of entity types and relation types limits the
application's ability to automatically incorporate new types of information as
the resource evolves and grows. This project develops new methods of using semi-
structured information resources that make fewer assumptions about the structure
and semantics of a semi-structured knowledge resource, thus enabling them to
make full use of the resource as it grows and evolves. The resource is treated
as a network of entities and relations that are each described by a "bag of
words" description. Entities and relations are retrieved using extensions of
full-text retrieval methods. Evidence such as estimates of authority or related
language models can be associated with entity and relation types, and propagated
along specific network links to improve entity and relation models. This project
applies this general architecture to make several improvements in the accuracy
of a full-text search engine, for example, providing an alternative method of
answering entity-attribute queries and a more stable and effective method of
query expansion. Research results are disseminated through scientific
publications, open-source software, and the project's web site
(http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~callan/Projects/IIS-1422676/).