* 1422909
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: A Linux ARM Hypervisor for System Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Jason Nieh, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 635,103.00

Mobile devices and embedded systems have become ubiquitous in our society. Such
systems use ARM processors, which differ greatly from the traditional x86
processors found in larger computing devices. As devices become smaller, there
is a growing demand for virtualization, which provides benefits such as energy
efficiency and the ability to use the device in multiple operational modes.
Virtualization is especially important in the context of system security as many
security mechanisms leverage virtualization as a core technology for fault
containment and isolation, intrusion detection, malware analysis, and the
detection, diagnosis, and remediation of software vulnerabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the challenges of ARM virtualization, this
project designs, implements, and deploys KVM/ARM, an open-source ARM hypervisor
in the Linux operating system. Since the traditional x86 architecture is vastly
different from ARM, past work on x86 hardware support for virtualization cannot
be carried over to ARM. In addition, ARM processors vary greatly since each
licensee of the ARM technology adapts and changes the systems software to meet
their needs. Successfully creating an ARM hypervisor that is adaptable across a
range of ARM implementations offers rich opportunities for incorporating
security into the hardware itself. Adopting this research into mainline Linux
code ensures that capability is broadly available on a supported foundation for
system security research.