* 1422257
* SHF: Small: Exascale Formal Verification Algorithms for Parameterized Probabilistic Models of Complex Computational Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Sumit Jha, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 503,627.00

The project creates high-performance algorithms for discovering and validating
parameterized probabilistic models against formal specifications of their
expected behavior. Probabilistic models naturally describe the impact of
uncertainties on the behavior of many real-world systems including
probabilistically correct computing devices, autonomous cyber-physical systems,
and multi-outcome predictive models. Parameters in computational models are
employed to represent incompleteness in the knowledge about the system being
described - either due to a lack of sufficient experimental insight or due to
the need for constructing template designs that can be reused. The analysis and
synthesis techniques for probabilistic systems developed in this project could
have a broad impact since many important real-world systems are probabilistic in
nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exploits the synergy between Bayesian
risk analysis and change of probability measures to design new model validation
algorithms that expose rare but interesting behaviors of computational models.
By leveraging theoretical results in randomized metric embeddings and practical
advances in extreme-scale computing, the project creates new parallel algorithms
for synthesizing parameters of probabilistic models from a suite of behavioral
specifications. The project uses computational models of biochemical and cyber-
physical systems as benchmarks for evaluation, and creates a web-based cyber-
infrastructure for rapid dissemination of the algorithms to the wider community.
The project will accelerate the design of complex predictive models by
automatically validating them against multiple historical observations. It will
also enable a formal methods based uncertainty quantification framework for
analyzing the correctness of intelligent cyber-physical systems - thereby,
making these devices safer.