* 1422316
* CHS: Small: Intra-Organizational Boundary Spanning: Strategic Implications for the Design, Implementation, and Use of Enterprise Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wietske Van Osch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 458,253.00

This project will explore the potential of enterprise social media (ESM) for
enhancing inter-group cross-boundary communications and performance of
collaborative organizational groups. Enhancing the performance of organizational
groups is critical to industrial success and the economic competitiveness of
organizations in the United States. The study will provide implications for the
strategic design and organizational implementation of ESM tools to enhance their
impact on collaboration and innovation and offer specific guidelines for the
design of ESM platforms aimed at evoking and enhancing collaboration and
boundary spanning in other cyber-human systems. The project will also produce
relevant materials for the education and training of students.

This project is motivated by two recent scientific developments. On the one
hand, there is growing recognition of the need to study social media in groups
and to explore its potential for supporting a range of group and organizational
outcomes. On the other hand, the recent literature on boundary-spanning has
proposed the need for shifting the focus to virtual contexts and in particular
assessing how the use of virtual tools (e.g. ESM) affects boundary-spanning
success. This study responds to both developments with a longitudinal, multi-
level, and mixed-method empirical study of the relations between ESM use and
intra-organizational boundary spanning. The research will address four related
research questions: 1) the types of boundary-spanning activities that occur
using ESM; 2) the effect of these activities on group performance; 3) the impact
of a group's degree of virtuality; and 4) the effect of the affordances and
privacy settings embedded in the ESM platform on boundary spanning and group
effectiveness. The proposed approach entails a dynamic multimodal network
analysis complemented with mixed-method data for providing a processual
understanding of the effect of ESM on intra-organizational boundary spanning and
group performance. The study will provide several contributions to the ESM and
boundary spanning literature. First, it will contribute to the development of a
conceptual and operational apparatus for understanding how ESM supports boundary
spanning. Second, the project will contribute an understanding of ESM use at the
inter-group and intra-organizational level, thereby extending the current
individual-level focus that has dominated much of the social media literature.
Third, the project will contribute an understanding of the (a) effectiveness of
virtual tools in supporting boundary-spanning activities, (b) the optimal
configurations of network relations for supporting these activities, and (c) the
effect of other node variables and tie characteristics on the relation between
ESM use, boundary spanning, and the performance of collaborative groups.