* 1422286
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Research into Worst-Case Large Deviation Theory for Network Algorithmics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Bill Lin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The design and analysis of network algorithmics, namely, techniques and
principles behind the software and hardware systems running on high-speed
Internet routers, has become a rich area of research. In general, network
operators would like routers to deliver robust performance under a wide variety
of, often unforeseen, operating conditions. To address this need, this project
takes a first look into network algorithmics solutions that can guarantee a
certain level of performance, not only under typical or average parameter
settings as in prior studies, but also under all admissible parameter settings.
Toward this goal, PIs propose to develop a novel mathematical approach, called
worst-case large deviation theory that is needed to prove such universal lower
bounds on performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three
closely connected research threads. First, the principal investigators (PIs)
will develop solutions for distributed data streaming problems that can
guarantee a certain level of performance, under all possible ways a given data
set is partitioned into distributed subsets. Second, they will develop a rich
family of load-balanced switching solutions that can guarantee high throughput
and reasonably low delay under all admissible traffic workloads. Third, they
will build mathematical connections between worst-case large deviation
techniques they developed in the past several years for deriving such universal
performance bounds in prior network algorithmics solutions, which they expect
will shed light on the new mathematical problems they will encounter in the
first two research threads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage both
graduate and undergraduate students through integrated classroom curriculum and
research training that span multiple disciplines, from fundamental mathematics,
algorithm design, to hardware implementation. The results will be broadly
disseminated through publications, invited talks, tutorials, and open-sourcing
of software developed for this project in accordance with the policies of each
institution. The PIs will work closely with leading networking and systems
solution providers to facilitate technology transfers. Further, both PIs are
committed to outreach efforts at their corresponding campuses to broaden the
participation of under-represented groups in research and higher education.