* 1422193
* CIF: Small: Detection and Classification Problems in Online Information Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Rohit Negi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 403,270.00

Online Social Networks (OSN) such as Facebook, Twitter, as well as a plethora of
online datasets, such as Wikipedia and US government?s DATA.GOV initiative are
becoming the repositories of knowledge and discussion for the future. These OSNs
and online datasets all share the common feature that they can be thought of as
?Online Information Graphs? (OIG), in the sense that the information embedded in
them has a natural graph structure, such as Facebook?s graph of ?friends?. This
project considers the question of detection and classification of real-world
events using these Online Information Graphs from a communication theoretic
viewpoint, by using the graph to specify a Bayes prior. As more and more data is
made freely available on the internet, utilizing it to extract information
becomes important for society, which is the main goal of the project. For
example, Open Government data can improve governance, if inferences applicable
to society can be made from it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions about OIG
that are being investigated are; defining and learning suitable models for the
Bayes prior of the OIG, defining various detection and classification problems
on OIGs, designing detection algorithms for large OIGs, analyzing detector
performance, and engineering the information graph to improve detection. The
research is partly experimental (e.g., exploring real-world datasets) and partly
theoretical (e.g., analyzing detector performance), and so, intellectual
contributions will be made in both categories. Algorithms are being designed to
operate on these models, for graph structures typical in OSN-type datasets. The
research uses analytical techniques from communication theory, adapted to
probabilistic graphical models, to predict error performance and to engineer the
networks.