* 1422916
* SHF: Small: 100GHz DIgital Logic Using Cooled Commodity CMOS Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Kenneth Mai, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The scaling of integrated circuit process technology over the past few decades
has enabled ever faster, smaller, and lower power micro-electronics. However, as
process technologies near fundamental scaling limits, the pace of improvement in
micro-electronics has slowed. This project seeks to boost the performance of
digital integrated circuits made in current process technologies to
unprecedented performance levels by cooling them to cryogenic temperatures. With
this approximately order-of-magnitude performance gain, one may enable new
classes of applications without needing fundamental breakthroughs in process
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much of the recent research in digital
systems has been focused on exploiting parallelism (e.g., many-core CPUs), there
remains a significant need for faster sequential processing. Even in highly
parallelized systems, serial sections of code and Amdahl's Law can be
bottlenecks to compute performance. Further, many users have critical, but un-
modifiable, serial legacy code or applications that are inherently serial and
non-parallelizable. The proposal explores extremely high clock rate digital
systems in the "performance-at-all-costs" region of the design space using
aggressively cooled commodity CMOS systems with a target clock rate of 100GHz,
whereas the present commodity CMOS process technologies can achieve performance
near 10GHz only. The project proposes to bridge this gap by building systems
that use aggressive cooling, customized low-temperature circuits, and
application specific architectures. Use of commodity CMOS process technologies
enables both lower cost and higher integration densities than the more exotic
processes, which heretofore were the only way to achieve the necessary digital
logic and memory speed.