* 1422254
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Significance of Intercultural Social Networks in Emergent Commercial Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Catherine Lutz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 13,003.00

Economic anthropologists and sociologists have long established that commercial
relationships are "embedded" in social and cultural processes. As various
economies become increasingly globalized, there are new challenges for
scientific understandings of how economic relationships can be established and
thrive in contexts where entrepreneurs are informed by different cultural,
social, and political expectations. This project, which trains a graduate
student in how to conduct rigorous, scientifically grounded fieldwork, explores
the practices and processes that do and do not lead to greater trust and
mutually satisfying outcomes between individuals of varying national origins in
emergent commercial markets.

Derek Sheridan, under the supervision of Dr. Catherine Lutz of Brown University,
proposes to ask how everyday economic and social interactions between merchants
and entrepreneurs of diverse national backgrounds shape both the understanding
of international relations, and the implications these relations have for viable
commercial networks in emergent markets. To answer these questions, the
researcher will spend a year focused on Chinese migrants in Tanzania. Given the
growing economic presence of Chinese entrepreneurs in Africa, and the enormous
importance of Africa's resources and economic growth to China's ascendency, this
is an ideal context for studying how the emergence of important commercial
relationships in the twenty-first century. The researcher will follow how
Chinese-Tanzanian relationships develop and evolve in different contexts and
under different conditions. Through fieldwork, he will trace how people evaluate
each other, develop trust and/or mistrust in each other, and develop the
everyday ethics and "rules of the game" that allow them to conduct business with
each other. Through a combination of extended observation and interviews, the
researcher will follow how people make sense of their experiences through
stories, and how they share these experiences with others; and in the process
contribute to popular knowledge in both China and Tanzania about Sino-African
relationships. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology, the project would generate data significant commercial
relationships between African and China, the understanding of which is critical
to economic competitiveness.