* 1422312
* CSR: Small: I/O Virtualization at the Device File Boundary and its Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Lin Zhong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 428,000.00

Virtualization allows multiple virtual computers to securely share the hardware
resources of a physical computer. This has become a critical technology for
security, resource consolidation and management in modern computers. Among
hardware resources, input and output (I/O) devices have proven to be hard to
virtualize because of the great diversity in their functionality and
implementation; yet, I/O devices are very important for modern computers from
smartphones to data center servers. They include not only human input and output
devices such as sensors and actuators, but also computational resources like
graphics processing unit (GPU) and field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Known
I/O virtualization solutions often struggle between development effort and
supported device functionality. This project aims at not only solving this
impasse but also extending I/O virtualization from locally connected I/O devices
to network I/O virtualization - I/O devices from computers available via
network. It will also demonstrate the novel, compelling application cases of
network I/O virtualization for both mobile devices and data centers.

Device file, an abstraction used by Unix-like operating systems for I/O devices,
can be the sweet spot as the boundary for I/O virtualization. The project's
focus centers around three technical contributions: First, high-performance
cross-computer file operations that allow file operations issued by one computer
to be efficiently executed by device drivers residing in another computer,
virtual or physical, even over network. Second, this project will provide fault
and data isolation between multiple computers sharing an I/O device and provide
correctness and performance guarantees to them without sacrificing the potential
benefits of the device file boundary. Finally, this project will demonstrate the
novel applications of network I/O virtualization for both mobile and server
systems, including accelerator consolidation in data centers and I/O sharing
between mobile devices.

The project will leverage collaborations with industry leaders to ensure a
timely transfer of technologies into industry and there is a broad impact on the
commercial development of mobile devices and data centers. The project will
provide new system components for teaching mobile and embedded systems to a
diverse community of learners. Finally, as mobile devices have penetrated all
walks of life and data centers have become the backbone of personal computing,
the project has the potential to impact this global society and its economy by
reducing the operational cost of data centers and by enabling novel use of
mobile devices.