* 1422381
* CHS: Small: Making sense of information in online discussion boards with novel social computing platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Lena Mamykina, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,931.00

This project will analyze how individuals make sense of information collected
within online health forums and how existing computing platforms facilitate or
inhibit this process. Increasingly, individuals of all walks of life go online
to collect and share information, collectively make sense of it and negotiate
its meaning, reach a consensus, or agree to disagree, and, thus, generate a
repository of collective wisdom that can be shared and reused. These social
behaviors, often referred to as "sensemaking," are particularly consequential in
health and wellness management, as increasing numbers of individuals join online
health support communities and rely on their peers for help and advice. Despite
the ongoing research on social computing platforms and on attitudes, perceptions
and behaviors of their users, the dynamics of computer-mediated sensemaking
remain poorly understood. Moreover, most of the information collected within
these forums continues to exist in the form of discussion threads that provide
little guidance as to the main topics discussed, the relationships between posts
within the thread, different attitudes towards the topics of interest, and the
overall dynamics of the discussions. The overarching goal of this research is to
develop novel summarization, visualization, and interaction mechanisms to help
individuals make sense of information and opinions collected in online forums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research will seek to understand how
sensemaking unfolds within discussion threads, describe it through a set of
formalizations, or semantic discussion typologies, and identify ways to study it
computationally. Participatory design methods will then be used to develop novel
visualization and interaction mechanisms for facilitating individual and
collective sensemaking within online forums. A combination of computational data
analysis and visualization techniques will automatically generate visual
summaries of discussions threads that can help users to understand the evolution
of meaning in discussions. This research will build upon previous work in
natural language processing and data mining, to represent salient properties of
the discussion threads, such as discussion topics and their transformation
overtime, and the various attitudes towards the topics among the users. Finally,
the discussion visualization tools will be evaluated on their impact on
individual and collective sensemaking in controlled experiments and in a
deployment study within an existing online health community oriented toward the
difficult health issues associated with diabetes.