* 1422113
* 2014 Ocean Global Change Biology Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2014
* David Hutchins, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 30,000.00

Overview: National Science Foundation support will help establish a new Gordon
Research Conference titled "Ocean Global Change
Biology."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There is a growing awareness
within the oceanographic and global environmental change communities that the
various effects of a changing climate on oceanic properties will be both multi-
faceted, and occur simultaneously. A growing body of evidence indicates that our
ability to predict the biological responses to these dramatic alterations of the
oceanic environment is contingent on understanding the interactive effects
between many distinct ocean properties. In the last decade our research
community has primarily focused on the biological effects of changes in
individual ocean properties, particularly pH (ocean acidification) and
temperature (sea surface warming). This new Gordon Research Conference will
bring these distinct but related research threads together by adopting a
holistic approach to two pressing research questions: 1) How will ocean biota
respond to multiple fundamental and concurrent alterations of their environment?
and 2) How will their cumulative responses affect ocean productivity,
biodiversity and biogeochemistry?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This new
Gordon Research Conference will encompass disparate research communities, from
experimentalists to modelers, who are all tackling aspects of biological
responses to ocean global change. There is an urgent need to move beyond the
current focus on just ocean acidification to address the full range of
interactive anthropogenic global change effects on the marine biota, including
warming, enhanced hypoxia and stratification, ice melting, changes in iron and
nutrient availability, altered irradiance, and shifts in biological interactions
such as competition and predation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Global Change
Biology conference will open new avenues of communication between the diverse
research communities who are addressing all of these inter-related processes, in
order to devise a range of approaches to more systematically and realistically
tackle the full range of impacts of a changing ocean environment on the
biological communities and living resources of the oceans.