* 1422557
* RI: Small: Finding Patterns in Complex Data with Probablistic Graphical Models
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 449,991.00

The ability to find patterns --- groups of variables working together --- and
their dependencies in high dimensional problems are becoming crucially important
in a wide variety of scientific, societal, and commercial applications.
Important areas include cancer genomics, climate science, forest ecology,
healthcare, and social media analytics. Typical patterns involve one or more
groups of variables jointly exhibiting similar or dependent behavior in certain
situations. In a predictive setting, activation of certain groups of variables
often serves as a key signal for the prediction task. There is an urgent need
for probabilistic models which go beyond identifying pairwise interactions, to
understand higher order interactions between variables. Towards this end, the
project will investigate novel methods based on structurally constrained
dependency estimation and high-dimensional inference in probabilistic graphical
models. This work will consider two important applications: climate and home
care. Across the globe, climate change is impacting both the frequency and
intensity of weather events, such as precipitation. The proposed methods will
enable more accurate modeling of precipitation driven hydrological events. In
the US, health care expenditures are expected to increase to 19.6% of the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) by 2019. The proposed work in home care is unique in
scope and will be broadly applicable to any health care data, thus providing a
foundation for future meaningful use of electronic health records, a national
priority in the US. This project naturally spawns many educational
opportunities, and will engage students through classroom teaching and
associated modalities. The project will engage under-represented groups in the
research, and disseminate the findings through workshops and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, there are two
central challenges for probabilistic pattern analysis with higher-order
interactions: the combinatorial challenge, as one has to potentially look at all
possible subsets of variables and their interactions, and the statistical
challenge, as one typically has a small number of samples available, which can
be unsuitable for testing significance of dependencies or relations found. The
project will build on recent advances in structured estimation in regression and
pairwise graph structure learning to develop novel approaches to structure
estimation and associated inference for graphical models with higher order
dependencies. In particular, the work will focus on estimation with structural
constraints or regularization which can estimate complex dependencies, including
overlapping and block-correlated patterns. For inference and pattern completion,
the focus will be on approximate inference based on novel randomized block
updates for constrained optimization and associated ideas.