* 1422134
* AF: Small: Algorithms in Phylogenetics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* David Fernandez-Baca, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Phylogenetic trees, also known as phylogenies, represent the evolutionary
history of sets of species. The construction of such trees is an attempt to
understand the origin of life. Phylogenies have several practical uses. For
instance, they offer biologists a tool to predict gene function, by comparing
and leveraging information among species related by evolution. They also help to
track changes in rapidly developing organisms such as viruses or cancer cells.

Building phylogenetic trees from gene data poses major computational problems.
Every known formulation of the task leads to an intractable (NP-hard) problem.
Further, data is scarce: not every gene has been sequenced for all species, and
not every species has the same set of genes. Thus, to build comprehensive
phylogenies, we must piece together information from different genes.
Complicating matters even further, gene evolution does not always conform to the
history of speciation. In fact, due to gene duplication and loss, and horizontal
gene transfer, it is not rare for gene phylogenies to be in conflict with each
other.

The proposed research addresses the mathematical and algorithmic problems that
arise from data scarcity and conflict in phylogenetics. Among the interrelated
themes we will explore are the detection of conflict, the properties of
dissimilarity measures between trees, and the identification of common patterns
in collections of trees. A portion of our work will center on the supertree
problem, where the goal is to amalgamate a collection of trees for partially
overlapping sets of species into a single phylogeny -a supertree- for the
combined set of species. We will investigate the properties a supertree method
can and cannot satisfy, and develop mathematical characterizations of the
solvable instances of important classes of supertree problems. We will use the
latter to identify parameterizations under which certain problems become
tractable. Our methods for mining phylogenetic databases for common patterns
will enable biologists to identify well-supported evolutionary relationships
among species and to spot "rogue taxa"; i.e., species whose presence radically
alters the result of a phylogenetic analysis. We will also investigate supertree
construction and data mining for multi-labeled trees (trees where each species
can occur multiple times), which are now commonplace in phylogenetic databases.