* 1422358
* CIF: Small: A Framework for Low Latency Universal Compression with Privacy Guarantees
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lalitha Sankar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 498,213.00

In contrast to the traditional data communications models in which large blocks
of data are compressed, the evolving information generation, access, and storage
contexts require compressing relatively smaller blocks of data asynchronously
and concurrently from a large number of sources, and often, with additional
security and privacy constraints. This research addresses this growing need by
developing a rigorous framework for universal lossy and lossless compression
algorithms in the finite blocklength regime with strong theoretical guarantees.
It also addresses the related need for privacy guarantees in low latency
applications via new privacy metrics and mechanisms applicable to datasets
of&amp;#8232; all sizes. Finally, the research will develop open-source
computational tools for finite blocklength analysis, with applications to
numerous communication and compression problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research can be applied to the wide variety of systems that continuously
collect, store, and process data, including online retailers, search engines,
social network sites, and storage systems for electronic medical records. A key
impact of the research will be much-needed compression techniques that are more
suited to these low-latency applications than traditional methods. In addition,
this research will develop privacy mechanisms for these applications, to provide
solid privacy assurances in this modern environment in which users are
increasingly concerned about their own sensitive data in various electronic
forms. The research will also integrate undergraduate and graduate student
involvement through curriculum development, theoretical research, and open-
source software efforts.