* 1422788
* CSR :Small: Exploiting Slowdowns for Speedup in Power-Scalable HPC Systems.
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Kirk Cameron, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Advanced computing systems --- that support a wide variety of applications in
fields such as economics, sciences, and medicine --- are increasingly being
designed with energy efficiency considerations. An extant approach to energy
management is to run the underlying processors and devices at varying voltage
and frequency. Typically, the approaches push the devices to run as fast as
possible within thermal limits using the premise that "faster is better or at
least does no harm." There is growing evidence in the prevailing literature that
"slower is sometimes better." For example, for benchmark applications such as
IOZone, it has been observed that running the processors at a faster speed can
lead to significant slowdowns in the overall execution time. At large scale,
e.g., in the Amazon Web Services cloud, such performance loss can cost hundreds
of thousands of dollars in CPU hours and waste precious energy often begotten
from polluting fossil fuels. However, isolating the root cause of such slowdowns
in today's complex systems at the scale of data centers is akin to finding a
needle in a haystack. Performance is now a function of the complex interaction
between application design, system resources, and the underlying hardware.
Furthermore, power scaling makes the raw performance of the hardware a variable;
thus, further confounding attempts to isolate
slowdowns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds novel technologies that
identify, model and automate the minimization or elimination of slowdowns in
parallel and distributed applications when power scaling is enabled. The key
approach is fine-grain application and kernel instrumentation to develop in-
depth analysis of the interaction between parallel and distributed applications
and the software and hardware stack. The intellectual merit of this research
involves three intermediate research goals: 1) Exhaustive testing and deep
system and code analysis on a large class of applications and a diverse set of
systems to classify and isolate the slowdown phenomenon due to power scaling; 2)
Design, implementation, and validation of models of the critical paths of
applications exhibiting sensitivity to slowdowns; and 3) Analysis of the
resulting models and design, implementation, and validation of the automated,
open-source, runtime optimization techniques to steer power scaling to minimize
or eliminate slowdowns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of the project will
improve the performance and energy efficiency of advanced systems. Adoption of
the resulting runtime tools will enable use of power scaling to save energy
while simultaneously reducing time-to-solution for modern applications and
systems. The resulting artifacts and technologies will contribute to U.S.
competitiveness by addressing the challenge of building large-scale systems
within power constraints. The educational activities will help produce diverse
graduates with highly marketable skill sets. The integration of the research
discoveries and software tools, which will be open source and made public, into
the educational curriculum will help capture the interest of the next generation
of computer scientists.