* 1422252
* CIF: Small: Stochastic frames in signal processing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Somantika Datta, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 257,190.00

In harmonic analysis, frames provide decompositions of functions where the
individual components (of the frame) are not necessarily linearly independent.
In recent years, they have become the standard tool for generating useful
redundant (or over complete) signal representations. Frames make signal
representations more flexible, robust to transmission errors, and resilient to
noise. Despite the prevalence of stochastic models for noise and other
uncertainties that plague many signal processing problems, deterministic
perspectives and methods remain dominant in frame theory research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pervasive theme of this research is to study how well
(stochastic) signals can be represented by random subframes of standard ones.
The ultimate goal is to design/study frames and random sub-frames that are
resilient to transmission losses or erasures of frame coefficients. This will
entail developing notions of optimality under erasure and characterizations of
optimal frames. The application of this theoretical work to signal processing
problems will promote the transition of basic mathematical results into
applications and perhaps ultimately into new technologies. Since the proposed
study lies in the interface of many mathematical sub-disciplines including
harmonic analysis, and probability theory, it will also enable dissemination of
mathematical knowledge across sub-disciplines and will foster an instructional
agenda that embraces this cross-disciplinary view. Elements of the proposed
research will be incorporated into a newly developed course (by PI) in
approximation theory at the University of Idaho, as well as, student research
activities.