* 1422471
* SHF: Small: Refinement Types For Verified Web Frameworks and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 516,000.00

Title: SHF: Small: Refinement Types For Verified Web Frameworks and
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Web applications play a crucial role in every
aspect of our lives, including banking, commerce, education and healthcare and
travel. Despite their importance and ubiquity, they remain notoriously hard to
design, develop and deploy as they span several tiers and languages: an
HTML/JavaScript client that runs on users' browsers, a central server that
implements the application's logic in the "cloud" and a database that stores
persistent user data. The goal of this research is to build upon recent advances
in SMT-based software verification to develop reliable and secure web
frameworks. The intellectual merits of this research are new techniques for
specifying and verifying multi-lingual systems spanning databases, scripting
languages and service protocols, which are essential ingredients of large
software systems. Thus, the project's broader significance and importance is
that it will lower the cost of constructing robust web applications, with strong
guarantees about the protection of sensitive data about the users' health,
finances and other personal information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To mitigate the
impedance mismatch across tiers, developers use web frameworks which have
simplified the construction of web applications. However, reliability and
security concerns still cut across multiple tiers and languages, making them
hard to achieve. This research will use refinement types to specify and verify
properties for frameworks and end-to-end safety and security properties for
applications. In particular, it will build on the refinement type system of
LiquidHaskell, developed in preliminary research, to verify existing frameworks
like Haskell's popular SNAP framework, and use it to develop a suite of
applications with strong guarantees, thereby showing how the idea can be widely
adopted in mainstream frameworks and languages.