* 1422594
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Towards Agile and Privacy-Preserving Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Peng Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2018
* USD 248,841.00

Cloud computing offers many benefits to users, including increased availability
and flexibility of resources, and efficiency of equipment. However, privacy
concerns are becoming a major barrier to users transitioning to cloud computing.
The privilege design of existing cloud platforms creates great challenges in
ensuring the trustworthiness of cloud by granting too much power to the cloud
administrators, who could launch serious insider attacks by abusing the
administrative privileges.

This project uses a well-understood philosophy, separation-of-privilege, in the
architectural design of a cloud platform. The architectural design and the
strong homomorphic cryptographic approach protect data privacy in cloud
environments from different angles. This project develops an innovative privacy-
driven architectural design, with one focus on the privilege-level design of
each software component of a cloud platform, and another on defending insider
attacks. This project investigates new mechanisms to de-privilege the cloud
administrator and enable more fine grained access control among the software
components of a cloud platform. More specifically, the new mechanisms enable
agile configuration of the platform; user-configurable privacy protection; and
strong isolation in the user space. The techniques developed under this project
are immensely important as users place more of their data into the cloud and
rely upon cloud providers to keep that data private.