* 1422211
* TWC: Small: Understanding Network Level Malicious Activities: Classification, Community Detection and Inference of Security Interdependence
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Bailey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,952.00

This goal of this project is development of a formal method to quantitatively
assess the security posture of large networks and assign them a numeric score.
Large networks are made up of a collection of individual machines, which exhibit
more stable behavior and features as a group than at the IP level, where each
host is inspected separately. Networks at an aggregate level thus carry more
predictive power, enabling a more robust and accurate policy design.
&lt;br/&gt;A large-scale statistical analysis of network data forms the basis of
two sets of metrics. The first concerns a network as a standalone entity
irrespective of other networks in the same ecosystem. The second concerns a
network as one of many inter-connected networks. This second set is crucial due
to the fact that the actions of one network affect its neighbor networks. If a
network tolerates malicious behavior, its network neighbors feel the
impact.&lt;br/&gt;This project enables network operators to design network
security policies that can be meaningfully applied at a network or
organizational level, for example peering arrangements between Internet Service
Providers, traffic routing decisions, and incentive mechanisms (e.g., cyber
insurance) aimed at encouraging better security practices and investment by
organizations. The outcome of this project is thus expected to have significant
impact on security and incentive policy design across the very core of the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;