* 1422218
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Functional Network Discovery for Brain Connectivity
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ian Davidson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 315,977.00

Neuroscience is at a moment in history where mapping the connectivity of the
human brain non- invasively and in vivo has just begun with many unanswered
questions. While the anatomical structures in the brain have been well known for
decades, how they are used in combination to form task specific networks has
still not been completely explored. Understanding what these networks are, and
how they develop, deteriorate, and vary across individuals will provide a range
of benefits from disease diagnosis, to understanding the neural basis of
creativity, and even in the very long term to brain augmentation. Though machine
learning and data mining has made significant inroads into real world practical
applications in industry and the sciences, most existing work focuses on lower-
level tasks such as predicting labels, clustering and dimension reduction. This
requires the practitioner to shoe-horn their more complex tasks, such as network
discovery, into the algorithm's settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this grant is a transition to more complex higher-level discovery tasks and in
particular, eliciting networks from spatio-temporal data represented as a
tensor. Here the spatio-temporal data is an fMRI scan of a person represented as
a four dimensional tensor with each entry in the tensor being a data point that
indicates the brain activity at that time and location. The overall problem
focus is to simplify this data into a cognitive network consisting of
identifying active regions of the brains and the interactions that occur between
them. The work will consist of three intertwined tasks as follows: i) Supervised
and Semi-supervised Network Discovery, ii) Complex Network Discovery and iii)
Network Discovery in Populations. In the supervised/semi-supervised setting, the
networks discovered involves coordinated activity among some combination of
anatomical structures Since all or some of the structures are given along with
their boundaries, this is termed a supervised (or semi-supervised) problem. With
complex network discovery the team will move beyond finding a single network of
coordinated activity to finding multiple networks with complex (beyond
coordinates) relationships between the structures/regions. Finally with network
discovery in populations , the previous work that studies an individual scan
will be expanded to a population of scans. A population may be a collection of
individuals performing the same task or a single individual's scans collected
over time. Studying such populations allows addressing innovative questions such
as: "How does one individual's network change over the course of development,
aging, or disease?" and "How do the networks differ for one group of individuals
to that of another group?"