* 1422997
* CIF: Small: Network Information Theory Meets Network Optimization: Optimal Linear Network Coding for Packet Erasure Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 10/31/2019
* USD 493,142.00

The development of high-rate, more efficient, and ubiquitous communication
networks is a critical backbone infrastructure requirement of the 21st century.
A fundamental query in studying network is thus how much information one can
reliably send and how to design a scheme that attains the optimal network
throughput. Presently, almost all network information theory results consist of
two parts: Firstly, devising a clever solution, and then mathematically proving
its optimality. Both tasks are highly non-trivial and our understanding of
optimal network communications is thus still nascent. This project proposes a
fundamentally new methodology, called knowledge space partition, to drastically
reduce the size of the design space of network communication schemes. This
allows us to use computers to systematically search for the best possible
solution and automate the design of high-performance network protocols. The
optimality of the resulting scheme is also guaranteed since the computer-aided
search is exhaustive in nature. Based on this central idea, this project will
(i) Systematically compute the linear network coding capacity for various small
packet erasure networks; (ii) Design and implement optimal linear network coding
protocols in practice; and (iii) Generalize the results from network-layer
processing to physical-layer processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
methodology will unify the concepts of stability region and capacity region,
with the two concepts that having long separated the networking and information
theory communities. The success of this project will also imbue next generation
network engineers with back-to-basics information-theoretic thinking with
enormously rich network optimization techniques. With realistic settings and
implementation-friendly constructions, the optimal theoretic results of this
project should spur significant developments in system-level research as well.
Preliminary results of this project have shown that the network coding benefits
are especially significant for the loosely-coordinated low-cost solutions
operated in unlicensed bands, such as Wi-Fi. The findings of this project will
thus further bridge both the domestic and global digital divide. Several sub-
topics of this project, e.g., using linear algebra to improve network
throughput, will be used to attract minorities and women through the Vertically
Integrated Projects (VIP) of Purdue, an undergraduate-research course that
engages undergraduate students in a team-based hand-on research environment.