* 1422116
* CIF: Small: Modeling and Dynamic Analyzing for Multiplex Social Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* My Thai, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 269,014.00

The rapid growth of online social networks has made them become one of the most
important channels for fast information propagation and influence. This
propagation process becomes much more effective when information simultaneously
spread on many social sites via overlapping users, who have accounts on
multiples social networks sites. Analyzing each network separately will fail to
identify the most influential users, and thus give erroneous indicators of
information propagation. At present, understanding behavior that crosses
multiple networks with multiple layers, dubbed here Multiplex Social Networks,
is still largely unexplored. This project aims to develop mathematical models
and techniques to precisely and efficiently analyze the information propagation
in multiplex networks, capturing the extrinsic interdependencies between
networks while preserving each network?s intrinsic properties.

At the heart of this project lie novel mathematical techniques to study many
dynamical processes in multi-layered multi-dependent networks. This research
will lay a foundation in understanding the fundamental properties that
contribute to an extremely fast propagation in multiplex social networks,
providing a breakthrough in effectively using online social networks and their
crowd sourcing capabilities. Furthermore, algorithmic techniques developed in
this project are expected to advance research fronts in approximation theory and
network science. The findings may also benefit other fields, such as network
immunization, offering control of epidemic outbreaks and containment of viruses,
and likewise allow us to analyze other dynamic features, such as cascading
failures in many modern complex networked systems, which are interdependent. The
project will involve students at all levels, with emphasis on attracting
students from underrepresented groups via an internship program. The real-world
applications will offer an ideal platform to engage undergraduate and K-12
students.

This project will comprehensively investigate propagation behaviors in multiplex
social networks by pursuing three primary research tasks: 1) modeling a
multiplex social network via a new set of graph theory techniques. The model
provides a unified framework to extract the interdependencies between networks
and the properties of each network in the simplest form; 2) Analyzing the speed
of information propagation and identifying the most influential users in the
presence of simultaneous spreading via overlapping users. Several new
optimization models along with their hardness complexity analyses and
approximation algorithms will be investigated; 3) Devising near-optimal
solutions for many optimization problems considering the properties of complex
networks since many real-world networks, ranging from the Internet to social and
biological networks, are complex. This is a novel research direction and success
of this approach will impact the design of approximation algorithms for many
real-life problems on complex networks.