* 1422768
* SBE: Small: An optimization framework for prioritizing cyber-security mitigations for securing information technology infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* James Luedtke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 455,828.00

Our nation's information technology (IT) infrastructure is vulnerable to
numerous security risks, including security vulnerabilities within the IT supply
chain. This research addresses the cyber-security risks and vulnerabilities that
exist in the Federal IT infrastructure. It will provide new insights for
prioritizing and deploying IT security mitigations in a budget-constrained
environment. It will also develop tools that can be used by Federal decision-
makers and other large organizations which make investments. These tools enable
prioritizing, among numerous potential options, the cost-effective security
implementations which reduce threats and secure IT infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will introduce new models that capture the
key facets of prioritizing IT security mitigations. The new optimization models
are formulated as mixed integer linear programming models, robust optimization
models, and bi-level programming interdiction models. They capture adversarial
attack paths, overlapping security mitigation capabilities, tradeoffs between
multiple criteria, robustness to data uncertainties, and the impact of adaptive
adversaries. Models with adaptive adversaries are a major focus, and therefore,
the models explore a range of adversarial strategic sophistication. The
methodological contributions include an analysis of the model features,
performance guarantees associated with proposed approximation algorithms, new
valid inequalities to improve the ability to solve the models, and new
techniques to obtain solutions robust to uncertainty of the functions used in a
model. The overall goal is to protect Federal IT infrastructure by identifying
the right mix of security mitigations that is effective with respect to cost,
threat reduction, and consequence mitigation.