* 1422629
* SBE: Small: Beyond technical solutions: Understanding the role of governance structures in Internet routing security
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Milton Mueller, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 03/31/2016
* USD 338,664.00

Existing research on Internet routing security concentrates on technical
solutions (new standards and protocols). This project is based on the premise
that organizational and institutional factors - known as governance structures
in institutional economics - are as important to Internet routing security as
technological design. Internet routing involves decentralized decision making
among tens of thousands of autonomous network operators. In this environment, an
operator's decisions regarding implementation, organization and monitoring of
routing policies powerfully affect the adoption and performance of security
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research bridges a gap between computer
science knowledge of routing and social science theories of organization and
networked governance. The interdisciplinary method combines data sets from
computer science quantifying the number of routing incidents with network
analysis techniques and the insights of institutional economics. Quantitative
and qualitative methods are used to assess the relationship between routing
security incidents and the governance structures among Internet service
providers (ISPs) that affect routing. The research also tests whether deployment
of new routing security technologies (e.g. Resource Public Key Infrastructure,
RPKI) actually affect the quantity and severity of routing incidents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding correlations between governance structures
and routing security is expected to yield important practical insights for
network operators and policy makers in cyber-security. By compiling and
rendering usable multiple data sources on routing incidents, the project will
contribute to the infrastructure of social science research in cybersecurity.
The PI will disseminate the data resources and research results to a broad
constituency of academics, policy makers, network operators, industry
practitioners, and advocacy groups.