* 1422489
* SHF: Small:Thermal Monitoring in 3D Integrated Circuits with Bimetallic Thin Film Thermocouples
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Seda Memik, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 457,999.00

Power consumed by integrated circuits (ICs) converts to heat and dissipates
through the material of the IC and the surrounding packaging. Heat dissipation
from the interior of an IC to the ambient becomes highly constrained when power
hungry high performance chips are stacked vertically to create 3D ICs. Pockets
of accumulated heat with poor heat conduction paths to the ambient is then
trapped in between stacked IC layers. As a result, overheating within ICs
threaten the safety and performance of future computing systems that rely on
this important new IC design methodology. This project will develop a new
thermal sensor design that is especially well suited to be integrated into 3D
ICs during semiconductor processing steps. It is smaller by design, i.e., an
arbitrarily large number of sensors can monitor an unprecedented part of the IC,
and they do not consume additional power. This will impact the sustainability
and computational power of future computing systems by enabling them to operate
at maximal frequencies without the need for costly active cooling solutions.
They also affect the pricing of the chip products and therefore have a direct
impact on the industry and economy. The PIs will continue to train graduate and
undergraduate students in the basic research that underlies creative
technological developments and actively promote science and technology in
outreach events to the community. One of the PIs will also leverage her
membership in the Diversity Committee at her institution to attract
underrepresented minority graduate student applicants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves a new paradigm for design of thermal sensors using Thin Film
Bimetallic Thermocouples (TFBTs), which senses temperature according to an
intrinsic material property that is independent of process variation and thermal
conditions of the environment. Since TFBTs are passive, they do not consume
power or dissipate heat during sensing. Significant challenges remain in better
understanding and modeling of the materials as well as the integration of the
TFBTs into 3D ICs. The project will study the basic science of these
thermocouple metals as a function of layer thickness, since thin film Seebeck
coefficients are known to differ significantly from bulk. Particularly,
experiments will be undertaken to investigate the dependence of the Seebeck
coefficient on film thickness and on the choice of various candidate metals for
thermocouples. Samples using integrated resistive heater elements on
semiconductor substrates will simulate hot spots underneath arrays of bimetallic
thermocouples, generating thermal maps with high spatial resolution. Design
optimizations for effective integration into 3D ICs will be developed. Novel
thermal management schemes that can make use of the resulting fine-grain,
robust, and low cost sensor array will be developed&lt;br/&gt;and evaluated.