* 1422966
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Sketching and Tracking of Covariance Structures for High-dimensional Streaming Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Yuejie Chi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2016
* USD 75,000.00

The explosion of high-dimensional and high-rate data streams has overwhelmed the
computational and storage power of traditional sensor suites, resulting in a
severe mismatch between the data generation rate and processing capabilities in
modern data-intensive applications: On one hand, vast amounts of data are
generated ubiquitously at an unprecedented rate carrying dynamic information
that are essential for decision making; on the other hand, limited by processing
power and storage capacity, many sensing platforms cannot afford to capture a
complete snapshot of the system or store the entire data stream. This research
program provides a comprehensive framework for learning and tracking covariance
structures of large-scale data streams, which has implications for a broad range
of applications in network analysis, active sensing, traffic monitoring,
particularly in systems where communication bandwidth, battery life, and
physical limits constrain the practicality of high sample rates.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging low-dimensional covariance structures such as sparsity
and low-rankness, the research introduces a novel framework for reconstructing
and tracking covariance structures of high-dimensional noisy data streams in
time-sensitive and resource-constrained environments via low-complexity
sketching schemes, showing that a single sketch per sample suffices for
accurately reconstructing the covariance matrix rather than the original data
stream with minimal storage requirement. The research program develops efficient
algorithms with theoretical guarantees as well as investigates the fundamental
limits for inferring covariance structures from a limited number of
measurements, offering a new combination of insights and techniques from
information theory, signal processing and high-dimensional statistics.