* 1422706
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Human-computer interaction for personal genomics: understanding, informing, and empowering users
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 170,795.00

This project will explore the roles human-computer interaction can play in
helping non-experts to understand and engage with their personal genomic
information. Recent years are seeing a dramatic growth in the scale and scope of
personal genomic information that is available to non-experts, often online and
in interactive forms. As a result, individuals are confronted with unprecedented
amounts of sensitive and often complex information about themselves, which
influences their decisions, emotional states and well-being. Consequently,
questions about how people make sense of and engage with their personal genomic
information, and how comfortable they feel about sharing it in order to advance
scientific and biomedical research, are not only of paramount importance for
life sciences researchers and policy makers, but also a pressing issue for
human-computer interaction researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Because the
technology that enables lay people to interact with such information is new,
there is little research on it. Given the tremendous growth in the scale and
scope of genomic information available to non-experts, this work has the
potential to make an impact on human-computer interaction theory and practice by
investigating fundamental issues concerning non-expert interaction with complex
scientific information and the impact of user interface design interventions on
learning from, and sharing of, personal genomic information. Advances in five
areas will be sought: (1) Functional requirements for supporting meaningful
engagement of non-experts with personal genomic information; (2) Fundamental
knowledge of how user interface design interventions impact users' willingness
to share personal genomic data; (3) Novel interaction techniques for presenting
and exploring rich, complex, and highly personalized data sets by non-experts;
(4) Design guidelines for effective interaction with personal genomic
information, and (5) Methodology for evaluating the effectiveness of techniques
for interaction with personal genomic information.