* 1422979
* TWC: Small: Using a Capability-Enhanced Microkernel as a Testbed for Language-based Security (CEMLaBS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Mark Jones, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2018
* USD 324,364.00

This project is investigating the potential for language-based security
techniques in the construction of low-level systems software. The specific focus
is on the development of an open, capability-enhanced microkernel whose design
is based on seL4, a "security enhanced" version of the L4 microkernel that was
developed, by a team in Australia, as the first fully verified, general purpose
operating system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work on seL4 is rightly celebrated as
a landmark for formal verification, and provides a strong foundation for
building trustworthy systems. The costs of its development and maintenance,
however, are quite high. We have observed that many of the security properties
established in the seL4 verification (including the absence of code injection
attacks, buffer overflows, and null pointer dereferences) could have been
guaranteed automatically by writing it in a language that incorporates language-
based security mechanisms such as an enhanced type system. Motivated by such
insights, the specific goals of this project are to evaluate: whether it is
actually feasible to write software of this kind in a language with meaningful,
language-based security guarantees; what practical impact this might have,
particularly in reducing verification costs; and whether it is possible to meet
the performance goals that are&lt;br/&gt;typically required in such
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary impact of this project will be in
increasing the applicability of verification and language-based security
techniques for the construction of secure computer systems. It will also
generate and distribute key artefacts including the microkernel implementation,
with associated teaching materials, for use in education, research, and
industry.