* 1422918
* III: Small: Spectral clustering with tensors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* David Gleich, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2019
* USD 339,546.00

Society is awash in complex data that is recorded by high-resolution sensors and
through our traces of online activity. One of the key challenges in turning this
data into actionable insight is finding hidden groups in these data. For
instance, finding similar types of land based on its spectral composition, or
finding groups of like-minded people in a social network. While there are a
variety of methods to solve these problems that are known already, there are
none that take advantage of the multi-dimensional features of the data in an
integrated way. The work in this proposal will provide an entirely new type of
data clustering, or grouping. The method exploits the rich features of these
complex modern datasets. Having access to such a method will help society
improve its understanding of the results of complex scientific experiments,
produce new insights into the common patterns in social networks, and extract
valuable information from large databases of sensor information. The methods
developed will be general, and thus, they will have broad applicability that
will enrich our capability to use data to benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectral clustering is a technique to identify
cohesive groups in a database based on simple pairwise relationships between the
items. In a social network, for example, people are connected based on pair-wise
friendship relationships. This two-way, or two-dimensional, association between
people does not capture the richness of real-world social interactions that
often involve multiple people. These higher-order interactions among groups will
be represented as tensors and hyper-graphs in this project. For instance, an
interaction among three people corresponds to a hyper-edge, which will be
represented by a three-dimensional tensor. Thus, this project will investigate
novel formulations of the spectral clustering problem that work on multi-
dimensional relationships represented with tensors. These new methods and their
variations will be evaluated based on the insights that they provide into (i)
hyper-spectral imaging data, where each pixel has a large number of frequencies
measured; (ii) in social network data, where groups of interactions create
higher-order relationships; and (iii) in complex simulation data, where
parametric variation creates multi-dimensional data and relationships based on
space, time and parameters. This project will also investigate fast algorithms
to identify the clusters based on the new formulations of spectral clustering,
as well as relations between these algorithms and emerging work in computational
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the software developed as part of this
project will be released as open source software in order to maximize its
impact. The investigator will organize tutorials on these new formulations at
major conferences to attract additional applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
further information see the project web site at:
https://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/dgleich/tensors