* 1422965
* TWC: Small: Noisy Secrets as Alternatives to Passwords and PKI
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Leonid Reyzin, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 06/30/2019
* USD 499,691.00

In order to establish a secure communication channel, each communicating party
needs some method to authenticate the other, lest it unwittingly establish a
channel with the adversary instead. Current techniques for authentication often
rely on passwords and/or the public-key infrastructure (PKI). Both of these
methods have considerable drawbacks since passwords are frequently breached, and
PKI relies on central authorities which have proven to be less than reliable.
Thus there is a need to use other sources of information for the communicating
parties to authenticate each other. Such information should be at least
partially unavailable to the adversary since the adversary can pretend to be one
of the parties. Many natural sources of such information such as visual
passwords or physical tokens are noisy, and don't give the same result each time
they are accessed.

This project investigates new techniques for using realistic noisy sources in
authentication, without necessarily reconciling the values. It combines ideas
from a variety of related lines of research, including information
reconciliation, secure computation, password-based key agreement, program
obfuscation, and locality-sensitive hashing. If successful, it will lead to
better authentication solutions than are currently deployed. The investigators
have contributed to standardization work in professional organizations like IEEE
and ITEF, and have collaborated with industry.