* 1422831
* SBE: Small: The Force of Habit: Using fMRI to Explain Users' Habituation to Security Warnings
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* C. Brock Kirwan, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 352,526.00

Warning messages are one of the last lines of defense in computer security, and
are fundamental to users' security interactions with technology. Unfortunately,
research shows that users routinely ignore security warnings. A key contributor
to this disregard is habituation, the diminishing of attention due to frequent
exposure. However, previous research examining habituation has done so only
indirectly, by observing the influence of habituation on security behavior,
rather than measuring habituation itself. This project uses neuroscience to open
the "black box" of the brain to observe habituation as it occurs. By
investigating how repetition suppression occurs in the brain, researchers can
make a more precise approach to designing security warnings that are resistant
to the effects of habituation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is used to measure how neural activity in the
visual processing centers of the brain sharply decrease with repeated exposure
to warnings. This phenomenon, termed the repetition suppression effect, is
directly antecedent to the process of habituation. This project aims to: (1)
directly measure how habituation of security warnings occurs in the brain; (2)
examine how habituation towards security warnings develops over time using a
longitudinal design; and (3) use fMRI brain data to guide the design of
polymorphic (dynamic) security warnings, as well as to empirically test their
effectiveness compared with existing security warnings. The insights gained from
this project have the potential to inform the design and evaluation of warnings
that more effectively help users to respond to security threats.