* 1422099
* Citizen Science Embedded Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Rachel Becker-Klein, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,957.00

The Citizen Science Embedded Assessment project will explore the use of embedded
assessment to measure participant science inquiry skill development within the
context of citizen science projects. Citizen science (CS) projects partner
volunteers with scientists to participate directly in research endeavors.
Embedded assessments (EAs) assess participant skills and performance that are
directly integrated and are indistinguishable from day-to-day activities. As
such, EAs allow learners to demonstrate their science competencies through tasks
that are integrated seamlessly into the learning experience itself. The CS field
has a growing inventory of self-assessment tools, however, the evaluation of
citizen science (and other informal science projects) using such subjective
assessments can be remarkably improved when these are used in combination with
objective measures of knowledge, skills or other resources participants gain
through their participation. Science skills, such as data collection and
analysis, are particularly important for CS projects because of their focus on
the scientific process and their need for rigorous data collection. Despite the
focus on skill gains, CS projects rarely measure such improvements. Embedded
assessments (EAs) offer a critical method for understanding the impacts of these
participatory learning environments. The project will develop and field test EAs
on citizen science topics with an environmental science focus. It will also
design training to support their use by individual
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three primary research foci: (1)
identifying common and unique science inquiry skills targeted by CS projects,
and how skills are currently being measured to document project impact; (2)
identifying the opportunities and challenges present in developing and
administering EA tools customized for CS projects to assess science inquiry
skills; and (3) assessing whether EA tools created for a CS project can provide
project leaders with a better understanding of their project's impact on
participant science inquiry skills. The project will address these questions
with a needs assessment of research and evaluation studies within the CS
community and case studies to develop and test EAs customized for three
identified and interested CS projects.