* 1422327
* Collaborative Research: Threat Perception Following Mass Violence Events
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Karen Quigley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 10/31/2017
* USD 305,177.00

Experiencing mass violence, terrorism, or other traumatic events can shape how
individuals perceive and respond to their social world. Anecdotally, following
extensive media coverage of mass violence events, many report perceiving
objects, people, and situations as particularly threatening; and, as media
coverage shifts to emphasize resilience and community cohesion, this
hypervigilance for threats seems to dissipate. Karen Quigley (Northeastern
University), Yu-Ru Lin (University of Pittsburgh) and their collaborators will
empirically test how emotionally potent media coverage of a real-world threat
alters threat perception (i.e., the perception of a potentially harmful event,
situation or stimulus as present or imminent). Specifically, they will test the
hypothesis that media coverage focusing on death and destruction caused by a
serious real-world threat event will have a more detrimental impact on
subsequent threat perception than media coverage of the same event that focuses
on people's heroic responses to the threat. This work could reveal potential
harmful real-world consequences of emotionally potent media reporting of a
terrorism event as well as suggest methods for alleviating such effects (e.g.,
by reporting on positive responses to such tragedies, like the heroics of first
responders). This work will also help characterize the types of individuals who
are at greatest risk of altered threat perception after a mass violence or
terrorism event or when media attention to such events increases.

This project will examine the effects of real-world mass violence on threat
perception among members of an affected community using multiple threat
perception paradigms in the laboratory. A longitudinal study will be used to
assess changes in threat perception before, during and after renewed media
coverage near an upcoming anniversary of the Boston Marathon bombings, a potent
real-world mass violence event that killed three and injured more than 250. The
investigators will utilize novel media tracking measures to assess changes in
exposure to media coverage of the bombings and threat-related events at both the
community-wide and individual level. Specifically, the research will examine
changes in threat perception as a result of (1) naturally-occurring changes in
participants' exposure to actual media coverage of the Boston Marathon bombings
near an upcoming anniversary of the tragedy and (2) in-lab exposure to media-
style vignettes about the bombings that are designed to specifically activate
negative or positive concepts related to the tragedy. A second, cross-sectional
study will examine responses to physical threats (i.e., guns) and social threats
(i.e., scowling faces) shown outside of conscious awareness. This will test
whether exposure and affective framing can influence the conscious detectability
of physical and social threats. Taken together, this research will provide a
better understanding of how real-world mass violence and the media response to
it can influence basic perceptual mechanisms that underlie changes in every day
judgments and behaviors among members of the affected communities.