* 1422798
* CSR: Small: From Simulations to Proofs for Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mahesh Viswanathan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 515,000.00

The widespread presence of embedded controllers in vehicles, medical devices,
and water, power, and gas supply systems, makes the problem of ensuring their
reliability critically important. The two most popular methods of achieving this
in the context of cyberphysical systems, namely simulation and verification,
suffer from serious drawbacks. Simulation, while being scalable and efficient,
is incomplete. Verification, on the other hand, is computationally difficult and
does not scale to large systems. This project explores a third approach where
system-level correctness guarantees are derived from algorithmic analysis of
finitely many, carefully chosen simulations or tests. The techniques developed
in this project could enable more reliable and safe Cyber Physical Systems which
are critically important class of systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop algorithms for finding the relationship between executions that
start within close proximity of some initial state, techniques for verifying
temporal properties involving non-linear propositions, and develop the
foundations for compositional simulation-based verification. These ideas will be
embodied in a software tool which will drastically reduce the effort required to
verify cyberphysical models created using the Simulink/Stateflow environment. In
addition to these research goals, the PIs plan on teaching a class on verifying
hybrid systems that will introduce undergraduates and graduate students in
engineering to the use of formal methods in embedded system design. The
scientific ideas discovered, the tools built and the repository created will all
be publicly disseminated.