* 1422045
* CIF/AF: Small: Some fundamental complexity-inspired coding theory challenges
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/29/2020
* USD 515,912.00

Error-correcting codes provide a judicious way to add redundancy to data in
order to safeguard its utility even when corrupted by various forms of errors.
Codes are crucial to the reliable communication and storage of data, and find
widespread use in diverse applications. This project is aimed at tackling a
collection of fundamental challenges concerning various aspects of error-
correcting codes. The questions underlying the project are inspired and
technically integrated by the PI?s ongoing work in complexity theory and
algorithmic coding theory. Progress on these questions will improve our
understanding of the power and limitations of error-correcting codes in several
models, as well as strengthen the connections between coding theory and various
other fields such as information theory, combinatorics, pseudorandomness,
cryptography, graph theory, and complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will study the performance of error-correcting codes in many settings,
such as communication on discrete memoryless channels with a specific focus on
convergence to Shannon capacity of polar codes; codes resilient against worst-
case deletions; local testability and decodability; non-malleability against
natural tampering attacks, etc.  The discovery of new coding schemes has
potential applications in data storage and communication. Non-malleable coding
schemes can serve as building blocks for tamper-resilient cryptography. Locally
decodable codes can improve the efficiency of distributed storage applications
leading to substantial cost savings. The research will employ ideas from
computer science in setting new directions for research in coding theory,
thereby enhancing the connection between the computer science and information
theory communities. On the education front, the project will engage several
graduate students and provide a stimulating research environment for them, and
help with the planned writing of a textbook on essential coding theory.