* 1422236
* Design Squad Global
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Marisa Wolsky, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 12/31/2017
* USD 2,748,034.00

This project will help address the urgent need for a new engineering workforce.
Middle school students will be entering a workforce that is increasingly global.
They will need not only technical skills but also global competencies including:
the ability to investigate the world, recognize perspectives, communicate ideas,
and take action. This model integrates engineering with global competencies and
will provide new knowledge about how this type of learning experience impacts
students and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the success
of the previous Design Squad project funded by NSF and developed by WGBH, which
has implemented a national model for engineering education for middle school
youth. This project expands the model internationally, connecting U.S. based
youth with those in Southern Africa (including South Africa, Botswana, and
Swaziland). The project partners are FHI 360, a non-profit organization in 60
countries around the world that helps build capacity for improving lives. They
will facilitate the implementation of the afterschool programs in Southern
Africa . The US dissemination partners include Promise Neighborhoods Institute,
Middle Start, Every Hour Counts, and the National Girls Collaborative Project.
Project deliverables include a global engineering curriculum; a web platform
with videos, games, activities; an afterschool Club Guide; and a Community of
Practice for informal engineering educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A knowledge
building component will provide new evidence on how high quality accessible
resources and strategies can impact students' development of global competencies
and engineering skills to solve real world problems. An iterative approach will
be used to develop the resources including the global engineering afterschool
curriculum, Club guide, and other components. The methodology uses a continuous
cycle of improvement including: assess/design, test/ implement,
synthesize/reflect, and utilize/disseminate. The Summative Evaluation will
generate evidence about whether and how this kind of collaborative work builds
children's understanding of engineering, motivation to participate, and
confidence in taking informed action on behalf of pressing global problems. This
will contribute to a larger body of work about whether and how engaging with
global, collaborative engineering problems leads to greater self-efficacy for
children with very different backgrounds, experiences, and opportunities. This
project will add new knowledge about how the well-honed Design Squad model in
the U.S. can be expanded with a global context and global partners. This
proposal was co-funded by EHR/DRL, Engineering/EEC, and International Science
and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the project period approximately
125,000 children in the US and 5000 children in southern Africa will be reached.
In the long term, with the continued global access to the resources, the reach
will potentially be in the millions.