* 1422921
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Software Defined Energy Adaptation in Large Scale Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,996.00

Today many compute and data intensive applications are running on the computers
in data centers. Therefore, data centers consume large amounts of energy. Within
a data center, many compute, storage and networking components are coordinated
together to support these applications. This project studies how to efficiently
allocate resources in data centers to satisfy the requirements of these
applications with guaranteed quality of service (QoS) and at the same time
taking advantage of the available renewable (green) energy to reduce the total
energy to be consumed. As the data centers increase in size and complexity, it
is becoming clear that the traditional distributed control of their resources
poses daunting problems in ensuring the desired agility and QoS support demanded
by the enterprise applications. This problem is further compounded by the need
for aggressive energy management in order to minimize energy cost, cope with
power and thermal related constraints, and adapt to variability in the energy
produced from local "green" sources. A distributed management of energy is
particularly difficult since energy by its nature is a central resource that
must be properly divided up among various infrastructure components in order to
yield acceptable application performance.

This project explores a flexible, policy driven, software defined mechanism to
manage energy at all levels of the data center and for all major resources
including networks, storage systems, and compute servers. A crucial aspect in
this research is the coordination of energy management decisions at various
levels which is essential to achieve optimal performance under given
energy/thermal constraints. The project brings in the emerging concept of
software defined resource management to seamlessly tackle the energy
sustainability and corresponding QoS issues in data centers. The project also
forms a pilot realization of the software defined data center, since energy
adaptation requires an adept management of all major data center resources. A
set of new algorithms in resource allocation, resource monitoring, QoS
enforcement, energy allocation and distribution will be designed and developed.
These algorithms will be implemented into a specific framework to demonstrate
and validate the usage and benefits of the research. The broader impacts of the
project include mechanisms to enhance energy sustainability of data centers and
a comprehensive mechanism for software control of large computing systems. The
project also augments the research being done in the NSF Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) on intelligent storage and will use it as a
conduit for industry adoption of this research.