* 1422027
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Mechanisms of Diffusion of State/Non-State Legal Agreements
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Peter Katzenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,129.00

This project examines the factors contributing to the successful spread of laws
from one country to another. Unlike other studies of diffusion, the project
focuses on a law that originated in the developing world and has spread both to
other developing countries and has begun to penetrate the developed world, The
production sharing contract (a form of law governing ownership of resources) now
challenges the concession and state ownership systems as the dominant model of
ownership of certain natural resources. The project proposes that the success of
the production sharing contract is attributable in large part to processes of
learning and emulation, rather than coercion or competition, with domestic
politics playing a crucial role in determining which countries are perceived as
role models. The project will test this hypothesis by combining quantitative
analysis of an original data set of global petroleum laws from 1960 to 2010 with
qualitative analysis of interviews with petroleum industry experts and archival
materials from industry publications and U.S. government documents.

Apart from advancing knowledge about legislation in the petroleum industry
through its eventual dissemination at conferences and through publication, the
project promises to improve understanding about how to successfully promote
legal innovations across developing countries as well as to recognize the
contributions of developing countries as developers and promoters of new laws.
It also will contribute to future research with the release of its original data
set.