* 1422165
* NeTS: CIF: Small: Robust and Optimal Design of Interdependent Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Osman Yagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 467,000.00

Interdependent systems, such as the smart-grid, are rapidly emerging as the
underpinning technology for major industries in the 21st century. Such systems
are often more fragile in the face of node failures, attacks, and natural
hazards than their isolated counterparts. This is because failures in one
network may propagate to other networks and vice versa, leading to a cascade of
failures that can potentially collapse the entire infrastructure. Mitigating
these risks is critical for the successful development and evolution of many
modern systems including the smart-grid. Traditional network science focuses on
single networks, and thus lacks the methods and tools necessary to address
vulnerabilities of even simple interdependent networks. This project aims to
advance the state-of-the-art in modelling, controlling, and optimizing the
robustness of interdependent networks by exploring several novel research
directions. The first phase targets a study of robustness of interdependent
networks under various topologies when nodes in one network may depend on more
than one node of another network, and vice versa, aiming to characterize the
critical fraction of nodes whose failure will lead to the collapse of the entire
system. This also exposes the trade-off between network robustness and the
number of inter-connections (or resources) allocated. The study then advances to
optimal allocation of support-dependency links to maximize the robustness of the
smart-grid, seeking to characterize the distribution that will lead to maximal
robustness. The results aim to articulate concrete design guidelines on how
available back-up resources should be allocated in order to best sustain i)
random node failures; and ii) targeted attacks. Successful completion of the
project will require the development of new techniques and approaches in the
fields of network science, discrete optimization, and random graph theory,
together with acquisition and analysis of real-world data from existing smart-
grid networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the sheer size of its market for power
transmission and distribution, the US is likely to become a major consumer of
smart-grid technology in the near future, especially with the integration of
renewable sources and electric vehicles. All of these point to a future where
the reliability of the smart grid will become paramount. This research program
is specifically designed to have a positive impact on the successful development
and the evolution of smart-grids, and is likely to have a positive impact on the
reliability of other national infrastructures as well. Research materials will
be incorporated into the teaching curricula via a new course, and will be
disseminated to broad academic and professional audiences. The project will
engage PhD and Masters students in research in an area of national importance,
and will include outreach efforts to high schools.