* 1422462
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Software Defined Network Function Virtualization (SDNFV) - Flexible, High Performance Network and Data Center Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Traditional computer networks have been built from hardware appliances, such as
routers, firewalls, and switches, to implement functionality. These devices can
process network packets at high speed, but provide little flexibility since they
are based on purpose-built hardware. Recent improvements in multi-core
processors and high-speed network interface cards have enabled Network Function
Virtualization (NFV), which allows these network components to run instead on
commodity compute servers. NFV makes the network data processing elements run as
software, allowing them to be deployed dynamically or easily modified and tuned
with changes in network workloads. At the same time, Software Defined Networking
(SDN) has grown in popularity as a way to manage more easily network services by
centralizing control plane functions. This research investigates how the
convergence of NFV and SDN can enable a new breed of highly dynamic network
services for customers of Internet Service Providers (ISPs), and also grant
cloud computing customers far greater control over data center resources. The
work will explore both the software mechanisms needed to support network
components running at speeds well beyond 10 Gbps inside of virtual machines, and
the algorithms and control architectures required to coordinate these components
with high performance and low cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets
two application areas for Software Defined Network Function Virtualization
(SDNFV). The first is dynamic services for network providers for which the
principal investigators (PIs) are developing a SDNFV platform that enables line-
rate packet processing within virtual machines by exploiting network interface
controller (NIC) polling and shared memory for zero-copy communication. This
flexible infrastructure will allow packets to be redirected based on complex
policies, packet data, or service state, which is not currently possible in
hardware-based solutions. The second focus area is on cloud computing data
centers in which SDNFV will enable cloud data center operators to easily
partition and multiplex network resources in the same way they currently
virtualize servers and storage devices. In this application area the PIs are
developing virtualization-layer trust boundaries that provide strict performance
and data isolation, while still permitting the optimizations required for
SDNFV?s fast packet processing. They will also study the new resource management
and scheduling algorithms required to ensure a group of virtual machine-based
network services can meet their strict latency requirements. Finally the PIs
will evaluate their ideas by building prototypes and testing them using
realistic benchmark workloads and traces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
has the potential to redefine how networks are built and managed, by
transitioning away from single-purpose hardware to flexible software-based
network components. This research could make the connected, digital world we
rely on more efficient and more responsive to workload changes, attacks, and
policy decisions. The research will be paired with an educational program to
enhance the networking and distributed systems curriculum at the researchers'
institutions. This will help prepare undergraduate, Masters, and Ph.D. students
to enter the work force with highly sought-after experience in the latest
networking technologies.