* 1422964
* NeTS: Small: Enhanced Interference Alignment for Networks using Reconfigurable Antennas
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 349,989.00

Interference between wireless devices will become a serious bottleneck for
future wireless networks as&lt;br/&gt;they become more pervasive in our everyday
lives. The traditional approach of dealing with interference&lt;br/&gt;is to
share limited resources, such as spectrum, among many users such that a given
resource is used by&lt;br/&gt;only one user at a time. The recent notion of
interference alignment (IA) proposes a new paradigm where&lt;br/&gt;several
users can simultaneously send information by sharing the same resource. This new
approach&lt;br/&gt;results in increased network capacity where every user gets
half the interference-free throughput. In this&lt;br/&gt;research, the project
team will leverage reconfigurable antenna systems to design and
enhance&lt;br/&gt;interference alignment techniques for multi-user wireless
networks. Reconfigurable antennas are capable&lt;br/&gt;of electronically
switching between different radiation patterns (or 'states') in response to the
needs of&lt;br/&gt;the overlying communication link and network. In this regard,
reconfigurable antenna systems represent a&lt;br/&gt;significant new degree of
freedom for developing interference management techniques. The project
team&lt;br/&gt;proposes new ways of using the antennas to enable more practical
solutions for future multi-user&lt;br/&gt;networks and also provide a software
defined radio platform to enable further research within
the&lt;br/&gt;community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the vast majority of
existing research in this area considers an antenna to be a monolithic
'black&lt;br/&gt;box', the project team will develop and demonstrate new compact
form-factor electronically&lt;br/&gt;reconfigurable antenna technologies that
are capable of providing pattern agility. This additional degree&lt;br/&gt;of
freedom allows for the dynamic selection of radiation patterns to seamlessly
integrate with, and extend&lt;br/&gt;interference alignment techniques. The
first objective is to demonstrate how electrically
reconfigurable&lt;br/&gt;antennas can greatly enhance the sum capacity achieved
via distributed interference alignment, especially&lt;br/&gt;at low SNR, by
improving the subspace design. The second objective is to demonstrate how
blind&lt;br/&gt;interference alignment can be practically achieved by combining
antenna state selection algorithms with&lt;br/&gt;multiple physical layer
transmission schemes. The additional channel diversity provided
by&lt;br/&gt;reconfigurable antennas comes with an overhead to acquire
information about the state of all the channels,&lt;br/&gt;revealing a need for
a strategy to select the optimal state and most importantly an ability to learn
the&lt;br/&gt;changes in the channel state in order to adapt. With these goals
in mind, the project team will utilize&lt;br/&gt;online learning based on multi-
armed bandit theory to design algorithms to control and adapt the state of
a&lt;br/&gt;reconfigurable antenna system. For the multi-user network, the team
will analyze the cost of learning&lt;br/&gt;under an unknown statistical model
of the channel and compare it with the oracle with full
prior&lt;br/&gt;knowledge. Finally, the team will focus on implementing the
developed interference alignment algorithms&lt;br/&gt;on Drexel's Software
Defined Communications (SDC) testbed. The SDC testbed is based upon a
Scalable&lt;br/&gt;OFDM physical layer, which operates close to many different
standards. The project team will develop&lt;br/&gt;new blocks for precoding and
decoding, cross-transmitter symbol-timing synchronization, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;implement more efficient synchronization techniques that require
less data overhead. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;combination of the Drexel SDC testbed
with IA algorithms will result in a product that has high relevance&lt;br/&gt;to
the industrial and academic research communities. Special effort will be made to
not only disseminate&lt;br/&gt;research results through relevant conference and
journal publication, but also through testbed
technology&lt;br/&gt;demonstrations. In order to extend the outreach of the
proposed research beyond the research community,&lt;br/&gt;high school students
and teachers, specifically under-represented populations, will be invited
to&lt;br/&gt;participate in the PIs research laboratories through pre-existing
educational programs. The developed&lt;br/&gt;testbed will be used to develop
demonstrations and laboratory-based course modules.