* 1422342
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Adaptive Memory Resource Management in a Data Center - A Transfer Learning Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Zhenlin Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,993.00

Cloud computing has become a dominant scalable computing platform for both
online services and conventional data-intensive computing (examples include
Amazon's EC2, Microsoft's Azure, IBM's SmartCloud, etc.). Cloud computing data
centers share computing resources among a large set of users, providing a cost
effective means to allow users access to computational power and data storage
not practical for an individual. A data center often has to over-commit its
resources to meet Quality of Service contracts. The data center software needs
to effectively manage its resources to meet the demands of users submitting a
variety of applications, without any prior knowledge of these applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on the issue of management of memory
resources in a data center. Recent progress in transfer learning methods
inspires this work in the creation of dynamic models to predict the cache and
memory requirements of an application. The project has four main tasks: (i) an
investigation into how recent advancements in transfer learning can help solve
data center resource management problems, (ii) development of a dynamic cache
predictor using on-the-fly virtual machine measurements, (iii) creation of a
dynamic memory predictor using runtime characteristics of a virtual machine, and
(iv) development of a unified resource management scheme creating a set of
heuristics that dynamically adjust cache and memory allocation to fulfill
Quality of Service goals. In tasks (i)-(iii), transfer learning methods are
employed and explored to facilitate the transfer of knowledge and models to new
system environments and applications based on extensive training on existing
systems and benchmark applications. The prediction models and management scheme
will be evaluated on common benchmarks including SPEC WEB and CloudSuite 2.0.
The results of this research will have broad impact on the design and
implementation of cloud computing data centers. The results will help improve
resource utilization, boost system throughput, and improve predication
performance in a cloud computing virtualization system. Additionally, the
methods designed and knowledge they impart will advance understanding in both
systems research and machine learning.