* 1422871
* CIF:  Small:  Statistical Approach to Signal Processing for Long-Haul Fiber-Optic Communication Sytems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 368,444.00

Society depends on fiber-optic networks to carry its huge data demands. Recent
literature on optical communications has predicted a plateau in the throughput
increase of long-haul fiber-optic communication systems, estimating that the
demand for throughput will exceed supply within the next ten years or so. The
long term solution to this problem is the systematic replacement of all long-
haul fiber (millions of miles just in the US) to more effective fibers. This
research project explores a less drastic shorter-term solution. It seeks to
answer the following question: if limiting assumptions made in deriving this
throughput plateau are relaxed, by using more sophisticated channel modeling and
signal processing, can the system capacity be increased sufficiently to delay or
even obviate the costly fiber upgrade? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a
full probabilistic description of the signal and noise co-propagation through
optical fibers is developed so that statistical signal processing approaches can
be effectively used on this difficult channel. A probabilistic representation of
the fiber-optic system including its correlated, nonstationary, and nonGaussian
qualities for wavelength division multiplexed systems and emerging elastic
optical networks is first derived. The research includes the derivation of the
statistics of each mode of a Gaussian mixture model for the joint signal and
noise processes as they propagate through a long-haul fiber. The models
developed are used to derive accurate closed-form predictions of the system
performance. Signal processing algorithms and receiver designs that optimize the
above performance metrics are then developed. The program leverages current
models developed for deterministic signals. The focus is in generating accurate
yet simple models to make them more generally applicable to both legacy and new
optical networks.