* 1422039
* III: Small: Virtual Unrolling of Carbonized Herculaneum Scrolls
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* William Seales, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 07/31/2018
* USD 506,156.00

This project will develop algorithms and software tools for extracting the
written text from volumetric, non-destructive scans of scrolls, which were
carbonized in the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum as a result of the eruption
of Mount Vesuvius in A.D. 79. The library from Herculaneum, which was first
discovered in 1752, is of immense interest to scholars worldwide. The excavated
collection contains more than 1800 carbonized papyrus scrolls, and is the only
library known to have survived from classical antiquity. All attempts at
physically opening the scrolls have created profound damage, and many scrolls
(nearly 300) are still intact. This project will build a computational framework
in order to "digitally unroll" two complete scrolls, producing a comprehensive,
non-invasive solution to the technical challenges and prescribing a path for the
scholarly assembly and publication of all inaccessible texts in the Herculaneum
collection. This will definitively establish that volumetric, non-destructive
imaging methods can reveal complete texts that were long thought lost. The
algorithms developed in this project will set the stage for the
interdisciplinary discovery of new works from antiquity, the scaling of these
methods and algorithms to the complete Herculaneum collection, and the broader
interest in volumetric analysis for cultural heritage.

The Herculaneum scrolls were written with carbon-based inks that create a
challenging scenario for volumetric methods because density variations are very
small. This work will overcome that problem using phase contrast tomography from
a synchrotron beam in order to build high resolution volumetric models that show
better contrast at ink boundaries. Because the internal structure of the
Herculaneum rolls is complex, chaotic, and fully 3D, slice-based segmentation
strategies fail when the surfaces turn into the dominant slice directions.
Instead the segmentation approach will be based on registered multi-modal scans
and a 3D structure tensor approach for building surface estimates from local
multiscale volumetric operators and region-growing methods. The estimated
papyrus surface segmentation will be locally re-positioned using optimization
methods that improve the expected surface texture, and then digitally flattened
to produce clear, flat views of the internal surfaces of the scrolls. This work
will expand volumetric imaging toward a more widely used representational
platform and will address fundamental technical challenges in segmentation,
registration, representation, and visualization. The project will implement the
developed segmentation and unwrapping algorithms as software tools so that non-
scientists will be enabled to extract new images of text directly from
volumetric data sets of scrolls. For further information, see the project
website at http://vis.uky.edu.