* 1422184
* SHF: SMALL: Automatically Supporting Developer Learning in Context
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 515,726.00

Software developers striving to create and evolve large software systems find
themselves frequently in need of learning. They join a new project where they
need to learn a new software system and the development team?s culture. They
frequently need to learn new Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), or newer
components of existing APIs. The project addresses the need for useful automated
support for helping software developers learn APIs and how to use them
effectively solve the task at hand. The envisioned system performs the
underlying automated analysis on a server which takes information from the
user?s context and current maintenance or evolution task, as allowed by the
user, and sends back learning nuggets as they perform their tasks. With more
effective ways to learn, software development could be more efficient and
provide more reliable, higher quality software, which has a broad impact on
society which depends increasingly on software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to the state of the art by tackling three major
challenges to bring this kind of automated support for developer learning into
practical use. First, we will develop analysis techniques to bridge the gap
between single statement and whole method level analyses for automatic
extraction, description, and generalization of information from source code at
the multi-statement, algorithm-step level. Second, we will develop tools that
automatically identify, extract and categorize different kinds of information
such as facts, (positive and negative) opinions/advice, and usage information in
mixed text-code artifacts such as emails, question-answer forums, and other
developer communications. Third, we will develop tools to automatically identify
the relevant context of the developer and identify the relevant learning nuggets
for that context. The novel approach to analyses, the resulting tools, data
sets, and experimental infrastructure developed within the project will be
released, which will enable other researchers and practitioners to build on the
project?s results and will ultimately advance knowledge and understanding within
the field of Software Engineering.