* 1422066
* CHS: Small: Collective Design through Remixing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Jeffrey Nickerson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,150.00

The project is set in the context of open innovation communities in which people
design physical products that may be based in part on previously contributed
designs, exploring how creativity could be enhanced in these communities by
presenting the right related designs to an inventor at the right time in order
to inspire a creative remixing. 3D printing online communities allow makers,
designers characterized as expert amateurs, to share, modify, combine, and print
each other's designs. These communities present an opportunity to understand and
improve collective design, a form of cumulative innovation. Improvements to
innovative processes will contribute to the growth of the economy, and design is
an activity that is educationally appealing to many different age groups,
demographics, and academic interests.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
analyze an existing open innovation community. From data gathered, tools will be
built that suggest designs that when combined are more likely to result in an
impactful invention. These tools will consider a wide range of possible
innovations, suggesting areas of the design space that may lead to fruitful
discoveries. Because collective design depends on the varied expertise of its
participants, the project brings together makers with professional engineers,
architects, and fabricators through an innovation contest. The makers bring
energy, diversity, and experience with online collaborative design processes.
The professionals bring detailed knowledge of practical problems, as well as an
understanding of modeling and simulation technology in relation to materials
used in additive manufacturing. The primary method is experimental, informed by
the analysis of existing online communities, and testing the new creativity
support tools that will be developed. The envisioned tools will analyze the
products and social networks of remix communities in order to suggest candidate
designs for modification or recombination. Long-held theories about innovation
processes will be tested in a new context, potentially leading to new insights
concerning collective innovation that will be instantiated in new tools and
systems. Data will be gathered, a system will be built, experiments will be run,
a contest will be hosted, and the accumulated learning, data, and software will
be made available to other interested researchers.