* 1422910
* AF: Small: Foundations for Learning in the Age of Big Data---New Frameworks and Algorithms for Interactive, Distributed, and Multi-Task Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Maria-Florina Balcan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Machine learning is a broad discipline with important application domains
including computer vision, robotics, sustainability, and bio-surveillance. Its
past successful evolution was heavily influenced by mathematical foundations
developed for core problems of generalizing from labeled data. However, with the
variety of applications of machine learning across science, engineering, and
computing in the age of Big Data, re-examining the underlying foundations of the
field has become imperative. This project aims to substantially advance the
field of machine learning by developing foundations and algorithms for a number
of important modern learning paradigms. These include interactive learning,
where the algorithm and the domain expert engage in a two-way dialogue to
facilitate more accurate learning from less data compared to the classic
approach of passively observing labeled data; distributed learning, where a
large dataset is distributed across multiple servers and the challenge lies in
learning with limited communication; and multi-task learning, where the goal is
to solve multiple related learning problems from less data by taking advantage
of relationship among the learning tasks. The project also aims to develop new
connections between machine learning and property testing, a flourishing area of
theoretical computer science. In addition to solving fundamental questions in
each of these directions, the project will highlight and leverage synergies
between these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the key research
directions of this project are: (1) Developing mathematical foundations for
interactive learning by analyzing new forms of interactions between the learning
algorithm and the domain expert that could lead to fast and efficient learning
of difficult tasks by wisely exploiting the capabilities of domain experts. (2)
Developing new algorithms for distributed learning, an important modern scenario
where data is distributed among several locations. This project will develop
protocols that trade off the various types of resources involved in such
settings (computation, communication, and domain expertise). (3) Developing new
algorithms with provable guarantees for learning multiple related tasks from
limited amounts of labeled data and massive amounts of unlabeled data by wisely
exploiting explicitly known or latent relationships between the given tasks. (4)
Developing mathematical foundations for property testing, where the question is
to quickly determine whether there exists a low-error rule of a desired form by
using significantly less data than needed to actually find the rule itself. This
project will specifically focus on active and distributed scenarios, with the
goal of using testing as a way to improve learning efficiency
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include mentoring women in CS and
actively organizing workshops and seminars in the interdisciplinary area.