* 1422029
* SHF:small:Functional geometry and the Traite de Lutherie: Domain-specific languages for computational thinking about the science of art
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Harry Mairson, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,808.00

Title: SHF: Small: Domain-specific Languages for Computational Thinking about
Functional Geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to design,
implement, and experiment with a domain-specific programming language for
functional geometry with applications to describing the design of string
instruments: violins, violas, and especially violoncellos. The approach is based
on the use of computational thinking for historical reconstructions of
seventeenth-century geometrical and instrument construction techniques. The
intellectual merits of the proposal are the rigorous design of the domain
specific language, descriptive insight and abstraction of the above techniques,
an archival representation for describing basic data structures tailored to
string instruments, and language constructs for generating drawings. Because
instrument making, from conception to construction, is so founded on algorithmic
method, computational thinking is a natural rubric for organizing design, and
creating a hierarchy of techniques that give order to the decomposition of the
plane into an instrument form, and to the ancillary geometric problems that are
solved with ruler-and-compass constructions. This work is integrated with
building violoncellos, connecting the historical and conceptual with the
practical. The underlying domain-specific language, as an added and beneficial
impact, may also be useful for teaching principles of geometry at a middle- or
high-school level. The project's broader significance and importance are in
providing a foundation for a descriptive tool for analyzing the evolution of
instrument designs over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The domain-specific language
is, at its core, a ruler-and-compass programming language for doing geometric
constructions. Higher-order procedures in the language, can be used to abstract
over canonical geometric constructions at the "assembly language" level of
ruler-and-compass steps, providing an abstract, yet fully functional description
of how these outlines were historically conceived. These higher-order procedures
may capture not only technical, but conceptual patterns of the design process.
The overall goal is to provide computational thinking in the context of a
classic, specialized architectural domain, that of string instruments.