* 1422341
* CHS: Small: C3DaR - Collection, Creation, and Collaboration for Engineering Design and Reflection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Karthik Ramani, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Innovation is now recognized as critical to economic growth and international
competitiveness. While prototyping, manufacturing and even engineering work are
routinely outsourced to foreign markets, design remains a key output of the
nation. It is therefore imperative to improve the innovative capacity of
designers, particularly those in engineering, through new design concepts,
methods and tools to support transformative and creative design thinking. The
goal of this project is to develop and test a digital platform for early design
called C3DaR (Collection, Creation and Collaboration for Engineering Design and
Reflection). C3DaR will transform the creative process of early design for
engineering by applying a computer-as-partner paradigm in which the system
becomes as an active contributor to the partnership between designers, artifacts
and media. The research, education and dissemination efforts conducted as part
of this project will greatly facilitate a paradigm shift in design to improve
our nation?s creative design capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early design for
engineering is characterized by informal, unstructured and heavily collaborative
work processes involving multiple participants, disparate forms of
representational media and a plethora of interactions between designers and
artifacts. To explore and evaluate novel ways to support design, the project
includes three research streams, corresponding to the 3 Cs in C3DaR.
&lt;br/&gt;(i) Collection incorporates mechanisms to help designers gather
materials in the early stages of the creative process. Examples of proposed
mechanisms include web browser integration for collecting inspirational
material, design scrapbooking for composing content into multimedia montages and
diagramming for organizing and recording textual and hierarchical ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Creation encompasses techniques to help designers to make and
modify design artifacts. Examples of such techniques include textual and visual
prompting to guide the designer's sketching process, integration with a naive
physics engine to enable an intuitive sketch-to-life design approach and auto-
completion of 2D sketches to enable rapid content creation. &lt;br/&gt;(iii)
Collaboration includes mechanisms to enable multiple designers to coordinate
their combined efforts while avoiding interference and maximizing their
productivity. Examples include allowing social-media-like discussion, tagging
and voting for design artifacts, motion gestures and annotation to facilitate
expressing dynamic behavior and integrated visual conflict resolution techniques
to coordinate the team. &lt;br/&gt;The contribution of this project is to
develop and test a radically new early design process for engineering that is
scaffolded by, as well as closely intertwined with, digital media.