* 1422324
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Techniques for Several Geometric Problems Arising in Biomedical Imaging Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jinhui Xu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 480,349.00

Recent progress in biomedicine has heavily relied on computer science
technology. As the territory of biomedicine is rapidly enlarging, more powerful
computational techniques are needed to foster its continuous growth. This
project is for developing efficient computer algorithms for a set of geometric
problems arising in several biomedical imaging applications. Particularly, it
will design algorithms for three challenging problems (as well as their related
problems): (1) generalizations of Voronoi diagram (which is a fundamental
structure in geometry) called Clustering Induced Voronoi Diagram (CIVD), (2)
general forms of matching in geometric settings based on Earth Mover's Distance
(EMD), and (3) uniform framework for various types of constrained clustering
problems. Problem (1) is for developing a mathematical model for understanding
the interaction of dendritic cells and T cells in the immune system. Problem (2)
is motivated by a medical imaging application of combining anatomic and
functional images of moving organs for better imaging quality. Problem (3) aims
to achieve better accuracy in image classifications by using a priori knowledge.

This project will use computational geometry techniques to develop novel
algorithms for the proposed problems. It will introduce several general
algorithmic techniques to the area of computational geometry, enriching and
prodding its further development. These algorithmic techniques are also likely
to be used in other areas, such as machine learning, computer vision,
information security, data mining, and pattern recognition, and bring new ideas
to these areas. This project could lead to several long term impacts. It could
potentially help understanding the immune function and dysregulation in cancer,
improving our ability to recovering fast organ motion (e.g., cardiac and lung
motion), and achieving more accurate image classification in various
applications.