* 1422338
* CSR: Small: Software Infrastructure for Online Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 468,727.00

Complex analytics frameworks -- distributed systems that continuously extract
information from large, often dynamic data sources -- sit at the core of a large
class of increasingly important applications, ranging from information retrieval
and search, to large-scale scientific data analyses. A common feature of many of
these frameworks is their offline nature -- the underlying models are only
periodically updated, typically through expensive computations, in an offline
manner (e.g., update their recommender system models weekly to monthly). In
contrast, many emerging applications (e.g., sentiment analysis and
personalization) require online analytics, often relying on expensive
computational methods. These applications are constantly running (i.e., they do
not start and stop at prescribed times), they are required to respond to real-
time queries even if the answer is approximate, they operate on currently
available data as opposed to collecting all possible data, and they must adapt
to available computational resources. A coherent software system targeted
specifically to this important class of online learning applications would
significantly enhance the state-of-the-art. This project aims to develop a
software infrastructure comprising application programming interfaces (APIs),
runtime systems, and domain-specific optimizations for scalable online
analytics. This work has broad and deep impact on applications in domains
ranging from commercial to scientific data analyses. In commercial domains, such
systems would be used to analyze real time data feeds from social networks,
economic transactions, and other dynamic information sources. In scientific
domains, such systems could be used to analyze data from astrophysical
observations, high-throughput instrumentation, and densely sensed environments.

Scalable analytics are among the most important current challenges facing large-
scale distributed systems. To address these challenges, the project has the
following specific aims: (i) development of suitable domain-specific
abstractions, along with an API for specification of analytics dataflows; (ii)
support for dynamic updates and user-interaction geared towards scalable
analytics applications; (iii) development of a runtime system infrastructure for
scheduling, resource management, performance, and fault tolerance; (iv)
development of a kernel library of online versions of important analytics
operations; and (v) validation through exemplar applications. Each of these
goals represent significant intellectual challenges from theoretical and
systems-building viewpoints.