* 1422696
* CHS: Small: Context-aware mobile systems to facilitate synergistic face-to-face interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Quentin Jones, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2018
* USD 515,544.00

Cyber-Human Systems hold the promise of seamless mobile social navigation, where
people on the move are able to make connections to the right people at the right
place and the right time. Chance encounters, the unintended meeting between
people unfamiliar with each other, are rare but powerful incidents that offer
people an opportunity to develop new social ties. Building new social ties and
thus increasing social capital is important because individuals embedded in
richly connected social environments are, for example, better able to handle
personal setbacks, such as financial failures and illness, and to provide social
support for others. While we often are surrounded by potential new friends it is
problematic to identify who they are and how to connect with them. Context-aware
systems have the potential to mediate such chance encounters and, hence,
transform the way we make new social ties. The goal of this project is to
understand the dynamics of chance encounters and to develop, deploy and test
mechanisms for systems that can facilitate such chance encounters leading to new
social ties.

The project has two phases. In the first, the investigators will conduct a
prospective cohort study (n=500), in which two cohorts of freshmen students will
be followed over 18 months, exploring both the extent of changes in their social
networks that are the result of chance encounters and how formation of new ties
might be enhanced by a context-aware system. A combination of ethnographic and
experience sampling studies will provide insights into the dynamics of chance
encounters and the contextual variables that influence people's motivations for
meeting others when on-the-go, such as the nature of place; number of people
nearby (social context); the individual user context, e.g., current activity
(cognitive context); the nature of the relationship between two potentially
matched people, e.g., shared attributes (relational context), and privacy
concerns. The second phase involves design research to generate innovative
mechanisms and designs for systems that will be validated in field use. Findings
from these studies will identify ways that contextual data can identify
opportunities for chance encounters and support serendipitous introductions,
fulfilling the CHS missions of creating systems that enhance human capabilities
and advance society's cohesiveness.