* 1422540
* CIF: Small: Blind Channel Estimation and Solving Bilinear Equations by Lifting and Factoring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Justin Romberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/2017
* USD 149,999.00

The focus of this research is a fundamental problem in the acquisition and
transmission of data: blind channel estimation. The goal is to develop novel and
widely applicable methods for making communications and imaging robust against
the types of perturbations that occur when a wireless signal travels through the
air between cell phone and base station, an image passes through a uncalibrated
lens, or a voice reverberates off of the walls and floors of a room. One of the
most challenging aspects of these problems is that these perturbations cause the
observations to be non-linear functions of the unknown variables. This research
program will develop a new framework for solving and analyzing the robustness of
the solutions to special classes of bilinear inverse problems, and then
specialize these results to particular problems in blind channel estimation.

Specifically, the investigator will study a new method for blind channel
estimation based on recently developed techniques for solving constrained
bilinear inverse problems. This methodology, called ?lifting? in the literature,
recasts the bilinear problem as a linear matrix recovery problem with a rank
constraint. This recasting allows the analytical and computational techniques
from the large body of work on low rank matrix recovery to be unleashed,
yielding new (very effective and scalable) algorithms for solving these
classical problems, and a new mathematical understanding about when they can be
tractably solved. The proposed framework will also be extended to the case where
there are multiple sources present, which need to be separated as the channels
are estimated.