* 1422335
* Complex Dynamics and Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/31/2013,06/30/2017
* Sarah Koch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 104,068.00

A major goal in dynamics is to understand moduli spaces. The most successful
endeavor in this regard has been the study of the moduli space of quadratic
polynomials, which contains the Mandelbrot Set, a fundamental object in the
subject. One hopes to understand other moduli spaces to a similar extent, like
the moduli space of rational maps of a given degree. Understanding the analytic
and algebraic structure of these spaces is quite challenging; one reason is that
few of the one-dimensional tools carry over to higher dimensions. The projects
outlined in this proposal incorporate topology, algebraic geometry, complex
analysis, Teichmueller theory, and the nondynamical moduli spaces of curves (and
various compactifications thereof) to better understand complex dynamical
systems (in one and several variables) and their associated dynamical moduli
spaces from both analytic and algebraic points of view. The projects are
organized into three main topics, and each topic is related in some way to
Thurston's Topological Characterization of Rational Maps, a central theorem in
the field of complex dynamics. The research program outlined in this proposal
weaves Thurston's theorem into these research topics in a variety of different
ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems are all around us: the motion of
the planets, the weather, the stock market, the ecosystems in which we live.
These systems depend on a variety of parameters, and as these parameters change,
the corresponding system is affected. Understanding how dynamical systems change
with different parameters is a very complicated and delicate question which is
not even completely understood in the simplest of mathematical models. The
research outlined in this proposal forges new connections between different
parameter spaces (or moduli spaces) associated to certain dynamical systems,
which will be exploited to further understand the spaces in question. One
dynamical system that arises across different scientific fields is Newton's
Method, an essential tool for solving equations that is employed by scientists
in every field. There are still many fundamental questions surrounding this
dynamical system (in one and several variables) that have yet to be understood.
Progress on the research outlined in the proposal has implications for this
dynamical system in certain cases.