* 1422133
* SHF: Small: Secure Compilation of Advanced Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Amal Ahmed, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2017
* USD 507,812.00

Title: SHF: Small: Secure Compilation of Advanced
Languages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced programming languages, based on
dependent types, enable program verification alongside program development, thus
making them an ideal tool for building fully verified, high assurance software.
Recent dependently typed languages that permit reasoning about state and effects
---such as Hoare Type Theory (HTT) and Microsoft's F*---are particularly
promising and have been used to verify a range of rich security policies, from
state-dependent information flow and access control to conditional
declassification and information erasure. But while these languages provide the
means to verify security and correctness of high-level source programs, what is
ultimately needed is a guarantee that the same properties hold of compiled low-
level target code. Unfortunately, even when compilers for such advanced
languages exist, they come with no formal guarantee of correct compilation, let
alone any guarantee of secure compilation---i.e., that compiled components will
remain as secure as their high-level counterparts when executed within arbitrary
low-level contexts. This project seeks to demonstrate how to build realistic yet
secure compilers. This is a notoriously difficult problem. On one hand, a secure
compiler must ensure that low-level contexts cannot launch any "attacks" on the
compiled component that would have been impossible to launch in the high-level
language. On the other hand, a realistic compiler cannot simply limit the
expressiveness of the low-level target language to achieve the security goal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
of a powerful new proof architecture for realistic yet secure compilation of
dependently typed languages that relies on contracts to ensure that target-level
contexts respect source-level security guarantees and leverages these contracts
in a formal model of how source and target code may interoperate. The broader
impact is that this research will make it possible to compose high-assurance
software components into high-assurance software systems, regardless of whether
the components are developed in a high-level programming language or directly in
assembly. Compositionality has been a long-standing open problem for certifying
systems for high-assurance. Hence, this research has potential for enormous
impact on how high-assurance systems are built and certified. The specific goal
of the project is to develop a verified multi-pass compiler from Hoare Type
Theory to assembly that is type preserving, correct, and secure. The compiler
will include passes that perform closure conversion, heap allocation, and code
generation. To prove correct compilation of components, not just whole programs,
this work will use an approach based on defining a formal semantics of
interoperability between source components and target code. To guarantee secure
compilation, the project will use (static) contract checking to ensure that
compiled code is only run in target contexts that respect source-level security
guarantees. To carry out proofs of compiler correctness, the project will
develop a logical relations proof method for Hoare Type Theory.