* 1422826
* EAGER_IDBR: Development of a Two-Photon Circular Dichroism Spectrometer with Extreme Spectral Capabilities in the far UV (FUV-TPCD)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Florencio Hernandez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,010.00

During the last three decades electronic circular dichroism (ECD) spectroscopy
has been the standard technique for the study of the conformational and
physicochemical properties of optically active biomolecules such as proteins,
nucleic acids and neurotransmitters, in solutions and at interfaces. The method
presents important intrinsic limitations for the study of chiral molecules in
solution and in inhomogeneous media in the far UV (FUV), a spectral region where
important structural/conformational information can be obtained. In the FUV, the
one-photon absorption (OPA) of standard aqueous buffer solutions and common
solvents and the scattering present in inhomogeneous samples mask the ECD signal
of chiral molecules, interfering with the acquisition of key information. In
order to surmount the existent barriers, an analogous nonlinear approach based
on two-photon absorption (TPA) has been proposed, i.e. two-photon circular
dichroism (TPCD). The development of the novel TPCD spectrometer with spectral
capability in the FUV (FUV-TPCD) will help expand the understanding of vital
chiral biological molecules and macromolecules (amino acids, nucleotides,
neurotransmitters, peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids), their interactions,
dynamic changes, and mode of action in fundamental processes as never before. In
addition, FUV-TPCD could assist chemist and engineers in the understanding of
the properties of optically active asymmetric catalysts and novel chiral
metamaterials, among others. Fulfilling the NSF mission, this project
contemplates the training of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as the
promotion of physical sciences to high school students and teachers in the
central Florida area. This project also promotes inclusiveness through the
specific involvement of members of underrepresented groups, i.e. three females
and two Hispanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
expand the spectral capability of the TPCD spectrometer down to the FUV and set
the bases for the development of a fully automated, compact, and robust FUV-TPCD
spectrometer that would allow to perform structural and conformational analysis
of key chiral biological systems in a region of the electromagnetic spectrum
inaccessible by existent ECD spectrometers. To validate the proposed instrument
in the FUV, the four main aromatic amino acids (Tryptophan, Phenylalanine,
Histidine and Tyrosine) will be used as model compounds. The rationale behind
our primary goal is that the development and assessment of a tabletop FUV-TPCD
spectrometer will set the bases for the construction of a fully automated,
compact and robust spectrometer that could be commercialized and implemented in
other labs, thus becoming accessible to a broad community of scientists in
biology, chemistry, optics and nanosciences. Dissemination will be accomplished
through facility tours offered to representatives of leader companies
specialized in circular dichorism, development of new Wikibooks in FUV-TPCD,
presentations at national and international meetings and through scientific
publications, creating a unique instrument, open-access to potential users in
central Florida through collaborations, and using the outreach program (BIOTEC)
to reach the general public in central Florida. This award is made jointly by
the Instrument Development for Biological Research program (IDBR) in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate: Biology) and the Chemical
Measurements and Imaging program (CMI) in the Division of Chemistry
(Directorate: Math and Physical Sciences).