* 1422198
* THE CROWD & THE CLOUD: Citizen Science, Big Data and the Democratization of Research
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Waleed Abdalati, Geoff Haines-Stiles Productions
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2017
* USD 2,985,610.00

This media and research project will develop and study the use of new media,
broadcast television, and social networks to introduce Citizen Science to a
national audience, and motivate their direct involvement and participation.
Project deliverables will include: four nationally-distributed public TV
programs hosted by Waleed Abdalati, Director of CIREs at the University of
Boulder and former NASA Chief Scientist; online videos for training and outreach
of citizen science partners; digital engagement via social media; and a custom-
designed application ('2nd screen app') that enables users to obtain additional
informational content, share information, and connect with other viewers. The
evaluation and research study will build new knowledge on how these deliverables
can motivate the public to become citizen science participants.

The investigators estimate the four television programs will reach approximately
80% of U.S. television households. In addition, videos and other content will be
distributed through channels such as iTunes, Hulu, Netflix, and social media.
Target audiences will include the general public, citizen science activists, and
professional scientists. Underrepresented groups will be reached through special
Google Hangouts, and professional societies such as SACNAS and AGU. The research
components of the project will provide evidence on how traditional researchers
respond to citizen science, and explore the deliverables' use as recruitment
tools for citizen science projects and impacts on viewers' attitudes, behaviors,
and skills related to citizen science. Data will be collected from multiple
sources, including online surveys, in-person focus groups, and analyses of
users' online postings. Retrospective surveys will be administered to explore
changes in behavior regarding whether respondents have increased their
interaction with professional scientists, or participated in citizen science
initiatives. A quasi-experimental study will be conducted to assess the value
added by the 2nd screen app.