* 1423612
* "Making" STEM Relevant in Underserved Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Charles De Leone, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2016
* USD 296,719.00

Many communities across the country are developing "maker spaces," environments
that combine physical fabrication equipment, social communities of people
working together, and educational activities for learning how to design and
create objects. Increasingly, maker spaces and maker technologies are being
designed to provide extended learning opportunities for school-aged young
people. Unfortunately, few youth from under-represented populations have had the
opportunity to participate in these maker spaces, and many communities do not
have the resources to establish facilities dedicated to making activities. This
project, a collaboration of faculty at California State University, San Marcos
and San Diego County Office of Education, the Vista Unified School District, and
the San Diego Fab Lab, is a feasibility study that will work to address these
needs by implementing and evaluating a pilot Mobile Making program in an
underserved youth population. It will bring Making to four after-school programs
in underserved communities in San Diego by using a van to take both equipment
and undergraduate student mentors to program sites. At these sites, between 50%
and 90% of the students are Hispanic or Latino and between 40% and 90% are
eligible for free or reduced price lunch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project employs a research-based approach to the design and implementation of
the Mobile Making program, coupled with an evidenced-based plan for developing a
model for future dissemination. Project objectives are: increasing the
participants' interest, self-efficacy, and perception of the relevance of
Making/STEM in everyday life; identifying and overcoming challenges associated
with a Mobile Making program; developing a model for implementing and assessing
Mobile Making in underserved communities; and disseminating materials and guides
for practitioners. Development will be guided by five research-based principles
for design of out-of-school time programs in underserved communities: access to
resources; ethnically diverse near-peer leaders; authentic activities;
legitimacy within the community; and ongoing input from participants. To inform
program development and implementation, including continuous monitoring and
adjustment throughout the two-year initiative, the evaluation component will use
a mixed methods approach to study outcomes with respect to the students, their
parents and the undergraduate mentors. Future work will apply the lessons
learned in the project to guide implementations and study the model's
applicability in other informal education settings. The dissemination plan will
include publication of project findings, activities, practitioner's guides, and
the model for implementing making programs in underserved communities.