* 1423583
* CSR: Small: Adaptive Brink-of-Failure Memory Architectures for Future Technologies and Workloads
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Rajeev Balasubramonian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 499,096.00

Computer systems are expected to provide correct outputs at all times, and are
therefore operated very conservatively. Unfortunately, this conservativeness
leaves significant performance untapped. The objective of this project is to
capture this untapped performance by selectively relaxing the operating
conditions while recovering from any resulting errors. The project will
investigate if such a system is especially well suited for workloads that can
tolerate occasional errors. If successful, the project will yield technologies
that can boost performance and lay the foundations for new kinds of
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer systems have generous timing margins
so they can behave correctly in spite of parameter variations, voltage noise,
temperature fluctuations, etc. The project attempts to shave these timing
margins in the memory system to safely push its performance to its limits. The
memory controller can handle different parts of the memory system differently,
depending on the parameter variation that is observed. Such a capability will be
even more vital in future technologies where parameter variations will mandate
generous timing margins. When a memory controller operates on the brink of
failure, some errors are inevitable. To cope with such errors, the memory system
will be augmented with a tailor-made error correction system. The proposed
memory system will be an excellent fit for emerging "approximate computing"
workloads. In addition to simulation-based studies, the project will develop an
FPGA prototype of the adaptive memory controller and will carry out an empirical
analysis of timing margins in off-the-shelf commodity memory chips. The project
spans multiple layers of the system stack, with key innovations to the hardware,
operating system, programming models, and applications. The proposed work will
increase the community's understanding of parameter variation and the merits of
different approaches to exploit these variations. It will help create a new
class of promising applications. The project will also support the educational
mission at the University of Utah and various outreach efforts.