* 1423727
* Collaborative Research: Memory and Jury Deliberation: The Benefits and Cost of Collective Remembering
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* William Hirst, The New School
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 07/31/2018
* USD 282,106.00

Juries are the bedrock of the American judicial system. Six or twelve people
join together in a collaborative effort to arrive at a verdict. During
deliberation, jurors must not only come to a verdict based on the evidence
presented during the trial, but they must also remember the evidence. To a large
extent, jurors must rely on their own memory. Here, the assumption of the Courts
is that the collective memory of a jury is likely to lead to a better, more
complete recollection than any individual effort. The difficulty with this
position is that there is burgeoning psychological evidence indicating that
groups often remember less than the sum of what individuals are capable of
remembering. Moreover, extant research demonstrates that what one person says in
a conversation can alter the memory of other participants - by imposing
misleading information or inducing forgetting, for example. Although both types
of conversational effects can affect subsequent decision-making, it is possible
that, even more critically, both types can be mitigated in certain
circumstances. To this end, the present research explores the way jury
deliberation might reshape the memories jurors have of the evidence presented
during the trial, the effect any change in memory might have on the verdict of
the jury, and the means of mitigating these deliberation effects.

The research involves seven experiments employing a mock jury methodology. They
will examine whether (1) research concerning collaborative remembering applies
to jury deliberations; (2) the emergent consensus story of a jury reflects the
conversational dynamics consistent with what is known about conversational
remembering; (3) the verdict of a jury can be traced to these conversational
influences on memory; (4) the conversational influences on memory are a function
of the composition of the jury; and (5) ways exist to mitigate these potentially
negative conversational effects through instruction or use of mnemonic
technology.