* 1423928
* Collaborative Research: Institution, Development, and Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* John Gerring, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,812.00

It is generally presumed that when rulers are constrained by law, when they are
accountable to broad electorates, when personal security and property rights are
assured, adn when capable bureaucracies are responsive to elected officials,
good things will follow. But how do we know this is true? And how might we know
which sorts of favorable outcomes of these institutional features is likely to
foster? Work on these topics has been constrained by the absence of fine-grained
measure of democracy and governance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the problem by enlisting a new database, Varieties of Democracy
(V-Dem), that measures various aspects of democarcy and governance-including
electoral contestation, rule of law, civil liberty, inclusion, decentralization,
and legislative primacy-at a highly disaggregated level for all sizable
countries in the world from 1900 to 2012. With this immense database at its
disposal, the researchers will test the relationship between these institutions
and outcomes such as economic growth, infrastructure, health, and education over
the past century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of the project include
enhancing current understandings of the impact of political institutions on
development outcomes. This should benefit governments, international
organizations, and NGOs that aim to promote economic and social development
around the world by providing guidance about the kinds of institutional
interventions that tend to work, backfire, or have no effect. Also, the data
will be provided to development agencies, policy-makers, and scholars. All the
data will be freely available in a variety of interactive infterfaces on the
project web site (v-dem.net). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a BIG DATA project.
However, unlike many big data projects, it is guided by theory. It will use
innovative Bayesian techniques as well as case studies to help examine the
causal mechanisms that are behind the relationships that are found by the
analysis. Where appropriate other techniques will be used to examine the panel
data such as Granger causalit, etc. This project will then allow for the testing
of a number of current theories in political science about the interaction
between institutions, democracy and development.