* 1423250
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Forwarding and Caching for Data-Centric Networks: Theory and Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Edmund Yeh, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Two fundamental trends in networking are clearly visible. First, the bulk of
network traffic today, and of its projected enormous growth, consists mainly of
content disseminated to multiple users. Second, network content is accessed
increasingly in mobile wireless environments with dynamic and unreliable channel
conditions. Traditional network protocols, designed originally for point-to-
point communication over static wired networks, are fundamentally ill suited for
such scenarios. Motivated by these trends, this project will develop dynamic and
distributed algorithms which can fully exploit network resources (both bandwidth
and storage) for efficient and robust content dissemination under changing
network conditions.

This project builds on recent active research efforts in data-centric
networking, which places information content, rather than source-destination
pairs, at the center of the network architecture. While there have been a number
of significant results in data-centric networking research, the central problem
of the joint design and optimization of dynamic caching and forwarding
algorithms has yet to be thoroughly studied. This project will study the
fundamental limits of caching and forwarding, as well as the design of practical
and robust algorithms for optimizing the use of bandwidth and storage in data-
centric content delivery. Unlike many existing works on centralized algorithms
for static caching, this project will develop scalable, distributed, dynamic
algorithms that can address large-scale caching and forwarding under changing
content, user demands and network conditions.

To achieve this goal, the project will take two complementary approaches. The
first approach is based on a stochastic model for distributed caching and
forwarding recently developed by the PIs. This approach significantly expands on
classical backpressure-based routing techniques to incorporate caching within a
unified framework, leading to new algorithms which maximize user demand rate
satisfied by the network. The second approach is based on a flow-based
distributed convex optimization framework, in which content-specific routing and
caching are carried out on a distributed node-by-node basis to minimize a global
cost objective such as delay.

This project addresses both practical and theoretical issues, and consists of
the following main thrusts: (1) the design of jointly optimal forwarding and
caching algorithms for minimizing delay; (2) the design of scalable, robust,
hierarchical dynamic caching and forwarding algorithms which operate with
dynamically adjusted name resolutions; (3) the development of algorithms which
combine dynamic caching and forwarding with congestion control for fairness and
enhanced performance; (4) the exploration of coding techniques in storage and
transmission for obtaining practical advantages in performance and reliability,
as well as for enabling the study of fundamental performance limits in caching
and forwarding; (5) the development of low-complexity, dynamic forwarding and
caching algorithms delivering lower user delay and greater resilience to multi-
user interference and channel fading in mobile wireless environments; and (6)
development of algorithms for querying and caching which lead to optimal
decision making in a sensing context.

The broader significance of this work will include: (1) direct and long-term
impact on network architectures for big data applications used in national
security, commercial enterprise, scientific exploration and research, health
services, and other important social projects; (2) impact on undergraduate and
graduate education, with particular emphasis on involving female and minority
students, through a planned course segment on 'theory and algorithms for data-
centric networking' and active hands-on projects involving testbed investigation
and validation; (3) enhancement of infrastructure for research and education
through active partnering with other university departments, government research
institutions and industry; and (4) broad dissemination to enhance scientific and
technological understanding by participation in multi-disciplinary conferences
and workshops, and exposure to broader media.