* 1423124
* III: Small: DBMS+: Management System for the Next-Generation Database
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jun Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

A large number of data processing systems---including NoSQL systems, column-
stores, MapReduce, data stream managers, complex event processors, in-memory
databases, and others---have been developed in recent years. It can be hard for
an application developer to pick one system when the needs of her application
match the features of multiple of these systems. The choice becomes considerably
harder when different components of an application fit the features of different
systems. Considerable manual effort goes into creating and tuning such multi-
system applications. Current applications are coupled tightly with individual
systems, which makes dealing with changes to application execution requirements
or workload characteristics nontrivial. Moreover, an application's data and
workload properties may change over time, often in unpredictable and bursty
ways. Consequently, the system that is best for an application can change over
time. Adapting to change can be hard when application development is coupled
tightly with any individual system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
design, implement, and evaluate a new breed of Database Management Systems that
is termed DBMS+. While conventional Database Management Systems (DBMS) support
applications with a single execution engine and a storage engine, a DBMS+
integrates and manages multiple compute and storage systems. An application
specifies its execution requirements on aspects like performance, availability,
consistency, change, and cost to the DBMS+ declaratively. For all requests
(e.g., queries) made by the application, the DBMS+ will select the execution
plan that meets the application's requirements best. A novel aspect of the
execution plan in a DBMS+ is that the plan includes the selection of one or more
specialized systems. The optimizer in the DBMS+ is responsible for determining
the most suitable execution plan, which includes choosing the most suitable
compute and storage systems for a given application and its requirements. The
DBMS+ approach has the potential to address the hurdles that application
developers and system administrators face from the vast and growing number of
specialized systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, see the
project web site at: http://www.cs.duke.edu/starfish/cyclops/