* 1423322
* NeTS:  Small: Collaborative Research: Tools for Design and Analysis of Provably Correct Networking Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Alexander Sprintson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 351,441.00

Networking and telecommunications infrastructure relies on many different
network protocols which interact to provide communication services. Software
that enables telecommunications and the Internet is inherently difficult to
create, given the number and complexity of network protocols, diverse
heterogeneous systems, and various administrative policies that must be
accommodated. This complexity significantly increases the likelihood of
implementation errors, which can cause network and security vulnerabilities
(e.g., the well-publicized Heartbleed bug). The project will address these
issues through the creation of a new programming language that supports the
synthesis of network protocols and their corresponding stack through a correct-
by-construction style of programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will investigate new transformational methods and tools for the design,
analysis, construction, verification, configuration, and deployment of provably
correct, safe, and efficient networking systems, rooted in the style and theory
of systems programming languages. Specific objectives include (i) the
investigation and analysis of abstractions present in the message layer, state
machine, system interfaces, and configuration tools of network protocols, and
(ii) the reification of these abstractions in a new systems programming language
that supports the definition of provably correct and efficient communication
stacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails the analysis of software and
hardware abstractions in modern networking and communication systems in order to
support the design of programming language features. The project will identify
correct by construction techniques that enable the design and synthesis of
efficient systems that are immune to broad classes of vulnerabilities based on
common programmer mistakes. Furthermore, the project will produce a language,
compiler and runtime system accessible to a large community of researchers and
engineers without requiring specialized expertise in formal
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to understanding the
foundation of the design of provably correct and secure computer and networking
systems. The methodology developed in the course of this project will facilitate
rapid development of vulnerability-free systems and will greatly benefit
researchers, industry developers, and educators. The project's results will help
improve networking system safety, security, and attack resilience. The project
will make a significant contribution to the broader areas of axiomatic
programming, programming methodologies, and formal methods. The project's
results, as well as the developed models, testbeds, and software, will be
disseminated to the research community and networking industry under an open
source license.