* 1423663
* CIF: Small: Structured Signal Recovery from Noisy Measurements via Convex Programming: A Framework for Analyzing Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Babak Hassibi, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With the advent of ubiquitous sensing (multi-modal sensors, imaging systems and
cameras, etc.), various complex social networks, and the deluge of health-care
data (DNA sequences, micro-arrays, etc.), society is now officially in the era
of Big Data. In such a setting, the ability to systematically and efficiently
derive structured models, and recover reliable and actionable information, from
barrages of high dimensional data will have far-reaching impact on engineering
challenges and on everyday life. Unfortunately, the data is often noisy,
inaccurate, or partially missing. This research will develop a comprehensive
theory to assess the performance of a very wide class of algorithms designed for
this purpose which are based on convex programming techniques. Such performance
guarantees will assist practitioners in a wide array of applications in signal
processing, machine learning, statistics and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years has witnessed some spectacular
theoretical and algorithmic advances in convex optimization and compressed
sensing that have changed how large noisy data sets are handled. Despite these
successes, key challenges remain, including the need for a comprehensive theory
that accurately predicts the performance of the algorithms and goes beyond the
customary ?order-wise? performance guarantees. The investigators will pursue an
ambitious research program to give exact performance evaluations for a wide
variety of convex-optimization-based signal recovery methods, including the
classical LASSO and its variants. The framework can deal with a wide array of
signal-to-noise ratios, different measurement matrix ensembles, and a variety of
cost functions and signal structures. The techniques draw upon a host of ideas
in high-dimensional geometry, statistics, and signal processing and are the
culmination of a flurry of activity by several different research communities.