* 1423371
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linking Changing Uses of Property with Urban Transformations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Nathan Ela, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 24,690.00

During periods of social and economic stress, how do organizations collaborate
to rework rules and norms of property law so that unused land can be activated
as a common resource? And why, even when conditions might seem ripe, do some
such collaborations not bear fruit? This project contributes to ongoing
interdisciplinary research on urban resilience, and sheds new light on how
people bring about and govern common resources in urban settings. It does so by
investigating how people and organizations in one of America?s largest cities
have periodically organized, and dissolved, regimes for governing land as a
common resource. Long term agreements concerning use deploy urban resources
flexibly to allow communities to address changing priorities. Governance of
common resources has long been a focus of concern across the social sciences;
little scholarship on urban resilience and property regimes is theoretically
informed by historical evidence. The project combines archival and ethnographic
methods to explore connections between urban farming and property law in
Chicago, between the 1890s and today. The ethnographic component includes
collaborative research with policy organizations. The final part develops two
contemporary case studies as points of comparison.

By learning from past episodes of urban resilience and ongoing land-use
experimentation, the project aims to inform future urban policy and planning. It
will ultimately propose, through a policy report possible institutional designs
for governing urban land as a common productive resource. The report will be
useful for cities as they consider land redevelopment to address changing needs.
In addition, the project will train students in the social sciences.