* 1423655
* Amazon Adventure: A Giant Screen Film, Educational Outreach and Research About 2D, 3D &amp; Dome Formats Using a Gaming Assessment Tool
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mina Johnson-Glenberg, Pacific Science Center Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,999,956.00

For over two decades NSF has been investing in the development and evaluation of
giant screen films for viewing by audiences in science centers and museums.
These have been highly successful in terms of audiences reached and project
evaluations that indicate their impact on learning. Less well understood is how
the unique attributes of giant screen films (e.g., "immersion" and "presence")
affect learners in ways that differ from other film formats. This integrated
research and media project will contribute to that knowledge base. Project
deliverables will include a giant screen film that tells the story of the
discovery of biological mimicry (the critical proof for natural selection and in
turn, evolution) through the life story of Henry Bates and his travels through
the Amazon rainforest more than 150 years ago; 2D dome, and 2D flat format
versions; live interactive science demonstrations and educational resources; and
workshops for ISE professionals. The film and the related outreach via science
centers, social media, and the web are expected to reach large public audiences;
workshops and web resources will reach ISE professionals nationally. A strategy
for reaching underrepresented audiences through science museums and partnerships
with educational societies is a part of the broadening participation
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on results of an NSF-funded workshop in
which researchers, evaluators, and filmmakers began to develop a research agenda
to provide evidence about giant screen attributes and their impacts on learning,
the research component of this project will focus on the differences in learner
knowledge among the various film formats, their unique attributes, and whether
format plays a role in science interest and science identity. A baseline study
will be conducted to begin gathering evidence on how each of these formats
affects learning. Data on audience knowledge gains, interest, and science
identity will be collected using a novel tablet-based game-like assessment pre-
film viewing, immediately post viewing, and in a later follow-up. These baseline
data will inform follow-on research that, over time, can better explain the
unique impacts on learning of the giant screen format.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project partners include the Pacific Science Center, SK
Films, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rutgers University, and Arizona State
University.