* 1423879
* Application of Siderophile Elements to the Study of the Chemical Structure and Mixing History of the Oceanic Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2019
* USD 280,000.00

The oceanic mantle may comprise more than 60% of the mass of the Earth. The
modern oceanic mantle is known to be chemically and isotopically heterogeneous,
primarily documented through studies of mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORB). The
processes that resulted in the creation of the heterogeneities were most likely
dominated by a combination of partial melting (melt removal), metasomatism
(melt/fluid addition) and incorporation of recycled crust (via subduction). The
relative impacts of each of these processes, the timing of the processes, and
the length scales of the resulting heterogeneities remain topics of considerable
debate. Clarifying the causes, timing and spatial extent of chemical and
isotopic heterogeneities in the oceanic mantle is, therefore, critical for
refining our knowledge of the present bulk composition of this major terrestrial
reservoir, for achieving a more complete understanding of how the chemical and
isotopic composition of Earth's mantle evolved through time, and for assessing
the efficiency by which the oceanic mantle is convectively mixed today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle these issues, sections of the oceanic mantle
accessible in four ophiolite complexes (tectonically emplaced slivers of oceanic
lithosphere) will be studied. The targeted ophiolites range in age from 1.95
billion years old to 6 million years old. The study will primarily focus on
examining the absolute and relative abundances of siderophile (iron-loving)
elements in the mantle rocks exposed in these locations. The study will seek to
answer fundamental questions about the present and past oceanic mantle
including: 1) What is the geometry of long-term, exceptionally melt-depleted
portions of the oceanic mantle? 2) Do common oceanic mantle lithologies, such as
pyroxenites and dunites, have chemical compositions and sufficient volume to be
implicated in the generation of certain volcanic rocks with unusual
compositions, for example some Hawaiian lavas? 3) Have key geochemical
parameters in the oceanic mantle changed through time? If so, can they be
correlated with the rates of processes that may have acted on the mantle through
time. In addition to answering these questions about the chemical structure of
the oceanic mantle, comparison of data from ophiolites spanning nearly two
billion years will begin the process of documenting secular changes in the
chemical structure of this mantle.