* 1423215
* CSR: Small: Jouler: A Cross-Device Energy Management Framework for Smartphones
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Geoffrey Challen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 499,185.00

The goal of this project is to address the problem of short battery lifetimes,
which continue to frustrate users of smart phones. Existing approaches to
battery management are proving too inflexible to respond to the significant
variations in application program energy consumption, user behavior, charging
habits, and battery lifetime expectations that both define and complicate the
energy management problem. This level of diversity means that "one size fits
all" approaches are likely to fail, as are approaches that make broad
generalizations about applications or users: one user's favorite application may
cause unacceptable battery drain for another user. One user may be willing to
charge multiple times per day while another wants their phone to last all day.

The project research approaches the battery lifetime problem through a novel
energy management framework, named Jouler. Jouler is distinguished from other
efforts in three ways: First, Jouler is automated, removing the user from the
loop to reduce the burdensome and error-prone nature of manual energy
management. Second, Jouler is flexible, encapsulating energy management
strategies into policy modules that can be distributed through application
marketplaces and installed as needed by users. By separating energy management
policies from mechanisms, Jouler also enables innovation in energy management
algorithms, which can now be written by developers and evaluated like apps.
Third, Jouler attempts to provide a cross-device framework to allow energy
managers to work successfully across broad classes of smartphone devices with
different features. The educational and outreach activities of the project
include a new course on energy management, a yearly challenge contest to
increase interest in policy module development, and a new energy management
assignment augmenting a widely-used instructional operating system.