* 1423249
* TWC: Small: Accelerating Cryptographic Protocols with Reconfigurable Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Michael Walfish, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2019
* USD 497,997.00

This project is motivated by several observations. First, a number of
cryptographic protocols have recently made the transition from pure theory to
proof-of-concept instantiations. Second, in these instantiations, the remaining
obstacles to genuine practicality seem amenable to hardware acceleration. An
example is verifiable computation (one party is given assurance that another
computed correctly); in this kind of protocol, computations are represented
using a circuit formalism, and there are parallelizable cryptographic operations
(modular exponentiation, etc.). Other protocols, including multi-party
computation, functional encryption, etc., have analogous
overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given this motivation, the project explores the
development, optimization, and application of hybrid software and hardware
platforms for cryptographic protocols. The project is developing new techniques
for parallelization on reconfigurable hardware, by drawing on integrated circuit
design and testing methods; the project is also exploring hardware and software
interfaces that enable efficient interaction between software and hardware
accelerators. The methods include software and hardware design, implementation,
modeling performance and costs, and rigorous experimental and empirical
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results include a class of
cryptographic protocols (verifiable computation, multi-party computation,
functional encryption, etc.) suitable for practical use. The project's success
thus makes a range of computing applications safer, including cloud computing
and high assurance computing. Results are disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, and through code and experimental configurations released on a Web
site. The project includes undergraduate involvement in research.