* 1423279
* Integrating Software Engineering and  Human Error Models to Improve Software Quality
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Gursimran Walia, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 180,242.00

This research looks to improve software quality in a new way by assuming that
human error is a key cause of software defects. Research from cognitive
psychology is used to develop a deeper understanding of the human errors that
occur during the software development process and to develop techniques that
detect and prevent those errors early in the software development lifecycle.
Early elimination of mistakes will improve software quality and reduce overall
development cost. Through the application of human error research from
psychology, this work will improve developers? ability to identify, classify,
and eliminate software development errors and provide a solid structure and
theoretical basis upon which to build.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To effectively use
findings from human error research to improve software quality, this project has
three primary objectives. The first objective is to develop and empirically
validate a requirement error taxonomy. The inclusion of human error research
will ensure that the taxonomy is well-structured. Empirical evaluation with
developers will ensure the taxonomy is complete and useful. The second objective
is to use the taxonomy to build and empirically evaluate error-based software
development techniques. These detection and prevention techniques will
operationalize the error information into a format usable by developers. The
third objective is to develop tool support for the error-based techniques. The
use of human error research in this project will provide a more in-depth
understanding of the types of mistakes developers make during development. In
addition to its impacts on software quality, this project will also provide a
venue for software engineering researchers to interact with cognitive
psychologists, producing more diverse PhD students.&lt;br/&gt;ents.