* 1423578
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Conditions Under Which Nations Implement International Anti-Atrocity Laws
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Mark Berlin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 06/30/2016
* USD 21,629.00

Large bodies of research examine why states construct and ratify international
legal agreements. Yet relatively little research assesses the conditions under
which states are likely to go further and incorporate international legal rules
into their domestic laws. This study contributes to our understanding of why and
when states incorporate international accords into their legal systems through
examination of criminal prohibitions against genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and torture. These norms are designed to work primarily
through domestic courts, so in order to fulfill their function, states must pass
criminal laws that define and allow their courts to prosecute these offenses.
This research will produce a new, publicly available dataset on the worldwide
spread of anti-atrocity laws since World War II. Through analysis of the
patterns by which these laws have been adopted, this research will shed new
light on more general mechanisms that facilitate the implementation of
international law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study hypothesizes
that states are likely to implement anti-atrocity laws during large-scale
processes of criminal code reform, because such reforms empower legal experts to
identify and codify laws - like anti-atrocity laws - that they believe embody
how a modern criminal code should look. To test this argument against a variety
of alternatives drawn from the literatures on human rights and norm diffusion,
this study uses time-series statistical analyses of an original and
comprehensive dataset on the spread of national criminal laws against genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity, and torture since 1945. To verify and
further probe the causal mechanisms underlying the statistical results, this
study investigates a single case that is particularly puzzling for existing
theories, that is Guatemala's adoption of these laws in 1973.