* 1423373
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Analysis of the Production and Management of Astronomy's Big Data Sets
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Hugh Raffles, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 18,000.00

As we enter what has been referred to as the Age of Big Data, experts speculate
about the implications of shifting scientific paradigms and knowledge practices.
This project explores the valuation of data and how new models of
intelligibility and tools for making data coherent are being made and tested.
This research, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous
empirical fieldwork, examines specifically how astronomical data are produced,
managed, and circulated. Katheryn Detwiler, under the supervision of Dr. Hugh
Raffles of the New School University, will explore how resources for optimal
astronomical data collection are established, how massive datasets are produced
and managed in practice, and the effects of these data as they circulate. The
research will principally take place in the Atacama Desert, which hosts nearly
two thirds of the world's infrastructure for astronomical observation. The
researcher will detail the regulation of light and radio wave pollution in the
desert and, at one of the Atacama's largest observatories, will inquire into the
everyday work of transforming light waves into data. The project follows these
data as they circulate to far-flung datacenters, valuable for the astronomical
knowledge they generate and also as Big Data, a proving ground for new
techniques of data management and interpretation. This study has two broad aims:
1) to develop an understanding of the contemporary Atacama Desert as a site of
techno-scientific innovation; 2) to provide a detailed account of how narratives
associated with the Age of Big Data relate to the ways actors conceptualize and
work with massive data in lived, material practice. It proposes to study massive
data through ethnographic methods analyzing the specific relations from which
data emerge and those that data forge. The research will draw from the social
study of science and technology, media and communication theory, the
anthropology of value, and ethnographies of infrastructure and material
networks. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology, the project would help contribute to understanding and
improving upon how scientific data is disseminated to the public.