* 1423411
* CIF: Small: SPREADING PROCESSES OVER MULTILAYER AND INTERCONNECTED NETWORKS
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Caterina Scoglio, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 522,042.00

This project advances the boundaries of network theory by analyzing spreading
processes over multilayer and interconnected networks, which abound in nature
and man-made infrastructures, and about which many interesting questions remain
unanswered. Multilayer networks are an abstract representation where multiple
types of links exist among nodes. Interconnected networks are an abstract
representation where two or more simple networks, possibly with different and
separate dynamics, are coupled to each other. The rationale for this project is
that viral-spreading dynamics over multilayer and interconnected networks
exhibit behaviors that cannot be attributed to single-network characteristics
and play a highly relevant role in practice. The first part of the project
extends the concept of the epidemic threshold value, which determines the
conditions for outbreak, to the threshold curve for interconnected and
multilayer networks. This research further develops measures for quantification
of coupling strength in interconnected networks and seeks optimal
interconnection designs for them. The second part of the project aims at
predicting competitive spreading over multilayer networks and possible emergent
phenomena. This research analyzes transient dynamics and steady-state behavior
of multiple-virus competitive spreading in multilayer networks, and investigates
competition policy in a game-theoretic framework. This project will use rigorous
mathematical tools from network science, spectral graph theory, nonlinear
dynamics, stochastic processes, control theory, game theory, and optimization.

Successful completion of this project will greatly advance the state of the art
in network theory, with specific, relevant applications in communications and
information technologies leading to more efficient and robust design of these
complex networked systems. In a broader view, this research will contribute
positively to society through a better understanding of how to prevent large-
scale catastrophes, including cascading failures in power grids, financial
contagions in market trading, infectious disease pandemics, and outbreaks of
computer malware. Furthermore, the investigators will put forth significant
effort to involve students from under-represented groups, and disseminate
project outcomes in both general society and academia through publications,
webinars, and public webpages.