* 1423570
* CIF: Small: Sensors That Make Sense: Peak-Power, Energy, and Delay Constrained Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Ertem Tuncel, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 09/30/2017
* USD 280,717.00

Sensors are becoming omnipresent. A wide range of applications such as
environmental monitoring, smart metering, and remote monitoring of roads are
already making an extensive use of the sensor technology to measure and transmit
a diverse set of physical signals over noisy wireless channels. Over the next
decade, the number of machines and sensors connected to the Internet is expected
to explode, creating the so called Internet of Things (IoT). It is foreseen that
a significant portion of the quintillions of bytes of data that will be
generated every day by IoT will be processed and transmitted using complexity,
power, and energy constrained sensor nodes. For the sake of mathematical
analysis, these practical constraints are usually relaxed or completely ignored,
thereby simplifying the problem at hand, sometimes even to the extent that
allows one to obtain closed-form solutions. The main goal of this research
project is to question such simplifications commonly made among
information/communication theory researchers, and to try to formulate more
practically relevant problems which can still be analyzed
rigorously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical constraints above will be
solidified as zero-delay, peak-power-limited, and energy-distortion frameworks
and combinations thereof in a multi-user joint source-channel coding setting.
Preliminary analyses demonstrate that the solutions to the communication
problems in these frameworks are significantly different from their counterparts
in the classical infinite-delay average power-distortion framework. More
specifically, the best known coding schemes in the classical framework become
either provably suboptimal or not applicable at all. This research project will
strive for complete characterizations of fundamental limits of communication
under the aforementioned practical constraints.