* 1423913
* Doctoral Disseration Research: A multi-generational phonetic and sociolinguistic study of emphasis in Turoyo
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alan Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,115.00

Around the world, people are shifting their language use from the minority
language of their parents to the dominant language of the place they live.
Through this process, minority languages are being lost. This research project
will delve deep into the details of the sound system of Turoyo, an endangered
Neo-Aramaic language originally spoken in southeastern Turkey, to provide a
fine-grained analysis of one aspect of sound change in the language - the loss
of the secondary articulation known within Semitic studies as emphasis. The
project will study the language as spoken within a close-knit immigrant
community in northern New Jersey. The research question is: Is emphasis being
preserved within this community, and how are social factors affecting the
preservation or lack thereof? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of
two parts: (1) fifty interviews directed by a sociolinguistic questionnaire to
discover more about the culture's effect on the vitality of the language, and
(2) an extensive acoustic study involving three generations of speakers to
discover the acoustic correlates of emphasis in Turoyo, and how faithfully
emphasis is being passed on between generations. The results of these two
studies will be synthesized to determine what social factors correlate to the
most faithful preservation of emphasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important for three main reasons. First, this study will help in the goal to
come to a clear, cross-linguistic definition of emphasis. Second, understanding
the intricate details of this sound change in Turoyo will help linguists to
better understand sound change in contact situations in general. Third, the
community that will be studied is actively trying to pass the Turoyo language on
to their children, but they do not seem to be succeeding. Why is this the case?
This project will reveal the type of factors that are hindering this community
from reaching their goal, and this information can then be applied to similar
contact situations around the world.