* 1423915
* Collaborative Project: Enriching Security Curricula and Enhancing Awareness of Security in Computer Science and Beyond
* EHR,DGE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ping Chen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 146,078.00

This project is building our nation's capacity to develop a workforce well
trained in computer security. Faculty from the University of Houston, University
of Houston-Downtown and Texas Southern University, are developing interactive
courseware and conducting workshops on the latest machine learning, data mining,
natural language processing and statistics techniques as applied to computer
security. Courseware on security-critical domains such as wireless sensor
networks, and on key societal privacy and security concerns is also being
developed. Workshops are being organized to cross-fertilize security curricula
with related fields and topics and to develop a broad-based consensus on
courseware contents. In addition to interactive courseware for security courses,
materials are being developed to infuse security topics and increase awareness
of information assurance in the broader computer science curriculum and, beyond
computer science, in other STEM disciplines. A hypertextbook integrating the
courseware is being implemented.

Through faculty workshops, a community of information assurance education and
research scholars is being created. This community will build bridges between
information assurance professionals and professionals in related fields. The
workshops are training diverse groups of faculty from different types of
institutions.

Courseware and other results are available in the National Science Digital
Library as well as at a project-specific web site which also links to exemplary
courseware developed elsewhere. Courseware and workshops are being rigorously
evaluated.