* 1423407
* SHF: Small: Advanced Digital Signal Processing with DNA
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Marc Riedel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 408,000.00

This project will develop techniques for implementing computation in general,
and advanced digital signal processing operations in particular, using molecular
reactions in general, and DNA-based reactions in particular. Just as electronic
systems implement computation in terms of voltage (energy per unit charge), one
can conceive of molecular systems that compute in terms of chemical
concentrations (molecules per unit volume). This proposal will explore
techniques for implementing a variety of computational constructs such as logic,
memory, arithmetic, and signal processing. A technique called DNA strand
displacement is the target experimental chassis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
impetus for this research is not computation per se. Molecular computation will
never compete with conventional computers made of silicon integrated circuits
for tasks such as number crunching. Chemical systems are inherently slow and
messy, taking minutes or even hours to finish, and producing fragmented results.
Rather, the goal is to create "embedded controllers" - viruses and bacteria that
are engineered to perform useful molecular computation in situ where it is
needed, for instance in drug delivery and biochemical sensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The digital circuit design community has
unique expertise that can be brought to bear on the challenging design problems
encountered in synthetic biology. Applications in biology, in turn, offer a
wealth of interesting problems in algorithmic development. With its cross-
disciplinary emphasis, this project will bring new perspectives to both fields.
If successful, the proposed research will transform disciplines such as genetic
engineering of drug-delivery systems. Currently, a costly and ineffective ad-hoc
approach prevails. With robust techniques for implementing operations such as
digital signal processing, much more effective systems will be developed. An
important goal of the project is to communicate the impetus for
interdisciplinary research to a wide audience. Building upon current research
efforts that include female students, underrepresented students will be
recruited into the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will build on the success of prior work, exploring the implementation
of complex signal processing functions for both discrete-time and digital signal
processing applications with DNA. The project will develop synthesis techniques
for molecular implementations of signal processing functions such as finite-
impulse response (FIR) and infinite impulse response (IIR) digital filters, fast
Fourier transforms (FFT), and power spectral density (PSD) computations. A major
component of this project is to study how to implement analog-to-digital (A/D)
and digital-to-analog (D/A) conversion with molecular reactions. A distinction
will be made between discrete-time signal processing and digital signal
processing. While signals are sampled periodically in both systems, the signal
is represented as an analog value in the former while the signal is quantized to
a digital value in the latter. Each has its advantages. Discrete-time signal
processing systems are similar to sampled data systems and require lower
molecular concentrations; however, the resolution cannot be precisely
controlled. Digital systems are more precise, but require higher molecular
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research thrusts are as follows.
Firstly, a complete digital signal processing system will be demonstrated. Such
a system will contain A/D and D/A converters and will implement a full
repertoire of complex operations. Secondly, the project will develop faster
implementations of both discrete-time and digital signal processing systems. The
main bottleneck in prior discrete-time signal processing implementations has
been speed. In contrast to electronic systems, where the speed is limited by
changes in electric charge, the speed in molecular systems is limited by changes
in molecular concentrations, which are inherently slow. The project will develop
new scheduling approaches where multiple computations are mapped to different
phases of transfer. The computation will be synchronous, with molecular
transfers synchronized by a "clock", implemented through sustained chemical
oscillations. The new scheduling approaches will allow computation of parallel
outputs without increasing the number of delay transfer reactions. Reducing
currently achievable sample periods from 40-80 hours to 4-8 hours will enable
experimental demonstration of some example signal processing functions using
DNA. Finally, the project will investigate tradeoffs in discrete-time and
digital implementations of signal processing functions with respect to speed,
accuracy, and robustness. Detailed studies of the system properties and
behaviors will be performed, e.g., how the resolution correlates with changing
molecular concentrations and how robust the designs are to parametric
variations.