* 1423140
* CIF: Small: Communication Theory Foundations and System Optimization of Femto-Caching and D2D Networks for Wireless Video
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Giuseppe Caire, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 274,361.00

Video streaming is fast becoming the dominant source of data traffic in wireless
networks. In order to avoid overburdening the cellular infrastructure, this
project investigates new systems that exploit caching to provide high throughput
with minimal infrastructure cost. This is pursued by exploiting the asynchronous
content reuse of on-demand video, i.e., that most people watch the same videos,
though at different times. Two approaches to such caching at the wireless edge
ar considered, either deploying helper stations (femto-base stations with a
cache, but no backhaul), or caching on user devices together with highly
spectrally efficient device-to-device (D2D) communications. The investigations
will consider the following main topics: (i) develop policies for optimizing
video quality in wireless streaming, (ii) investigate scheduling for single-hop
transmission between neighboring devices, (iii) investigate coding for D2D
transmission for combining D2D with coded multicast schemes. To complement these
theoretical investigations, realistic operating conditions (channels, user
distributions, etc.) will be analyzed through
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of this work will allow more
spectrally efficient transmission of wireless video. This will increase overall
video consumption, which is beneficial to the movie/entertainment industry, a
key US industrial sector. Furthermore, the suggested systems can also free up
many wireless resources that can be more efficiently used for other purposes.