* 1423725
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Selective Reversal of Public Service Sector Privatization in China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Melanie Manion, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 17,640.00

This project addresses important questions in China's political economy: What
accounts for the selective reversal of privatization strategies across public
service sectors and localities in China? Where has the state retreated, where
has the state advanced, and why? Developing an understanding of these issues
will increase knowledge about China's domestic politics.

In the 1990s, China opened up its non-strategic public services to private
providers. Private services quickly expanded in these sectors over the years,
but private coverage remains limited to areas where private firms can generate
revenues, and quality of private service is not ideal. In the 2000s, to correct
for these common problems caused by private provision of public services, the
Chinese national and local governments launched a series of policy reforms to
the original privatization plan. Examining policy changes in three sectors - the
postal services, public transportation, and industrial wastewater treatment -
puzzling variation emerges in the direction and intensity of government
strategies toward private firms. Privatization was reversed in some sectors and
localities, while deepened in others. The research explores the political and
economic reasons behind the government's adoption of different policies
targeting similar market-induced problems.

Intellectual Merit: With an original dataset on providers of various public
services in China and a research design incorporating both statistical analysis
and case studies, this project aims to broaden understanding of how an
authoritarian state defines and changes its boundaries in relation to the market
and society as well as the motivation and constraints the state faces in the
process. It advances three bodies of interdisciplinary scholarship. First, it
broadens the current literature on transitional economies by studying the
political and institutional origins of an authoritarian state's economic
policies. Second, it contributes to the literature on state-business relations,
by studying how the interaction between the state and businesses differs across
public service sectors, as an authoritarian state's primary concern for public
services is to maintain state legitimacy and preserve social order. The third
body of literature is the politics of economic reform in China. This project
digs down to municipal governments and examines the interaction between local
government officials, state-owned enterprises, and private firms during policy
reforms. Broader Impacts: This project studies the policymaking process for
public services in a non-democratic country, focusing in particular on the
postal services, public transportation and wastewater treatment. These services
exert a significant impact on ordinary citizens' daily lives. The broader impact
of this project is two-fold. First, it explores the policy origins of important
social and environmental outcomes in present-day China. Second, it advances
understanding of how the Chinese government weighs political, economic, and
social interests in policymaking. This project strives to deepen knowledge about
the intricacies of an authoritarian state's political and economic reforms.