* 1423916
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Sociolinguistic Analysis of How Cooperation Emerges in Multiethnic Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Judith Irvine, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 16,021.00

Anthropologists have long established that social cohesion and enduring
interpersonal relationships can be difficult to establish in dynamic multiethnic
and multicultural environments. When they are not, the consequences can be
adverse: contexts marked by poorly formed social relationships can correlate to
interethnic conflict. Conversely, social cohesion and cooperation among diverse
individuals and groups can have positive social impacts (for example, such
contexts can become important trade centers). This project, which trains a
graduate student in how to conduct rigorous scientific fieldwork in the study of
language and culture, asks what linguistic anthropological evidence exists to
explain how cooperation between linguistically and culturally diverse
individuals and groups emerges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Nikolas Sweet under
the supervision of Dr. Judith Irvine of the University of Michigan will how
explore interpersonal relationships are formed in heteroglossic, dynamic
contexts. This project questions what sociolinguistic evidence exists to explain
how cooperation and cohesion is achieved among diverse individuals and groups.
The research takes place in a formerly marginalized region in Senegal on the
Guinea border, a context once characterized by interethnic conflict which has
now become the site of significant trade, transportation, artisanal gold mining,
and in-migration from all across Senegal and West Africa. As such, it is a novel
site for a sociolinguistic study of how multilingual speakers from diverse
backgrounds develop interpersonal relationships. This is a two-phase project
that compares a rural context and large regional center, with the aim of
exploring differences in the communicative practices between urban and rural
centers, and how access to trade networks impacts language use. Through an in-
depth study of face-to-face conversations in multiple languages between
differentially positioned individuals, this project will be able to investigate
how ethnic and national associations--categories that are too often taken for
granted--are in fact negotiated in verbal interactions. Finally, this project
contributes to understandings of how proximity to national borders affects
individuals' linguistic practices.