* 1423002
* III: Small: Information Chain Support for Disaster Mitigation, Preparedness, Response and Recovery
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* James Kendra, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James French
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

When disasters strike, an urgent task for decision makers and the general public
is to consolidate scattered, probably chaotic and incomplete information and
then to plan the next step. The information needed to reach a decision or
develop a policy is very likely not provided by a single document or a single
piece of text, but resides in multiple sources. In other words, a document might
be complemented or further elaborated upon by other documents, and all of them,
only as a whole, provide a complete and satisfying answer. This project will
create a new information chain of support for emergency management. InfoChain is
expected to significantly improve the way policy/decision makers, disaster
researchers and the general public search emergency-related information by
automatically connecting the dots in information. All research results gleaned
from this project will be disseminated to the research community through
publications, tutorials and open-source software. Data collections will be
available for other researchers to use in evaluating their own approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's search engines, or more general Information
Retrieval (IR) systems are designed for simple information needs that can be
satisfied by one document. Documents are ranked independently with regard to
their relevance scores to a query. A single document is expected to cover all
the query concepts. Unfortunately, this assumption offers little help for
connecting different pieces of relevant information, which is crucial to
emergency management. The key novelty of this project is the capability to
search document tuples, a group of documents that collectively satisfy an
information need. Tuple-based retrieval models and result organization that
define collective relevance of a document tuple with respect to an information
need will help users efficiently examine search results. The document tuple is a
more natural and desirable retrieval unit for complicated information needs, and
its incorporation into IR retrieval models for emergency management leaps over
the single-document-oriented IR practices and is the first such effort. For
further information see the project web site at:
http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~hfang/infochain.html