* 1423514
* Workshop: Exploring the (un)expected--The role of informativity in language production and comprehension (Special Session at the 2015 CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Toben Mintz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 42,939.00

Language provides us with a powerful means of sharing information with other
people. Within a sentence, the informativity of expressions varies. For example,
some parts of the sentence may be relatively uninformative because they are
highly predictable based on what has already been said, or because they involve
information that the hearer already knows. In contrast, other parts of a
sentence are more informative because they provide new information and mention
things previously not known by the listener. When we speak, we continually have
to make choices (largely unconsciously) about how to order linguistic elements
of differing levels of informativity within an utterance and how to realize them
- for example, when to say something like "My neighbor Pat did not break the
window!" or when to just say "He didn't!." These issues are also relevant when
understanding language: When we listen to someone else or when we read text, we
are faced with the task of extracting the intended meaning. A growing body of
research suggests that informativity plays a key role in language. However, many
questions about the role of informativity in language processing remain open,
and different research traditions have approached these questions in different
ways. Significant advances in addressing these open questions would be
facilitated by bringing together researchers from these various traditions and
providing a forum for exposing future generations of researchers to a variety of
perspectives on the question of informativity in language
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators will
organize a special conference session on these issues, to be held in March 2015
at the University of Southern California, in conjunction with the 28th CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing. CUNY conferences are attended by a rich
cross-section of the academic community, from undergraduates through senior
scholars. From its inception, this conference series has been committed to
attracting graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and other new researchers,
encouraging them to attend and also to participate in the proceedings. Holding
the special session in conjunction with CUNY will thus ensure a wide audience.
The special session is designed to evaluate how informativity impacts language
production and comprehension, in order to contribute to our understanding of how
questions of informativity can inform theories of language processing. The
investigators have invited six distinguished scholars with special expertise to
give spoken presentations at this special session. Presentations from the
broader community of researchers working on these issues will also be solicited.
This special session aims to draw together diverse strains of research; this can
inform the work currently being done within each subfield and can potentially
result in new collaborative ideas. Issues related to informativity provide a
fertile ground for tools and insights from computer science and computational
linguistics, in addition to psychology and theoretical linguistics, thereby
opening the door to new cross-fertilization between these fields. The special
session will also contribute in important ways to the training of graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows. Educating and inspiring young scientists has
a powerful impact on the future of scientific research.