* 1423753
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Claims for Recognition in a Transborder Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Marc Edelman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 19,821.00

Territorial recognition claims by indigenous groups have posed new challenges in
a range of areas, such as the delivery of health care, community policing,
veteran affairs, environmental and business rights. Contemporary scientific
studies of these communities are struggling to explain how the members of these
indigenous groups negotiate the various legal and political frameworks of the
different territorial, municipal, regional, and state authorities within which
they overlap. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, explores how these
communities engage in territorial recognition when it bridges the borders of
nation-states, a level of complexity that has hitherto not been significantly
investigated.

Rocio Gil Martinez de Escobar, under the supervision of Dr. Marc Edelman of the
City University of New York Graduate Center, explores the production and
reproduction of Mascogo-Seminole sovereignty across the Mexico-United States
border. Using a range of ethnographic methods of data collection and analysis
including participant observation, oral history, and interviews, the project
examines the strategic negotiations of the Mascogo-Seminole people with Mexico
and the United States to achieve dual citizenship and to freely cross the
international border. This case sheds light on the historical production of the
Mexico-US border in the region of Texas-Coahuila through the particular lens of
indigeneity, race, and ethnicity. It looks at the ways through which competing
forms of racial and ethnic classification, as defined by two very different
states, historically produce peoples in the borderlands. It offers a view into
struggles of people divided by international borders and the possibilities of
alternative practices of sovereignty that transcend nation-states: forms of
transborder political organization, identification, flow of economic resources,
etc. Finally, this research sheds light on the mechanisms through which ideas
about race and indigeneity, and the rights attached to them, are established in
the borderlands and how this may influence the political and legal practices of
both nation-states. As such, in addition to providing funding for the training
of a graduate student in anthropology, the project would provide data useful to
policymakers and planners interested into the formulation and reform of border
policy.