* 1423221
* NeTS: Small: SOAR: Leveraging Traffic Signatures to Improve Performance of Vehicular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Guoliang Xing, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,999.00

Vehicular networking is an enabling technology for the next-generation
transportation services, such as vehicle safety communication, remote vehicle
diagnosis, and network-assisted autonomous driving. A major challenge to support
these applications is to achieve real-time, reliable communication using limited
wireless network spectrum resource, in the presence of noise, interference, and
mobility-induced wireless channel variations. This project develops a novel
cross-layer framework that improves the performance of vehicular networks
without incurring extra spectrum overhead. The key observation is that traffic
typically exhibits high predictability due to protocol-specific header
structures and the spatiotemporal correlation of application data, such as
vehicle positions, on-board sensor readings, and the range to surrounding
objects. This project takes a system approach to leveraging such traffic
signatures to optimize vehicular network performance. The approach is based on a
top-down cross-layer architecture, which consists of 1) a traffic signature
extraction algorithm that achieves assured accuracy under the dynamics of
network traffic; 2) traffic signature-aware PHY algorithms that improve the
robustness and resilience to channel variations and interference; and 3) a
comprehensive link layer that exploits traffic signatures in fine-grained
optimization of power control, rate adaptation and error recovery.

This project has broad implications for future vehicular network systems in
multiple application domains that demand high communication reliability under
spectrum resource constraints. The solution framework is transparent to
vehicular network applications and can be integrated with various wireless
standards, including 802.11p, WiMAX and LTE, for providing better Quality of
Service (QoS) in both inter-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure networks.
Educational and outreach activities include introduction of vehicular network
systems into new graduate courses with software, testbed, and labs developed in
the course of this project, and recruitment of women and minority students for
participation in the project.