* 1423865
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The interaction between tone, prosody and accent
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Kathryn Franich, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,339.00

The world's languages have traditionally been divided into one of three
categories (stress-accent, pitch-accent, or tone) based on how pitch is utilized
to distinguish words from one another. However, this division of languages is
based largely on the impressionistic judgments rather than on detailed
quantitative measurements of linguistic properties. Recent work has demonstrated
that this typology is deeply inadequate for characterizing both the precise
role(s) of pitch in language, and the relevant sources of diversity among
languages. For example, although a language may utilize pitch as the primary
acoustic cue to differentiate between words, it may also use stress, suggesting
that these two phenomena are not mutually exclusive. The prevailing typology,
though arguably flawed, has formed the basis for many important claims about the
nature of language and linguistic complexity, which in turn have shaped how
linguistic pedagogies are developed for use in foreign language teaching, and
the way that prosodic systems are modeled for developing tools such as speech
recognition software. Given the importance of such resources in today's global
society, it is important for linguists to form a clear picture of the ways in
which the acoustic properties of speech are used by speakers both in production
and in perception. The current project aims to take a closer look at pitch,
accent and prosodic structure in an effort to better understand how these
structural elements interact, with the end goal of developing a more accurate
linguistic typology, and a more adequate set of tools for language teaching and
natural language processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research for this project will
take place in Southwestern Cameroon, focusing on the Bamileke languages, a
subgroup of the Mbam-Nkam branch of the Benue-Congo group (Niger-Congo family).
These languages have some of the most complex tone systems in the world, and
much remains to be understood about their structure. Recent work suggests that
word- and phrase-level accentual properties reminiscent of those found in
prototypical stress languages are responsible for previously unexplained tonal
phenomena in these languages, and that accent may play a much more important
role in the organization of sounds than was formerly thought. This research will
endeavor to explore in detail the way that acoustic measures such as pitch,
vowel quality, amplitude, syllable and vowel duration interact in language
production, and the way that these cues are weighted by listeners when
perceiving speech. Data will be collected in the form of controlled production
and perception experiments, as well as in the form of natural conversation
between native speakers of the language. Research findings will contribute to
our understanding of the ways in which pitch can be used alongside other
acoustic cues at different levels of grammatical structure in a language with
lexically-based tonal contrasts. Since many of the languages deemed 'critical'
for learning by the US government also fit this description (Mandarin Chinese,
Punjabi, Hausa, etc.), this work will have important implications for a wide
variety of national language training initiatives.