* 1423368
* III: Small: RUI: Multi-dimensional Recommendation in Complex Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Robin Burke, DePaul University
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,884.00

Personalized information access via recommendation is a mainstay of today's
online information systems. As online information sources become larger, more
varied and more complex, new recommendation tools are needed that can integrate
all of the dimensions of the data when making personalized recommendations. This
project will develop new recommendation techniques appropriate to the scale and
complexity of online social networks. In particular, it will study how different
decompositions of a network can be used create multiple recommendation
components, and how these components can be combined into a single weighted
ensemble. The project will enable more effective and efficient generation of
personalized recommendations, helping users find useful connections even in
large and complex information networks.

This project will explore a recommendation approach known as the Weighted Hybrid
of Low-Dimensionality Recommenders (WHyLDR), which has proved effective in
recommendation for the social web. WHyLDR decomposes heterogeneous networks into
collections of two-dimensional matrices on the basis of meta-path expansions,
where a meta-path represents a composition of link relations over the network.
The low-dimensional components are combined using learned weights. One challenge
of this research is that the number of meta-paths is unbounded. Therefore, the
project will explore analytic criteria by which to evaluate the relative value
of components in a hybrid. The project will experiment with four complex
heterogeneous network data sets drawn from very different areas: employment,
travel, music and scientific bibliography, using a variety of recommendation
tasks and evaluation metrics.