* 1423396
* CNIC: US-Czech Project Development for Research on the Anatomy of Volcanic-Magmatic Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Michael Petronis, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 02/28/2017
* USD 27,106.00

This award for Catalyzing New International Collaborations(CNIC) provides the
PI, Michael Petronis, and two U.S. graduate students from New Mexico Highlands
University with an opportunity to travel to the Czech Republic (CR) and initiate
a collaboration with partners from the Czech Geological Survey and the Czech
Academy of Sciences' Institute of Rock Structures and Mechanisms. Together the
U.S.-Czech team will examine the growth of ancient volcanoes in the Jièín
Volcanic Field, CR, and compare those volcanoes to ones in northern New Mexico.
Their goal is to derive new paradigms for understanding the development of small
volcanoes, known as cinder cones, which are the most common terrestrial volcanic
feature on Earth. Through laboratory studies and field research at two or more
Czech volcanic sites, the US-Czech team intends to test common models of small
volcano construction that treat the magma feeder system as a simple dike or
pipe-like conduit that transports magma vertically from a reservoir to the
eruptive vent. Their alternative hypothesis maintains that feeder geometries
beneath these apparently simple exteriors are considerably more complex. This
catalytic effort is expected to establish essential ground work for follow-on
cooperative research and applications to NSF-Tectonics and NSF-Petrology and
Geochemistry programs with the parallel goal of involving under-represented U.S.
students in futue field and laboraroty aspects of such projects, thereby
contributing to the next generation of geoscientists, with early career
international research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, new
preliminary data should assist with defining the evolution of the anticipated,
more complex magma feeder system, specifically, one that involves multiple,
time-transgressive injections beneath the cone with magma transported vertically
upward and downward and laterally toward and away from the central vent conduit.
The team hypothesizes that magma supply rate (e.g., pulsed versus continuous),
magma pressure as well as magma composition, influence the subvolcanic
construction geometries and edifice deformation. Their field methods will
include primary field observations of eruption products, deposit
characteristics, and structural measurements, as well as sample collection.
Laboratory methods are to include thin section petrology, paleomagnetic,
anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility analysis, and geophysical surveys to map
the subsurface structure. The new data obtained during these activities in
partnership with Czech colleagues will enable preliminary assessments of
magmatic flow patterns, sub-volcanic deformation (microstructures and
paleomagnetism), and the subsurface structure of the volcanoes (geophysics). If
the Czech Republic volcanoes yield results and data similar to that from sites
previously studied by the PI, then the U.S.-Czech team maintains that this
pattern of magma flow beneath small volcanoes may be established as a new norm,
potentially transforming our fundamental understanding of the most abundant
volcanic construct on Earth.