* 1423939
* Collaborative Research; Protein Mediated Magnetite Biomineralization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Dennis Bazylinski, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 242,243.00

There is increasing demand for magnetic nanoparticles in emerging areas of
technology and medicine (e.g., high-density data storage, targeted drug
delivery, scaffolding for tissue regeneration). The "ideal" particle for many of
these applications is a nanometer scale magnet that has defined shape and
morphology, narrow size distribution, high crystallinity, and controlled
magnetic direction. Magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) have the innate capacity to
synthesize crystals of the mineral magnetite (Fe3O4) that meet all of these
criteria. In this proposal, investigators will study the protein-directed
crystallization of magnetite by MTB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MTB exercise strict
genetic control over the size, composition, and morphology of their nanomagnetic
crystals. Investigators will examine the so-called Mms proteins (Mms-5, 6, 12,
13; or homologues like MamC) to identify the key catalytic domains that direct
nucleation and growth of Fe3O4. In vivo biomineralization experiments will be
performed using wild-type strains (e.g., Magnetospirillum magneticum) as well as
mutationally altered strains generated during this project. In vitro
crystallization experiments will be carried out using recombinant proteins, or
peptides that mimic key motifs. Structural and magnetic properties of the in
vivo vs. in vitro mineral products will be characterized using electron
microscopy, atomic force microscopy, confocal laser scanning microscopy, and
magnetometry. Those proteins or peptides that catalyze novel mineral products
will be further examined using molecular dynamics simulations in silico. The
knowledge to be gained from these studies will allow to fabricate nanometer
scale, single domain magnetic crystals that are designed to elicit a particular
magnetic response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also includes an
educational outreach component for middle- and high-school students and
teachers. Teachers will spend 3-4 weeks each year with the PIs learning how to
collect and isolate MTB from environmental samples as well as characterize MTB
with various forms of optical and electron microscopy. Based on this experience,
the teachers will design experiments to use in their own classrooms.
Investigators will also direct two field camps: an annual, domestic camp on
environmental microbiology and one international field camp on
biomineralization. Student participants will learn to design and test scientific
hypothesis though field studies, lab experiments, and instrumental analyses
(e.g., electron microscopy). The students will present their results at an
annual science symposium.