* 1423587
* The Hidden World of Permafrost
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Victoria Coats, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,389,565.00

This project by teams at the University of Alaska and the Oregon Museum of
Science and Industry will engage the public in the topic of the nature and
prevalence of permafrost, its scale on the earth and the important role it plays
in the global climate. It builds on 50 years of informal education and outreach
at the Alaskan Permafrost Tunnel near Fairbanks, AK, which, since the 1960s, has
been the Nation's only underground facility for research related to permafrost
and climate. The project has four components: (1) a nationally distributed 2,000
square-foot traveling exhibition; (2) exhibit and program enhancements to the
learning opportunities at the tunnel; (3) programs, table-top exhibits and oral
history research in 27 Native Alaskan villages; and (4) an education research
study. Each of these components will be evaluated over the course of the work.
By upgrading the displays at the tunnel, and by taking traveling programs to the
villages, the work will extend the tunnel experience across Alaska. In the
villages the team will collect stories about climate change, along with samples
of real ancient ice and permafrost. These stories and materials will be used in
the travelling exhibit which is expected to be at three museums per year for
eight years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of the initiative will
build on the observation to date that the tunnel has provided thousands of
visitors with an underground immersive environment where they learn about the
science research being conducted and engage with climate-sensitive materials
(e.g., permafrost, wedge ice, frozen silt, Pleistocene bones) using all of their
senses. It has been conjectured that their learning experiences are enhanced by
interacting with real vs. replicated objects. As museums often contain exhibits
that are more likely to contain replicated and/or virtual objects and
environments, understanding the impact that these different categories of
objects have on learning is important. Using both types of materials, the
project will investigate differences in their efficacy in informal science
learning institutions related to climate change. Real objects are postulated to
have the following attributes that stimulate fuller engagement; they are (1)
information-rich by virtue of such features as their texture, odor, and
dimensionality; (2) at real-life scale; (3) authentic, i.e., original objects;
and (4) often unique, i.e., have inherent value. Research questions will explore
the potential impacts on learning of these and related features. Methods
employed will be observation, video, and interviews of the public with a
particular focus on visitor talk with respect to explanations and elaborations
about permafrost, tipping points, climate change, and geological time.