* 1423620
* RI: Small: RUI: Multi-Robot Systems for Tracking, Monitoring, and Modeling of Periodic Migratory Populations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Christopher Lowe, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 09/30/2017
* USD 473,521.00

Periodic migration patterns can be found throughout the natural world. Examples
of periodic movements have been observed in humans, terrestrial and aquatic
animals, insects, even bacteria. Understanding such patterns can provide
researchers with essential information to making decisions that affect
environment, health, finances, and safety. Developing better tools for
accurately measuring periodic movements is essential for developing more
sophisticated movement models. This project focuses on the development of a
mobile, multi-robot sensing system capable of monitoring individuals and
populations that share common behaviors resulting in periodic movement patterns.
The project uses multiple Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) for monitoring,
tracking, and modeling fish populations in their coastal habitat. The specific
goals of the project are to (1) develop mathematical models of a population's
periodic migratory motion, (2) develop strategies based on these models for
real-time estimation of the state of individual's and the population, (3)
construct multi-robot control strategies for tracking populations, and (4)
conduct continuous monitoring of fish populations using AUVs. To accomplish
these goals, a multi-AUV system is deployed to autonomously track and follow
acoustic tagged fish populations in Big Fisherman?s Cove in Catalina Island.
This test site is a Marine Protected Area abundant with several species of fish
that follow periodic migration patterns. Results from experiments are expected
to validate the system and generate models that are useful to marine biologists
and policy makers.