* 1423825
* An Online International Methods Colloquium for Quantitative Methodology in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Justin Esarey, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 252,384.00

This project develops, organizes, and produces a weekly interactive online
seminar on the use of quantitative and statistical analysis in social research,
particularly political science. This project will leverage off-the-shelf,
commercially-proven technology to bring methodologists in political science and
allied fields into interactive conversation with scholars, students, policy
makers, and industry practitioners all over the world without travel or venue
costs for the participants. The goals of the project are to promote the
development and application of new quantitative techniques for data analysis
that are applicable to the study of social, behavioral, and economic phenomena,
to enable low-cost collaboration and discussion among scholars and professionals
around the world who are actively involved in the development and application of
quantitative analysis in the social and economic sciences, government, and
industry, and to provide a free educational resource for students,
practitioners, and policy makers interested in using quantitative analysis and
social scientific research design.

Participation will be free of charge, requiring only a computing device (smart
phone, tablet, or computer) and an internet connection. Scholars and students
will benefit from interaction with and instruction from colleagues at the
forefront of the field. The archive of videos from past colloquia will form a
reference library of methodological resources for teaching and research. People
working outside academia will have the opportunity to learn from new research as
a part of their continuing education, and to contribute their practical
knowledge to the scholarly conversation. In addition to the direct benefits of
collaborative research and scholarship promoted by the colloquium, this project
addresses an urgent requirement for future U.S. economic growth and
technological advancement. This project will help to grow the community of
experts in the analysis of social and economic data that is critical to the
future health of the American economy. This project will provide a free resource
for students and data scientists in industry to expand their quantitative
skills, giving them an opportunity to interact closely with the scholarly
community and learn advanced techniques.