* 1423290
* CSR: Small: Quality Programmable Processing Platforms for Approximate Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 480,625.00

The gap created by diminishing benefits from technology scaling and projected
growth in computing demand has led to a need for new sources of computing
efficiency. Fortunately, the workloads that are driving demand across the
computing spectrum also present new opportunities. In data centers and the
cloud, computing demand is driven by the need to organize, analyze, interpret,
and search through exploding amounts of digital data. In mobile and deeply
embedded devices, the creation and consumption of richer media and the need to
interact more naturally and intelligently with users and the environment drive
much of the computing demand. These applications are largely not about
calculating a precise numerical end result; for them, "correctness'' is defined
as producing results that are good enough, or of sufficient quality. How does
this help design more efficient computing platforms? These emerging workloads,
and many others, demonstrate a high degree of intrinsic resilience to their
underlying computations being executed in an approximate or inexact manner. This
project will explore approximate computing, an emerging design approach that
improves the efficiency of computing platforms by designing them to leverage
intrinsic application resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish approximate
computing in a broader context, this research explores quality programmable
processors - programmable platforms for approximate computing that offer the
ability for software to express application resilience at the natural HW/SW
interface, i.e., the instruction set. The hardware underlying a quality
programmable processor is equipped to understand and guarantee the instruction-
level quality specifications, while exploiting the flexibility that they provide
to obtain performance or energy improvements. This project will explore quality
programmable designs of various programmable architectures, including general-
purpose cores, vector processors, and GPGPUs. It will also extend the notion of
quality programmability to the memory system and on-chip interconnect network.
Techniques will be developed to optimize programs for execution on quality
programmable platforms by identifying resilient computations, and tuning the
degree to which they can be approximated while maintaining acceptable
application-level output quality. The project will leverage outreach programs at
Purdue, including Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF), the NCN
(Network for Computational Nanotechnology), and the Women and Minority in
Engineering programs, to involve undergraduates and minority students in this
research.