* 1423379
* NeTS: Small: Advancing Time Synchronization for Sustainable Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Mehmet Vuran, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Time synchronization allows devices in a network to have a common notion of time
and thus to operate in a precisely coordinated manner that is essential for the
correctness, efficiency, throughput, and security of the entire system. Despite
efforts in the past for achieving accurate timing in traditional networks,
synchronization remains an open problem for the emerging sustainable wireless
networks which are envisioned to play a key role in many future applications
such as time-driven smart manufacturing, transportation cyber-physical systems,
smart power grids, high-confidence medical systems, etc., due to a wide range of
new features and requirements. To support truly sustainable operations, this
project will carry out systematic research to revisit the clockwork by carefully
identifying constraints from different aspects of such networks. The outcome of
this project will constitute a significant advance in the design and development
of theoretical foundations and practical algorithms to enable a highly effective
synchronization service in sustainable wireless networks. Broader impacts of
this project shall be magnified by (i) cultivating collaboration within the
computer network community and interdisciplinary cooperation with field experts,
(ii) improving curriculum development with hands-on training, (iii)
disseminating research results via high-quality publications and open-source
websites, (iv) raising interest in science and technology among K-12 students,
female, and underrepresented groups through seminars and open house
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will enable reactive,
efficient, scalable, and configurable time synchronization for sustainable
wireless networks deployed in highly dynamic physical environments. The project
will build a sustainable computing hardware prototype with modularized structure
that accommodates various solutions for energy harvesting, wireless
communication, on-board sensing and processing. New designs will be implemented
with a combination of different hardware platforms and the project will deliver
reusable system designs, firmware packages, algorithm and protocol libraries to
the research community. In addition to academic papers and technical reports,
this work is expected to contribute to the system development in broader
application communities across multiple disciplines, such as health care and
assisted living, urban safety and security, human behavior study, cyber-physical
system research, and so forth.