* 1423105
* NeTS: Small: Cross Layer Control of Dynamic Optical Networks - from Theory to Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Gil Zussman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Current optical networks are mostly statically provisioned at the lowest optical
layer. Moving the communications infrastructure to a dynamically provisioned
optical infrastructure will allow on-demand provisioning of high-bandwidth
circuits in support of science, commerce, media, and national security. Dynamic
optical networks will contribute to bridging the digital divide and supporting
bandwidth intensive transformative applications such as 3-D video for
telepresence in education and telemedicine. The physical layer components of
such a network are emerging from research on dynamic optical devices and
technologies and offer unique opportunities. However, controlling dynamic
optical networks while considering the physical layer Quality of Transmission
and the higher layer requirements poses major challenges due to both the
interactions of multiple light paths sharing the same fiber and the challenges
of adapting to multiple fiber types and physical infrastructures with varying
impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the deployment of
dynamic optical networks by developing cross-layered network control algorithms
for wide-area and data center optical networks. The algorithms rely on the
capabilities of real-time optical performance monitors (OPMs) and allow
efficient use of the optical resources through dynamic network configuration,
regeneration, and power, bandwidth, and modulation control. Since the effects of
dynamic operation in wide-area networks are analytically intractable, the
project develops an optimization framework that, rather than employing
theoretical models and analytical solutions, uses direct input from OPM
measurements. For data center networks, the project is designing network
configuration schemes that allow physical support of various *-cast (unicast,
anycast, multicast, etc.) higher layer requirements. This project includes
engaging diverse student populations in the cross-layered research and outreach
activities to the Harlem community.