* 1423946
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Explaining Variation in Advocacy Efforts by  International Nongovernmental Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Anna Schrimpf, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 31,979.00

International Nongovernmental Organizations' (INGO) focus advocacy efforts on
some issues and not others, and the extent of harm does not explain this
variation. INGOs mobilize around some issues of moral concern, but neglect
others with similar objective characteristics. The project will test potential
explanations of variation in attention to issues via a mixed methods research
design that explores INGO advocacy effort in the two issue areas of global
health and armed conflicts, both matters of great public import. INGOS' choice
of problems and strategies is important to understand because INGOs have long
been recognized as potent drivers of international normative change. Through
their practices they have made critical contributions to compliance with
international legal standards, particularly significant given the difficulty in
enforcing international norms. This project develops a theory of INGO advocacy
choices that emphasizes the constraints and strategic considerations affecting
their behavior. The project hypothesizes that institutional survival motives
incentivize INGOs to respond to the preferences of their donor constituency, as
well as to the expected likelihood of their demands? realization. In addition,
the theory underlines the importance of micro level dynamics. INGOs' agendas
evolve in a path dependent way, where previous choices constrain and enable
current agenda. Next, this project hypothesizes that issues gain organizational
support because organizations are more likely to do what other organizations do.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To analyze the activism of INGOs, reasons for their issue
choice, and path dependence, this project constructs the first quantitative
database allowing for the statistical analysis of issue-specific INGO activism.
The database will be useful for those who wish to understand how INGOs choose
issues, an important question for many policymakers.