* 1423618
* AF: Small: Information acquisition and revelation in games
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Kempe, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 457,999.00

Game theory has long been used as a powerful tool to model and analyze the
outcomes of interactions between agents with conflicting goals and preferences.
The recent confluence of game theory with computational systems has spurred
research on the role of information in games. At a high level, agents' behavior
in a strategic interaction will necessarily be based on the information they
have available, as well as their beliefs about the information held by others.
Traditionally, in economics, these information structures have been assumed to
be exogenous; that is, the information structure is given, and the analysis
departs from there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With few exceptions, it has only been
recently that research has focused on the acquisition and revelation of
information as part of the game itself. A key motivation here is that
information is often produced at a cost to those who produce it, meaning that
the acquisition of information requires rewards of selfish agents, a typical
situation requiring game-theoretic viewpoints. Similarly, one or more agents
possessing information may find it beneficial to strategically reveal some or
all of it to other agents to induce particular behaviors, benefiting the agent,
or society as a whole. In both cases, designing optimal or near-optimal
mechanisms for acquiring or revealing information is challenging, and requires
the combination of game-theoretic and algorithmic
insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the role of information
acquisition and revelation in games. Specifically, it will study the following
algorithmic problems:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Optimal information acquisition by a central
authority from selfish agents (under several natural models); and&lt;br/&gt;(2)
optimal information revelation by a central authority to selfish agents (under
several natural models and information structures).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will help to further our understanding of the role of
information in games, by providing fundamental characterizations of what is and
is not achievable in terms of its acquisition and revelation. The algorithms to
be developed also have the potential to impact the way online auctions are
conducted, where information (or lack thereof) plays a central
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and co-PI both have a long-standing commitment
to active dissemination of results and community building going beyond mere
publications. They have created and will continue to create interdisciplinary
graduate courses and make detailed class notes available for use by other
instructors. They will also actively establish the area by giving tutorials at
major conferences and producing overview articles for a broader audience. The PI
and co-PI are committed to including undergraduates in the research effort, with
a particular effort to recruit women and underrepresented minorities. The PI
will also continue to help build a strong computer science and problem solving
community by organizing local programming contests and significantly
strengthening the computer science curriculum at USC.