* 1423651
* RI: Small: Visual Situation Recognition: An Integration of Deep Networks and Analogy-Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Melanie Mitchell, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 475,754.00

This project investigates a novel approach to building computer systems that can
recognize visual situations. While much effort in computer vision has focused on
identifying isolated objects in images, what people actually do is recognize
coherent situations--collections of objects and their interrelations that, taken
together, correspond to a known concept, such as "a child's birthday party," or
"a man walking a dog on the beach," or "two people about to fight," or "a blind
person crossing the street." Situation recognition by humans may appear on the
surface to be effortless, but it relies on a complex dynamic interplay among
human abilities to perceive objects, systems of relationships among objects, and
analogies with stored knowledge and memories. No computer vision system yet
comes close to capturing these human abilities. Enabling computers to flexibly
recognize visual situations would create a flood of important applications in
fields as diverse as medical diagnosis, interpretation of scientific imagery,
enhanced human-computer interaction, and personal information
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach explored in this project
integrates two previously studied approaches: brain-inspired neural networks for
lower-level vision and cognitive-level models of concepts and analogy-making. In
this integrated architecture, recognizing situations--via analogies with stored
conceptual structures--will be a dynamic process in which bottom-up (perceptual)
and top-down (conceptual) influences affect one another as perception unfolds.
If successful, this system will be able to recognize visual situations in a way
that scales well with the complexity of the scene and the abstract concept being
recognized. As part of this project, a number of benchmark image datasets--
reflecting different abstract visual situations--will be collected to evaluate
the recognition system. In addition, the PI will design and run a public
competition on automated recognition of visual situations, using the collected
datasets. This competition will spur research on this topic, and help
researchers working in this area evaluate the success of various methods and
gauge the current state of the art on abstract visual recognition. All source
code and benchmarking databases developed in this project will be made publicly
available via the web.