* 1423102
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Realizing Visual and Acoustic Near Field Communication Systems for Smartphones: Performance Optimization and Security Assurance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Guoliang Xing, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Near-Field Communication (NFC) is an emerging wireless technology that expects
to revolutionize a range of mobile applications. However, the widespread use of
NFC is hindered by the fact that only a limited number of platforms have built-
in NFC support. Moreover, while NFC's short communication range offers some
degree of physical protection, recent findings have revealed NFC's vulnerability
to malicious eavesdropping.

This project develops alternative NFC technologies that are secure and
compatible with legacy mobile devices and existing infrastructure (e.g., POS
terminals). The key novelty of this approach is to leverage visible light and
acoustic channels to realize NFC systems with robust performance and security
assurance. Due to the high directionality of narrow light beams, visible light
can enable secure and interference-free wireless links. Similarly, acoustic
signal can be modulated for NFC communication in close proximity. This approach
offers several key advantages over the existing NFC technology. Both visual and
acoustic communication channels can be implemented using prevalent components
such as LCD displays, microphones, and speakers, which lead to purely software-
based solutions that can easily retrofit existing infrastructure with NFC
functionality. Second, in contrast to RF channels, the direction and distance of
screen-camera link are controllable, preserving the communication privacy and
security. Similarly, integrated with physical self-jamming techniques, the
acoustic link can achieve information-theoretic security without the need for
pre-shared secrets.

In this project, a new form of Visible Light Communication (VLC) is employed to
implement NFC, where 2D barcodes are streamed between LCD display and camera. A
new barcode design and several techniques are used to optimize the throughput of
screen-camera link, which include code block adaptation and re-ordering to
mitigate the impact of image blur in mobile environments, and lightweight image
processing algorithms for real-time decoding of barcode stream. A systematic
security study is conducted on barcode-based communication based on geometric
analysis and a new acoustics-based NFC system is developed for smartphones
without the need of a priori knowledge of security secrets. The emerging
friendly jamming techniques are utilized for establishing an information-
theoretically secure communication channel for NFC. This project also explores
advanced coding techniques, high-level modulation schemes and other physical
layer techniques for further improving the data transmission rates and ensuring
confidentiality guarantee.

This project is a multi-disciplinary research effort that integrates novel
technologies from visual/acoustic communication, adaptive self-jamming, image
processing, and cryptography. The results have impacts on a range of mobile
applications such as payment, access control, and smart device paring. The PIs
will integrate research results into several courses, and leverage the
intriguing nature of the project for reaching out to pre-college students.