* 1423629
* TWC SBE: TTP Option: Small: A User-Tailored Approach to Privacy Decision Support
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Alfred Kobsa, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 666,343.00

Numerous surveys find that Internet users want to limit the personal data that
is being collected about them, as well as control the usage of their data.
Existing and proposed regulation in the U.S. accords users such rights, in the
form of a "transparency and control" obligation on personal data collectors:
users should be informed about the rationale of requests for personal data so
that they can make an informed decision on whether or not to disclose their
data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the past few years, it became apparent that the
transparency and control paradigm "does not work." It overburdens users by the
sheer amount of decisions that must be made in a very short period of time.
Recent research moreover shows that users are not cognitively able to make
rational decisions when they have to trade off immediate benefits of data
disclosure with uncertain and unspecific privacy threats sometimes in the
future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Based on empirical studies, this research helps
predict what privacy decisions would be consistent with users' preferences, and
generate personalized default settings for privacy choices as well as rationales
for disclosure that best suits users' predicted decision-making. Users can
override any of the predictions, and such corrections will modify the prediction
algorithm over time. The proposed approach thus affords "realistic empowerment":
it allows Internet users to make their own privacy decisions if they wish, and
also helps them overcome the limits of their bounded rationality by first making
personalized default decisions on behalf of them. The multiple methods used in
the research design build upon one another, representing a rigorous and
systematic approach to develop an in-depth understanding of designing and
developing smart default privacy settings. This project can have a
transformative impact on the privacy literature by providing a systematic
understanding on predicting individuals' contextual privacy preferences.