* 1423867
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: A Field Experiment on the Externalities of Protest
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Barry Ames, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 17,629.00

How can protests mobilize civil society? Activists and scholars alike assume
that protests can inspire and mobilize non-participants, but psychological
research would argue that protests are counterproductive to political
participation. This project argues that the consequences of protest activity
vary along a continuum of perceived conflict; the more conflict individuals
perceive in the protest, the more likely they are to become less interested in
politics and less willing to participate. The theory is tested through a novel
field experiment, in which real protests in Mexico City serve as the treatment.
For the experiment, levels of political participation and political attitudes
among a random sample of local respondents are evaluated before and after
exposure to protest activity. The research will evaluate how exposure to protest
activity ultimately achieves a polarizing effect, such that individuals either
mobilize or demobilize significantly depending on their perception of political
conflict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project makes important
theoretical and methodological contributions to the field's understanding of
protests and mobilization. Theoretically, this project explores a new and
potentially fruitful range of consequences for protest activity. It is possible
that protesters who lose legislative battles win their own battles in the
streets, and it is also possible that protesters who win their battles with
legislators simultaneously lose among the electorate. Indeed, if protests change
politics in more meaningful ways than simply winning and losing legislation,
then those possible outcomes are worth considering. Moreover, to test this
theory, the project uses a fundamentally new and innovative methodological
approach that captures individual responses to protest activity at the ground
level, measuring change as it occurs in real time. Protests, particularly their
consequences, are notoriously difficult to study empirically. The data recorded
in this experiment, and the design of the experiment itself, will be useful for
any student of protests or mobilization who has been previously forced to rely
on purely quantitative approaches, such as protest event analysis, or purely
qualitative case studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There are three
major impacts of this project, the first of which relates directly to U.S.
national security. Policymakers have long wondered about the social and
political consequences of protest activity, but the diverse outcomes of the Arab
Spring have pressed this topic with more urgency. Indeed, civil society's
response to these movements has been unwieldy and, at times, unpredictably
divisive and violent. For example, the first cases of the Arab Spring in Tunisia
and Egypt were greeted with open arms as if mobilization would inevitably result
in sweeping democratic practices. It later became clear civil society would not
always respond this way, and many protests fizzled away without traction while
others fostered hotbeds of violent polarization. This project will provide a
framework from which to predict and explain which protest contexts are most
likely to result in democratization, demobilization, or extreme polarization so
that it will not be necessary to construct ad hoc foreign policy responses to
subsequent waves of protest. Second, this project is notably beneficial to
grassroots organizers and social movement organizations seeking to improve their
purchase among civil society. Moreover, the project provides specific
suggestions in terms of protest techniques and strategies that may yield
positive and or negative externalities. Finally, this project will serve to
build partnerships between the University of Pittsburgh and the "Caught in the
Act" project, a network of European and Latin American scholars working to
systematize protest research. The partnership will connect scholars from a
variety of countries, and it will allow for the training of undergraduate
students in survey work and experimental methods.