* 1423108
* SHF: Small: Efficient CPU-GPU Communication for Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Laxmi Bhuyan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 498,976.00

Future chip multiprocessors (CMPs) will have silicon space and technology to
incorporate hundreds of cores. The trend is to integrate tens of cores and
hardware accelerators (HAs), such as GPUs, on a single platform. The proposed
heterogeneous architecture will enable future chips to operate within their
power budgets while providing the high-throughput per Watt required for large
scientific applications. Many of the top-500 supercomputers integrate thousands
of CPUs with GPU accelerators to achieve the desired throughput for scientific
applications. Considerable effort, however, is needed to design efficient
communication mechanisms between heterogeneous components in such a system.
Currently, HAs are not fully integrated with the system architecture; offloading
computation from the CPU to the HAs adds large communication overhead. This
research project explores comprehensive solutions to this problem through many
different techniques. The project has significant broader impact in terms of
research publications, graduate student supervision, and minority education
because UCR is a minority serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop new CPU-GPU communication techniques through static programming and
run-time optimization. It will develop a divisible load theory (DLT) technique
to overlap communication with computation, and optimize the time and size of
data transfer between the CPU and GPU. The research will also develop run-time
techniques that can monitor the efficiency of execution and dynamically change
the transfer parameters by considering the execution behaviors of different
applications. Architectural changes are to be incorporated in the GPU to
initiate data transfers based on task execution inside the GPU. Design of the
shared virtual memory (SVM) architecture is to be developed, where the
accelerator and system memories share a single virtual address space; and CPUs
and HAs in the system will communicate through the SVM. The hardware
controllers, memory management unit (MMU), GPU cache memory architectures, cache
coherence protocols, and other interfaces between the GPU and CPU cores will
also be designed. The project proposes suitable hybrid cache coherence protocols
and efficient interconnection networks for scalable system design. Finally, run-
time system and software interfaces will be developed that can execute multiple
multithreaded applications on a heterogeneous multicore architecture.