* 1423487
* III: CGV: Small: A Scalable Visual Analytics Framework for Exascale Scientific Simulations
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Hongfeng Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2019
* USD 405,378.00

By leveraging advanced parallel computing systems, scientists can answer
important questions that are critical to US energy and economic security.
Exascale computing will further enable scientists to perform detailed
simulations at higher resolution and greater complexity. Advanced visualization
is necessary for scientists to explore massive and complex simulation data at
high interactivity and fidelity to study various physical, chemical, and
biological phenomena. Although visualization technology has significantly
progressed in recent years, conventional visualization techniques are not yet
ready for exascale systems and applications. Future exascale systems are
expected to be characterized with many-core processors, deep memory hierarchies,
and high levels of concurrency. The design of new visualization techniques must
adapt to the need for timely discovery from complex and extremely large data
sets as well as these emerging hardware and software trends. The goal of this
project is to address the current technology gap by investigating a complete
course of visualization pipeline with scientific simulations in a holistic
fashion, and thus ensure parallelism and efficiency in exascale data visual
analytics. This project will integrate research with teaching and outreach
programs, where visualization of scientific applications will be used as an
effective means to promote students' interest and proficiency in science and
engineering studies, and to attract and retain both undergraduate and graduate
students, particularly female students, into research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project plans to account directly for the complex interdependencies with and
among the critical components of visual analytics for exascale computing. This
project focuses on three key research tasks: (1) developing a novel in-situ data
reduction and indexing algorithm to capture essentials from large-scale
simulations; (2) studying parallel visualization algorithms to promise scalable
performance for high-throughput and high-resolution exploration of large-scale
simulation data based on in-situ compact data representations; and (3) designing
user interface to parse and deploy application knowledge for visual analytics to
acquire critical scientific discovery from in-situ simulation output with
enhanced user experience and performance. This project is driven by real-world
large-scale scientific applications that involve the modeling and analysis of
evolving phenomena with heterogeneous data types, and demand scalable
capabilities of visual analytics. Scientific collaborators will be involved into
the development, evaluation, and deployment of the solutions to close the gap
between advanced visualization techniques and scientific applications, and help
solve some of the most challenging scientific problems. The techniques developed
within this project will be readily adapted for use by many applications beyond
the primary demonstration targets with similar needs, and thus will have a
significant impact on scientists' capability for data analysis and
visualization. The success of this research will potentially change the
conventional scientific discovery pipeline and accelerate the study of large-
scale simulation data. The project results will be disseminated through
different venues and forms that are publicized at the project website
(http://cse.unl.edu/~yu/research/nsf15_exascale/).