* 1423648
* CIF: Small: A wave-theoretic approach to information transport in scattering environments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Massimo Franceschetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project studies the information limits of communication through waves
propagating in multiple scattering environments. Exploiting the physics of the
wave propagation process, the main objective is to merge wave theory and
information theory to reveal new perspectives that are not captured by the
mainstream probabilistic models. Results will include information limits
obtained by observing physical quantities at certain asymptotic scales where
finite dimensionality emerges and observational uncertainties are averaged out.
These asymptotic scales are both temporal and spatial and allow us to identify
the fundamental tradeoffs in the practical design of communication systems that
are directly connected to the physics of the propagation process. The project
will build upon the rigorous notion of degrees of freedom of a waveform and
study their limits in different asymptotic regimes and scattering
configurations. This includes the study of sparse signals and attempts to
characterize their information content in terms of degrees of freedom. We expect
to draw connections between information theory, electromagnetics, and functional
analysis. In addition, connections between information theory and the concepts
of metric entropy and capacities for band-limited space-time waveforms will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project departs from the traditional research
in wireless communication that has expanded the knowledge tree into an intricate
forest of narrow cases. Starting from first physical principles it will attempt
to re-order, reinterpret, and prune the knowledge tree, revealing its basic
skeleton. In doing so, it will also provide insights into the design and
operation of next-generation communication systems, including MIMO communication
systems, imaging systems, remote sensing systems, and radar systems.
Mathematical aspects include advancements in approximation theory, functional
analysis, and harmonic analysis of square-integrable, quasi-bandlimited
functions. On the education front, a new generation of students will be
educated, and a new book will be published impacting broadly the graduate
engineering curriculum.