* 1423309
* AF: Small: Group theory and combinatorial structures in computer science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Laszlo Babai, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 325,000.00

The project will contribute to our understanding of the fundamental nature of
the computational process.  It will further integrate certain areas of
mathematics and theoretical computer science, specifically group theory and the
theory of highly symmetrical combinatorial structures in mathematics, with the
theory of algorithms for graphs and the theory of Boolean
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main targets of the project is the
Graph Isomorphism (GI) Problem: to decide whether or not two graphs are the
same. This is a fundamental problem in the classification of objects both in
mathematics and in science (such as chemistry); it is also an ingredient in so-
called "SAT solvers," a generic approach to optimization problems. GI represents
one of the great challenges in the theory of computing because of its
fundamental nature and of its notorious unresolved complexity status.  The
problem is intimately linked to the study of symmetries of graphs, and therefore
to structural and algorithmic problems in finite groups.  The PI and his
collaborators have recently overcome several decades-old barriers in connection
with this problem; building on this momentum, the PI expects further significant
progress in this direction, using a combination of group theoretic and
combinatorial techniques to be developed. One of the lines of attack to be
pursued in this project is a generalization of these methods to so-called
"primitive coherent configurations," an intermediate class between strongly
regular graphs and the general case.  Another line of attack will study the
structure of certain types of permutation groups referred to as "giant action on
blocks" that represent the principal barrier to the classical group-theoretic
approach to the problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue to mentor
both graduate and undergraduate students on this research topics.