* 1423877
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: An Institutional Theory of Participatory Budgeting
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Margaret Levi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,056.00

The project addresses several critical questions about the connection between
decision-making practices and democracy: How does participatory budgeting, a
process in which a government sets aside part of a public budget for the
community to allocate, impact patterns of political behavior and civic
engagement in the communities where it is implemented? Are investments in new
opportunities for public involvement in budgeting worthwhile? This project tests
assertions about the democratic impact of small-scale governance reforms like
participatory budgeting. It advances a new mid-level institutional theory of
participatory budgeting that describes how a new set of rules around budgeting
may enable new patterns of communication and mobilization within a political
community. Using both qualitative and quantitative methods in a comparative
evaluation of four cases of participatory budgeting in cities in the US and UK,
this research provides a unique set of empirical tests of causal claims about
the democratic effects of giving people the chance to directly control local
budget decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
investigates fundamental claims about the democratic impact of narrowly defined
participatory governance institutions like participatory budgeting. It
integrates disparate but related literatures explaining civic engagement,
political institutions, and democratic quality, empirically testing assertions
advanced by value-based theories of democracy. In developing an institutional
theory of how participatory budgeting may transform the political behavior and
preferences of people in a community, this project makes a substantive
contribution to ongoing debates within political science about the relationship
between institutions and what is generally referred to as political culture, the
general pattern of beliefs and behaviors that establish default orientations
toward political practices in a community. As a new empirical contribution, it
also provides one of the first comparative evaluations of participatory
budgeting to draw systematic cross-country comparisons in developed democracies.
The project takes a much-needed step toward a general understanding of what
distinguishes participatory budgeting as a common set of institutions and how
these institutions operate within a political community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research has several broader impacts.
First, it is of direct interest and application to policy makers, government
officials, and community leaders. Follow-up to fieldwork has also included
distributing specially targeted reports from the research back to participants
and local organizers of participatory budgeting processes so they can reflect on
and incorporate the observations of their process. Second, this project supports
the education of undergraduate students by giving them the chance for extensive
research experience. Third, during field research, the Co-PI has been able to
provide technical assistance to process organizers to improve their own internal
research and evaluation capacity. Finally, this research directly contributes to
the economic well-being of the country. More efficient and responsive budgeting
processes, as supported by effective and targeted implementation of
participatory budgeting will have a direct impact on the economic health of
urban areas in the US, by making cities more economically competitive and
establishing a better environment for business development.