* 1423659
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Collaborative: Detecting and Characterizing Internet Traffic Interception Based on BGP Hijacking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Alberto Dainotti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2019
* USD 587,433.00

Recent reports have highlighted incidents of massive Internet traffic
interception executed by re-routing Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) paths across
the globe (affecting banks, governments, entire network service providers,
etc.). The potential impact of these attacks can range from massive
eavesdropping to identity-spoofing or selective content modification. In
addition, executing such attacks does not require access or proximity to the
affected links and networks, posing increasing risks to national security. Worse
yet, the impact of traffic interception on the Internet is practically unknown,
with even large-scale and long-lasting events apparently going unnoticed by the
victims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the complex dynamics and number of
different actors involved on a global scale, devising effective methodologies
for the detection and characterization of traffic interception events requires
empirical and timely data (e.g., acquired while the event is still ongoing).
Such data must be a combination of passive BGP measurements and active
measurements (such as Traceroute), since the mechanism triggering the attack
operates on the inter-domain routing control plane, but the actual impact is
only verifiable in the data plane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging our
measurement and data processing infrastructure, this project aims to: (i)
investigate, develop, and experimentally evaluate novel methodologies to
automatically detect traffic interception events and to characterize their
extent, frequency, and impact; (ii) extend the research team's measurement
infrastructure to detect in near-real-time and report episodes of traffic
interception based on BGP hijacking; and (iii) document such events, providing
datasets to researchers and summary statistics and reports to operators,
emergency response teams, law enforcement agencies, and policy makers.