* 1423386
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of New Security Technologies on Urban Life
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Kimberley McKinson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Security apparatuses are rapidly changing because of advances in technology.
Scientists have established that like all new technologies, security systems can
have important social and cultural impacts for the communities in which they are
adopted. New security paradigms, and the privatization of security services,
offer an opportunity for anthropological science to evaluate the socio-cultural
variation in methods of social regulation and the efficacy of these technologies
in abating crime. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to
conduct rigorous, scientifically grounded fieldwork, explores what impact these
new security technologies are having on urban life, and how the implementation
of these technologies and the form that they take is influenced cultural and
social variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Irvine
doctoral student Kimberley McKinson, under the guidance of Dr. William Maurer
will explore how contemporary notions of home security are shaped both by new
technologies as well as by the social, historical and material legacies of
regulation and discipline. Understanding urban residential life requires more
than taking into account macro-level economic, legal and state discourses and
practices. As such, the researcher will examine the production of the
securitized home in order to study the ways in which socio-historical memory is
being figured and refigured as today's urban dwellers become increasingly more
involved in the domain of security and shift between metal, electronic and
social modes of security at the spatial scales of the home, neighborhood and
city. Data for this project will be collected through ethnographic fieldwork
with residents of varying socio-economic backgrounds in their homes and
community, with metal artisans in their workshops and at building sites and with
private electronic security technicians and staff as they install, repair and
design electronic security packages for clients. The researcher will use a
variety of qualitative methods that will include participant observation,
interviews, movement analysis, photography and videography, sketch-work and
document research and archival research. This research project is important
because it will recognize the home as a critical site in the study of security
and as a way to think about spatial governance in its most domestic and
pedestrian manifestation. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology, research findings from this project will be
useful to academics, policy makers and security specialists who seek to
understand a security paradigm as a critical analytic for studying contemporary
urban life.