* 1423324
* SHF:Small:Arithmetic Algorithms and Applications of Hereditarily Binary Numbers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Paul Tarau, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 253,161.00

Number representations have evolved from the unary representation where one
scratch on the wall represented a unit, to the base-n number system, with the
remarkable benefit of a logarithmic representation size. Over the last 1000
years, this representation has proved to be unusually resilient, partly because
all practical computations could be performed with reasonable efficiency within
the notation. Still, one might ask if radically different numbering systems can
offer similar services. And one step further one might want to ask if there are
number systems that can accommodate significantly larger numbers while still
providing comparably efficient computations with the familiar ones. This project
has several practical uses involving efficient computations with very large
numbers which is important for fields like number theory and cryptography.

The project studies algorithms working with such a numbering system:
hereditarily binary numbers. It involves computing with trees obtained by
recursively compressing sequences of zeros and ones occurring in the binary
representation of a number. With them, computations with giant numbers,
including towers of exponents and all record holding prime numbers become
tractable. The project includes work on compact representation and computation
with sets and boolean logic, study of connections to a family of combinatorial
objects, advanced number-theoretical algorithms as well as an open source
software library implementing computations with hereditarily binary numbers and
their applications.