* 1423090
* CSR: Small: Leveraging Distributed Generation and Adaptive Energy Storage Management for Efficient and Scale-Out Renewable Powered Data Center Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Renato Figueiredo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Computer system design inevitably enters the landscape of design for
sustainability as the data center power footprint has become a global concern.
Renewable energy powered data centers are gaining growing popularity in both IT
industry and academia as a way to tackle the dual challenges of energy shortage
and environmental issues. The goal of this project is to explore designs that
allow near-oracle performance of computing systems on a variety of green energy
resources. To achieve this goal, the distributed generation technology will be
leveraged. To support emerging data-analytic workloads that tend to scale well
with large number of compute nodes, modern data centers are continually adding
computing resources (i.e., scaling out) to their existing sites. Another goal of
this project is to explore how to enable a power-constrained data center to
gracefully scale out while lowering the carbon footprint with high efficiency
and low overhead.

This project synergistically integrates the clean and renewable energy and novel
hardware and software support and opens the door for a new class of green and
sustainable cloud and big data computing. It facilitates to most effectively
leverage renewable energy using emerging smart grid technologies to tackle the
grand "Power Wall" challenges faced in today's IT industries. In addition, this
project greatly contributes to enabling cloud data centers to meet the scale-out
requirement in both sustainable and economical ways and hence benefits numerous
real-life applications. This project also contributes to society through
engaging under-represented groups, research infrastructure dissemination for
education and training, and outreach to renewable energy industries.