* 1423765
* Configural Face Processing and Prejudice Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Kurt Hugenberg, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 505,995.00

Dehumanization - the denial of full humanness to others - is a key trigger for
mistreating other people. When others are dehumanized, they are often subjected
to aggression, experience discrimination, and others even become blind to their
pain. In the current research, Kurt Hugenberg (Miami University) and colleagues
will examine the facial signals that can lead to dehumanization of others. Past
research has shown that human faces are normally processed configurally. That
is, rather than examining specific features (the eyes, the nose) of the face
separately, the features of a face are spontaneously "grouped together" and
processed as a whole. This work will investigate whether a failure to perform
this configural processing for a face may trigger dehumanization. This proposed
research will 1) bridge the boundary between perceptual and social psychology,
2) expand our limited understanding of the perceptual mechanisms underlying
dehumanization, and 3) answer deep questions about both the antecedents and
effects of dehumanization and the malleability of face processing.
Dehumanization plays a key role in intergroup conflict, injustice, and
discrimination. Understanding the mechanisms underlying judgments of humanness
is a necessary next step to addressing the causes and consequences of
dehumanization.

The proposed studies will explore the relationships between ascribing humanity
and configural face processing in 10 experiments across 3 lines of research. The
first line of work may provide novel evidence that configural face processing is
a cue for humanity, with configurally processed faces making human faces seem
more human, and that disruptions of configural processing may trigger
dehumanization. Second, using both behavioral and neuroscience (ERP) techniques,
this work will investigate whether increasing ascriptions of humanity can
increase the extent of configural face processing. Third, the current research
will seek to extend the findings regarding configural face processing and
dehumanization to the domain of prejudice regulation. Whereas the activation of
prejudice can occur simply from race-typical facial features, the motivation to
control prejudice could be triggered by experiencing a face as fully human.
Thus, this third line of work will demonstrate that prejudice activation and
prejudice regulation are dissociable, such that the former can be triggered by
race-typical features alone, and the latter via configural processing. This
knowledge could lead to the development of novel strategies to effectively
reduce prejudice and discrimination.