* 1423117
* Development and adaptation of active dependency completion mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Akira Omaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2017
* USD 391,214.00

Understanding how children learn to comprehend language as efficiently as adults
do is a central goal for theories of both normal and abnormal language
acquisition. Developmental research has shown that, while much linguistic
knowledge develops in the first few years of life, children are not necessarily
adept at quickly using this knowledge during real-time language comprehension.
For example, as sentences unfold, adult listeners and readers are able to
continuously predict how the sentences are likely to continue, based on their
knowledge of language or the distribution of sentence structures. However,
children's prediction mechanisms sometimes diverge from those of adults, and
they must somehow develop adult-like predictive mechanisms during the course of
language acquisition. Understanding this developmental process could lead to
advances in the pedagogical techniques that aim to enhance language
comprehension in children. This may also improve clinical intervention
methodologies for adult patients with language disorders, whose comprehension
mechanisms show similar characteristics to those of
children's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the development and
adaptation of filler-gap dependency processing mechanisms in children and
adults. In comprehending questions like "What was Emily eating the cake with --
?," adults incrementally complete the dependency by associating the dislocated
wh-phrase "what" with the verb, but children wait to complete the dependency
until after the verb and its object is encountered. The main hypothesis of this
project is that language experience and distributional regularities in the input
play a key role in the development and adaptation of predictive processes in
filler-gap dependency completion. The motivation for this hypothesis is two-
fold. First, it is well established in developmental psychology that
distributional regularities can bootstrap children's cognitive and linguistic
development. Second, much work in adult psycholinguistics research has argued
that syntactic priming, a processing facilitation that results from repetitions
of abstract syntactic structures, reflects an implicit learning mechanism that
adapts the comprehension procedures in accordance with the recent language
experience. Taken together, children's comprehension mechanisms may adapt to an
adult-like mechanism based on a) a long-term accumulation of filler-gap
dependencies that complete at the verb position, as well as b) syntactic priming
of such filler-gap dependencies within an experimental session. Conversely,
adults' comprehension mechanisms should also adapt to the child-like,
conservative mechanism after exposure to filler-gap dependencies that are
completed at a post-verbal position. To test these predictions, Dr. Omaki will
conduct i) a corpus study that investigates the distributional patterns of
English filler-gap dependencies in adults' conversations and child-directed
speech, and ii) five eye-tracking experiments with children and adults that
explore the time course of filler-gap dependency processing, as well as its
interaction with priming sentences that are designed to create a bias towards
the alternative dependency completion mechanism. As such, this project links
questions and methodologies in two traditionally separate fields of adult
psycholinguistics and language development.