* 1423431
* CIF: Small: Towards Practical Validation Of Nonlinear Analog and Mixed-Signal Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Shobha Vasudevan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 448,556.00

Analog components are increasingly prevalent in our mobile, handheld, health
monitoring, automotive, GPS and other embedded devices (e.g., in the iphone 5,
twenty out of twenty eight components are of analog/mixed signal type). The
benefit of using analog devices over purely digital devices is that they offer
low power, low cost and high flexibility of parameters in the design space.
However, the design flexibility comes with a tradeoff of complexity in the
verification/validation of these systems. While verification of the correctness
of a digital design is a hard problem, analog systems introduce complexity in
behavior that surpasses digital verification. Hence, with the growing use of
analog components, ensuring that these systems are correct is critical to their
design process. Since analog components were isolated single components in
previous generations of devices, there has been a void in the research in this
area. This project attempts a methodology to provide a quantum leap over the
current practices of analog validation and have the potential to bridge the gap
between analog design and design automation tools, paving the way for other
analog verification methodologies to evolve further. Course material on analog
and mixed signal verification for undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Illinois and elsewhere will be developed as part of the proposal.
MyTri, a professional networking portal for women in computing will be further
developed by the PI with NSF funds as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
technical standpoint, the design of analog and mixed-signal are much more
complicated than purely digital design, due to nonlinear behavior, continuous
state spaces, as well as traditional methods of manual validation. In the
context of system level integration, Monte Carlo simulations methods, the de
facto standard for analog circuit validation, fall short of the intended goal of
providing an ability to generate input stimulus, control the type of
simulations, specify desired constraints or trigger events, as well as provide
debugging, diagnosis capacity and a method to evaluate the test coverage. This
work proposes a validation environment with all the capabilities listed above.
The proposal is to analyze randomized tree based search algorithms. These
algorithms can be made controllable to achieve different validation objectives.
The problems addressed in the proposed work are computationally very complex,
and thus, scalable solutions to these problems is a challenge that will also be
addressed.