* 1423286
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: State Response to Religious Insurgencies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Ron Hassner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

This study examines how, when, and why the religious identity of guerrilla
groups affects the strategic decision making of counterinsurgent forces. To
date, attention has overwhelmingly focused on how religion shapes insurgent
behavior at the expense of exploring how it shapes state-level civilian and
military decision making. The proposed project addresses the gap by leveraging
new quantitative and qualitative data from the British, Cypriot, and Israeli
national archives to evaluate cross-national and within-case variation in
British counterinsurgent response towards secular and religious insurgents.
Particular attention is given to insurgencies during the early postwar period in
British Malaya, Palestine, Cyprus, Northern Ireland and the Mau Mau Uprising in
Kenya. Through detailed process tracing of the decisions and actions of civilian
and military strategists, this study provides new insight into how the religious
identity of irregular forces can provoke a counterinsurgent response that is
distinct from strategies adopted to fight secular combatants. It clarifies the
conditions under which such a treatment effect is most likely, and identifies
the reasons for this systematic bias. Specifically, it suggests that the British
Armed Forces were characterized by a strategic culture that construed religious
rebels as irrational and identified the most effective form of response as one
of overwhelming force, not containment or negotiated settlement.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in its relevance to
contemporary debates on the relationship between religion and armed conflict. It
will broaden and deepen the literatures on civil war, conflict resolution, and
religious violence in five ways. First, it will draw attention to an outcome
underexplored in previous analysis, namely variation in counterinsurgency
strategy. Second, it will collect, analyze, and disseminate original data on
British counterinsurgency operations against insurgents with religious
identities. Third, it will examine insurgent groups from religious traditions
understudied in past analyses, such as Judaism and Eastern Orthodoxy. Fourth,
this study will challenge the widespread claim that identity-based civil wars,
especially religious ones, last longer, involve more casualties, and remain more
difficult to resolve due to the demanding and uncompromising nature of
combatants' beliefs and identities. Instead, this approach suggests that
counterinsurgent perceptions of their opponents' religious identity may be as
important, if not more, as the identities themselves. Finally, this project will
add to recent work by historians who have challenged the conventional wisdom
that British counterinsurgency operations adhered to a single, uniform doctrine
of minimal force during the early postwar period. The proposed study offers an
explanation for episodes of excessive force based on civilian and military
leaders' assumptions concerning the nature of religious insurgents and the
threat they pose.

This study also stands to make several broader impacts in the form of
significant policy recommendations as the U.S. military continues to support
counterinsurgency operations against religious, and secular, insurgent groups
across the globe. A study of the British counterinsurgency experience will
elicit concrete suggestions for managing contemporary religious conflicts to
improve the probability of success, enable U.S. counterinsurgent forces to
better contain religiously motivated insurgencies to the initial conflict
environment, and reduce the opportunities for extreme acts of terrorism by
limiting blowback in response to repressive tactics. Such a project is all the
more important today as the number of and consequences of religious insurgencies
continues to grow.