* 1423788
* Understanding the Mechanisms for Disengagement from Contentious Political Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jaime Settle, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,975.00

The goal of this project is to better understand which facets of social
interaction about politics are most stress inducing, for which kinds of people,
and in which contexts. The first part of the study uses survey experiments to
assess hypothesized aspects of interpersonal political interaction that may
induce stress, relating to demands to form and express opinions, as well as
concerns about potentially negative evaluations or social implications of
political interaction. This survey experiment will be conducted with a a
nationally representative sample of American adults. The second part of the
study will use a set of laboratory experiments to demonstrate causal
relationships between the experience of social encounters with politics and
self-reported as well as physiologically-measured stress and emotional reponese.
By manipulating the social tie strength of the discussants in a political
interaction, the format of the interaction, and the anticipated level of
disagreement, the study will more fully elucidate the mechanisms that cause
people to be uncomfortable interacting about politics, potentially leading to
their disengagement from politics. This research will fill major gaps in the
political science literature by unifying fragemented findings loosely related to
these topics. This unique approach also continues to bridge the methodological
gap between between political science and psychology by relying heavily on a
social psychological explanation for political behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combined effect of increased social interaction about
politics-due to largely to the development fo the Internet and social media-in a
more polarized political environment suggest that people are more likely to
encounter extreme views, information about political beliefs in their social
connections, and demands to voice their own political opinions. Not everyone
will be equally affected by these changes in the political environment, however,
and individual psychological differences may influence how people interpret the
demands and ramifications of contentious social interactions about politics.
This study examines the psychological traits that impact our willingness to
engage in political debate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Democratic behavior hinges on
the idea that all citizens have equal opportunity to voice their opinions.
Barriers to participation and representation-based on gender, race, class, and
education level-persist and remain formidable challenges. However, we should not
overlook more-subtle-and perhaps more complex-barriers to engagement based on
people's orientation twoard conflict and disagreement. People who prefer
consensus and cmpromise may be discouraged from engaging meaningfully with
politics in a polarized environment. Identifying the facets of politics that are
stressful to citizens, and indentifying the facets of politics that are
stressful to citizens, and indentifying ways to ameliorate that stress, has the
potential to energize and enfranchise citizens who are discuouraged by our
current political system.