* 1423226
* Earth Partnership: Indigenous Arts and Sciences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Richard Hall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,762.00

Earth Partnership: Indigenous Arts and Sciences (EP) will develop and refine a
model for integrating Indigenous and informal and formal K-20 educators in
ecological restoration, project-based learning and professional development. EP
will involve participants in Native habitat restoration on community spaces,
school grounds and nearby natural areas as a context for intergenerational STEM
learning across age, ecosystem, discipline, learning style, culture and place.
EP integrates Native knowledge and core values including relationship,
reciprocity, respect and responsibility with Western STEM concepts and
processes. The project will integrate the expertise of university social,
physical, life and learning scientists and community and tribal practitioners to
design, develop and test informal STEM learning incorporating ecological
restoration, citizen science and cultural diversity. EP grows out of a teacher
professional development model funded by NSF and is a network that now includes
participating individuals and organizations from many states. This network will
enhance dissemination and provide a foundation for a larger project growing out
of the results of this project. EP will build capacity of Native and non-Native
informal educators and citizens to work together to generate engagement among
young people and adults with ecological STEM learning and stewardship. The
approach will integrate culturally authentic resources, inquiry and citizen
science process skills (e.g., data collection, analysis, ecological restoration,
water stewardship) in multiple learning settings. Stronger multicultural,
intergenerational and community partnerships will be supported to restore
aquatic and terrestrial habitats through community-based stewardship projects
and Service Learning. Through EP, Native youth will be encouraged to explore
STEM careers that will meet future workforce needs for managing tribal resources
and become knowledgeable citizens able to use critical thinking and analysis of
STEM-related issues in their communities. The project will use a developmental
evaluation approach to assess project planning processes and outcomes of
educational programs.