* 1423558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Predictors of Children's Lying to Conceal Parental Transgression
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Gail Goodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,958.00

It is vital for society to protect children from abuse. However, child abuse
victims are emotionally attached to their parents, and thus these young victims
will sometimes lie to conceal parental transgressions, even serious
transgressions such as child abuse. Abused children may be afraid of losing
their parent and entering foster care, and therefore lie to protect their
parents, despite the falsehood increasing the chance of the children staying in
an abusive home. It is important, therefore, to identify parenting variables and
parent-child relationship factors that predict whether or not children will lie
to conceal a parental transgression. This study will help guide theory regarding
social predictors of children's lying behavior. T his new knowledge will be of
use forensically given the likelihood that child victims who create this type of
falsehood would remain in detrimental environments and not receive necessary
protection.

This research examines whether parenting style, child attachment, and parental
attachment relate to children's lying to project their parents. A second goal of
the research is to determine whether children's willingness to lie changes when
the cost for lying varies. Parent-child dyads, with children ranging from 8- to
12- years of age, will be given well-validated measures of parenting and
attachment to complete, and then take part in a semi-scripted transgression
scenario. The children will be questioned regarding the transgressions, either
with an implied high cost or an implied low cost, and responses will be coded
for lying behavior. Regression models will determine whether the social
variables and the cost manipulation predict children?s lying.