* 1423137
* CSR: Small: Improving Data Center Water Efficiency via Online Resource Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Gang Quan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 11/30/2015
* USD 349,495.00

A large data center may consume millions of gallons of cooling water each day;
in addition, data centers also indirectly consume an enormous amount of water
embedded in offsite electricity generation. As a result, water conservation is
surfacing as a critical concern for data centers, amid the anticipation of
surging water demand worldwide. Left unchecked, the growing water footprint of
data centers can pose a severe threat to data center sustainability and may even
handicap availability of services, especially for data centers in water-stressed
areas. Existing mechanical solutions for conservation, such as using
recycled/industry water and directly using outside cold air, are often costly
and/or very limited by external factors such as locations, climate conditions,
among others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the integral efforts from both
industry and academy to enable data center sustainability, this project uniquely
integrates water footprint as an essential part of resource management in
virtualized data centers. It exploits the inherent yet little-known
characteristics of time-varying water efficiency and optimizes resource
management for minimizing operational cost as well as water footprint without
compromising service quality. To this end, this project investigates three
complementary research thrusts: (i) Online computing resource management for
water sustainability in the presence of large unknown dynamics (such as highly
volatile outside temperature); (ii) Exploration of the dependency of data center
water efficiency on cooling systems, and joint optimization of cooling and
computing resource management for water sustainability; (iii) Experimentation
and validation based on combined system prototyping and software simulation. In
addition to its environmental impacts, this project has large societal impacts
for its potential to alleviate the growing pressure on data center water
footprint effectively and economically. This project will enhance the
understanding of interplay among water consumption, power/energy consumption,
and resource management in data centers, and lay a solid foundation for
sustainable evolvement of greener data centers. New findings and techniques will
be readily incorporated into teaching materials. The project also contains a
significant component to promote diversity by inspiring minority students,
especially Hispanic students, to engage in computer science research.