* 1423056
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Robust Materials Genome Data Mining Framework for Prediction and Guidance of Nanoparticle Synthesis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Feiping Nie, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal supports novel computer science research to provide foundations
for new technologies. The research objective of this proposal is to design new
robust data mining and machine learning algorithms for solving the computational
challenges in complex materials genome data mining. The Materials Genome
Initiative research has been launched by U.S. government to discover,
manufacture, and deploy advanced materials fast and low-cost, which holds great
opportunities to address the challenges in clean energy, national security, and
human welfare. However, the major computational challenges are the bottlenecks
for comprehensive materials genome data analysis due to unprecedented scale and
complexity. There is a critical need for new data mining and machine learning
strategies to bridge the gap and facilitate the new materials discovery. To
solve the key and challenging problems in mining such comprehensive
heterogeneous materials genome data, the PIs propose to develop a novel robust
data mining and explore ways to integrate features from multiple data sources.
The PIs will make the developed computational methods and tools online,
available to the public. These methods and tools are expected to impact other
material genome and biochemistry research and enable investigators working on
new material design to effectively test performance prediction hypothesis. The
proposed algorithms and tools are expected to help knowledge extraction for
applications in broader scientific domains with massive high-dimensional and
heterogonous data sets. This project will facilitate the development of novel
educational tools to enhance several current courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs propose to develop a novel robust data mining framework targeting to explore
the following research tasks. First, the PIs will develop new computational
tools to automate the material genome data processing, including missing values
imputation by a new robust rank-k matrix completion method, robust tensor
factorization based feature extraction approach, and informative nanoparticles
selection using robust active learning model. Second, the PIs will investigate
the new sparse multi-task multi-view learning model to integrate heterogeneous
material characterizations for predicting the catalytic capabilities and
associations to theoretical modeling measurements. Third, to predict the
catalytic capabilities of the new synthesized nanoparticles, the PIs will design
novel robust semi-supervised learning models by investigating elastic embedding,
adaptive loss, L1-norm graph, and directed graph models. The proposed sparse
multi-view feature learning and robust semi-supervised learning models meet the
critical needs of large-scale data analysis and integration. Such unique
capabilities will enable new computational applications in a large number of
research areas. It advances and thus extends the relationship between
engineering innovation and computational analysis.