* 1423054
* TWC: Small: Empirical Evaluation of the Usability and Security Implications of Application Programming Interface Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brad Myers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 547,109.00

The objective of this project is to gather empirical evidence on the tradeoffs
between security and usability in programming language and library design.
Although it is well known that poorly-designed interfaces can lead to increased
defect rates and software vulnerabilities, there is currently little specific
guidance to designers on what precise language and library features make
programmers more or less likely to write vulnerable code. Furthermore, little of
the existing guidance is empirically based. The project will develop
empirically-based guidance on two issues. First, the ISO/IEC standardization
working group for the C programming language is currently evaluating multiple
proposals for adding concurrency to the language, and this project will produce
data to inform their decision-making process. Second, by evaluating the impact
of the use of mutability, the project will provide data that may influence how
future programming languages and libraries are designed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three parts. The first phase is an
analysis of flaws in code that uses the draft versions of the C concurrency APIs
under consideration as well as comparable Java databases on concurrency-related
flaws. In the second and third phases, programmers who have between 2 and 5
years of experience will be asked to complete tasks using competing interface
designs. The first set of experiments will evaluate competing C and C++ parallel
language extensions to determine which language and library features are more
likely to result in secure code. Specifically, the investigators will measure
the programmers' ability to produce concurrent code free from security-related
defects, such as "data races" and "time-of-check-to-time-of-use" errors using
the different libraries. The investigators will then build upon this work to
evaluate tradeoffs between security and usability when using immutability to
reduce the likelihood of vulnerabilities in concurrent code. Through these two
experiments, the project will advance the science of cybersecurity by developing
a methodology for empirically evaluating how library and language design affect
the frequency with which trained professional programmers inadvertently
introduce security vulnerabilities during implementation.