* 1423967
* Collaborative Research:   High-resolution Cretaceous terrestrial climate records of temperature, weathering and hydrologic response to hyperthermals in Songliao Basin, China
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Stephan Graham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2016
* USD 73,073.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The Cretaceous period (145 to 66 myr ago) is
characterized by an interval when the Earth experienced unusually warm
temperatures and high carbon dioxide levels. To understand how the Earth might
behave during greenhouse conditions it is imperative to study these unique times
in the Earth's past. In an effort to examine this time period, the International
Continental Scientific Drilling Program launched a project entitled 'Continental
Scientific Drilling Project of Cretaceous Songliao Basin: Continuous High-
resolution Terrestrial Archives and Greenhouse Climate Change,'. This project
will provide ~10 km of nearly continuous core through the entire Cretaceous that
is preserved as ancient lake sediments in northeast China. PIs will take
advantage of this unprecedented opportunity to study the Cretaceous hothouse by
collecting isotopic and sedimentologic data specifically focusing on intervals
(e.g. ~93 myr ago) in the Cretaceous when the Earth experienced extreme warmth
and the oceans became anoxic. They have assembled a team of scientists (Stanford
Univ., Univ. of Wisconsin, and Northwestern Univ.) with unique and complimentary
skill sets to address the problem of how Earth's mid-latitudes behave during
extreme warmth. PIs are particularly interested in examining the links and
feedbacks between the Earth's hydrologic and carbon cycles and time-scales that
these cycles are operative over. Their study will provide one of the most
detailed and constrained isotopic data sets for a terrestrial setting. These
data will provide the basis for their modeling studies that will give
quantitative bounds on the temperature and precipitation changes associated with
hyperthermal events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This one-year study focuses
on the Cretaceous terrestrial record of climate change in the Songliao Basin of
northeastern China, a long-lived, internally drained rift basin. PIs
understanding of the terrestrial responses to global climate change are informed
in part, by paleoclimate studies of times when the Earth experienced greenhouse
and hothouse conditions. They have a unique opportunity to address questions
concerning the links and feedbacks between global warming, the carbon cycle and
the hydrologic cycle in a terrestrial setting through the examination of core
material collected in ICDP coring of the Cretaceous Songliao Basin. Their
initial studies of the Upper Cretaceous core (SK-I) from this basin show that
the carbon isotopic values of ostracods reflect the global perturbations of the
carbon cycle as observed in marine records (Chamberlain et al., 2013). With the
collection of the new drill core from SK-II (May 2014), PIs are positioned to
extend this record through the Lower Cretaceous. In their study of the
Cretaceous drill-core they will address two related hypotheses, which are: 1)
SK-II core will record the temperature history of the Lower Cretaceous observed
in marine settings, particularly the hyperthermals and their carbon isotopic
changes; and 2) the Songliao drill core contains carbon isotopic evidence for
the Ocean Anoxic Event (OAE) 2 at the Cenomanian/Turonian boundary, and this
boundary will record evidence for the increased chemical and physical weathering
that may be responsible for OAE 2. To test these two related hypotheses will
require oxygen, carbon and strontium isotopic and trace/REE element studies set
within a rigorous sedimentologic and geochronologic framework. The latter will
be supported by field investigations of volcanic and sedimentary rocks exposed
near the basin margins. Driven by their earlier studies, PIs recognize that the
isotopic values record both global climate changes and regional basin evolution.
Unraveling these basin responses is not trivial, thus they have assembled
scientists with unique yet complimentary expertise involving sedimentology,
geochemistry, and modeling. Since this is a one-year study PIs will focus on
existing core material (SK-I) and the upper portion of planned core (SK-II) that
span the Cenomanian/Turonian boundary and OAE 2.