* 1423602
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alternative constructions of authority in establishing institutions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Calvin Morrill, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 11/30/2016
* USD 13,630.00

Building on previous research that examines the interpretation and construction
of law in organizational contexts, this project evaluates the hypothesis that
relevant law both shapes how actors view authorization of new forms of
organization under law, and how law in turn is shaped by encounters with
alternative understandings regarding the role of locally significant
institutions' understandings emanating from practice, the market, or elsewhere-
that inform the bureaucratic authorization process. The project will take the
authorization of charter schools, significant social institutions, as the site
for analysis of the reciprocal shaping of law and organizations.

Although there exists a well-developed literature on the performance and place
of charter schools within market-based education reforms, there have been few
empirical studies of how the parties relevant to charter governance encounter,
invoke, and use the law in the vital moments of school authorization, renewal,
and closure. The project will integrate analysis of the sociolegal dimensions of
organizational authorization and revocation under law with mapping of relevant
organizations. The study uses a multi-method approach with two phases: 1)
quantitative analysis of the current and historical population of relevant
organizations to reveal patterns and types of establishment, challenged or
denied renewal, closure, and legal appeal, with a focus on the participation and
significance of legal professionals, and 2) qualitative case studies of specific
authorization actions, including analysis of charter petitions and authorization
documents and in-depth interviews of the parties to charter authorization. To
the field of education research, this project brings needed sociolegal attention
to law within educational organizations, spaces characterized by the retention
of public accountability in the face of increasing privatization.

By focusing on the ways actors invoke, make use of, and extend the law in the
processes of charter school authorization, this study will have important
implications for charter operators, the bodies legally tasked with charter
oversight, and for policymakers as they evaluate the place of charter schools
within educational reform. The project will also train students in methods in
the social sciences.