* 1423560
* AF: Small: The Fixed Point of the Restricted Delauay Triangulation Operator, with Applications to Manifold Reconstruction and Mesh Generation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Shewchuk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 484,484.00

The investigators will study the related problems of surface reconstruction and
mesh generation. Surface reconstruction is the problem of creating geometric
models (usually surface triangulations) from data that merely suggests the form
of an object. Most commonly, the input to a surface reconstruction algorithm is
a point cloud consisting of points that have been sampled from a real-world
object by laser range finders, stereo photography, medical images, video depth-
from-motion algorithms, or even physical probes. Surface reconstruction is used
in computational engineering to perform physical simulations, in computer
graphics to acquire real-world geometry to place in virtual environments such as
videogames and movie special effects, and in surveying to acquire the geometry
of a plot of land or a collection of buildings.

Mesh generation is the problem of dividing a physical domain with a complicated
geometry--say, an automobile engine, a human's blood vessels, or the air around
an airplane--into small, simple pieces such as triangles or tetrahedra. An
important problem within mesh generation is the generation of surface meshes
embedded in three dimensions--specifically, triangle meshes that approximate
curved surfaces. Surface meshes are ubiquitous in computer graphics, geometric
modeling, and visualization.

Most prior work on these topics has been set in 2- or 3-dimensional space. There
is a higher-dimensional analog of surface reconstruction called manifold
reconstruction, commonly used for scientific data analysis. Many processes in
science and engineering produce data in the form of points in a high-dimensional
space of attributes. Manifold reconstruction is the problem of discovering
relationships between the attributes that restrict the points to lie
(approximately) on a low-dimensional manifold.

This research will generalize algorithms for manifold reconstruction and
manifold mesh generation to operate on k-dimensional manifolds embedded in a
d-dimensional ambient space, where k ranges from 2 to perhaps 10 and d ranges
from 3 to 10,000 or even greater. The investigators will also produce and
publicly release software for manifold reconstruction in d dimensions and out-
of-core software for surface reconstruction from extremely large three-
dimensional point clouds so that scientists, engineers, and geometric modelers
can use the methods for numerical simulation, computer graphics, and scientific
data analysis. The work will impact education and outreach at U.C. Berkeley by
training graduate and undergraduate students in research and geometric
algorithms.