* 1423872
* The Microsyntax of Pronouns in North American English
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Raffaella Zanuttini, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2019
* USD 285,951.00

Several misconceptions about language are pervasive in our culture. For example,
it is common for people to think that American English is uniform, except for
some differences in pronunciation ("accents"). This is not true: in addition to
lexical and phonological differences, American English also exhibits
morphological and syntactic diversity across its varieties. It is also common to
think that, for any language, there is a variety that instantiates it at its
best, while other varieties represent departures from the norm and are somehow
inferior (less pure, rich, sophisticated, etc.). This is also not true: research
in linguistics unambiguously shows that every language comes in many varieties,
both diachronically and synchronically, and that such varieties have similarly
rich and sophisticated grammatical systems. Creating broader awareness of these
findings of linguistics can help to correct these misconceptions, and lead to a
broader understanding and acceptance of diversity, linguistic and
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many facets of syntactic diversity in American
English are still not fully understood. This project aims to clarify some of
them to better understand a variety of complex properties across different
grammatical systems. The research has two main goals. One is to build an atlas
of varieties of American English based on syntactic differences, providing
graphic representations of areas where people use different syntactic
constructions. The other goal is to shed light on an issue that is important to
our understanding of human language, namely syntactic differences between
pronouns (e.g. "they") and noun phrases (e.g. "the students"). The researchers
will administer surveys designed to elicit acceptability judgments on sentences
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. They will analyze the results of these surveys,
plot the distribution of various constructions on maps, and conduct interviews
with a subset of survey participants. The results will contribute to our
understanding of pronouns as well as our broad knowledge of how speakers of the
relevant constructions are distributed, geographically and socially, across the
United States. The surveys will also include numerous other test sentences,
which will serve as pilot studies to plant the initial seeds for a syntactic
dialect atlas of the United States. This latter sub-project, we expect, will
promote greater communication and cross-fertilization between dialectologists
and theoretical syntacticians.