* 1423050
* Collaborative Research: EvalFest (Evaluation Use, Value and Learning through Festivals of Science and Technology)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Katherine Nielsen, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 202,752.00

EvalFest (Evaluation Use, Value, and Learning through Festivals of Science and
Technology) will test innovative evaluation methods in science festivals that
are being held across the country and assess in what ways and how effectively
they are used. Morehead Planetarium and Science Center (at the University of
North Carolina-Chapel Hill) and the University of California, San Francisco, in
collaboration with over twenty science festivals, will (1) investigate whether a
multisite evaluation approach is an effective model for creating common metrics
for informal STEM education, (2) develop common methods to measure the effects
of Festivals, (3) create a query-able database of 50,000 Festival attendees to
share with the informal STEM learning field, and (4) document whether these
efforts also result in new knowledge related to informal STEM education.

The project will develop the Enterprise Feedback Management (EFM) system and
query-able database for the festival community. EFMs are systems, including
processes and software, that enable groups (such as the festival network) to
collect, organize, analyze and share data. The EFM system will be designed to
integrate data across sites and to allow users to extract data of interest. The
project will refine evaluation tools currently used within the Science Festival
Alliance that assess self-reported festival learning, and the effects of
festival attendance, motivation, and future science participation. It will
collect economic impact data and longitudinal festival attendee data. The
project will also develop some new evaluation tools such as secret shopper
observational protocols. Data from festival attendees will be collected onsite
at participating festivals.