* 1423112
* CHS: Small: Realistic Navigation in the Third Dimension Using Low Cost, Portable, Wearable Immersive Environment Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Eric Hodgson, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 364,116.00

The natural world around us is characterized by hills and valleys. Man-made
structures are often composed of multiple levels connected by stairways, ramps,
or ladders. Slope helps us remain oriented when navigating, and has a strong
influence on the routes people elect to follow towards their destinations. To
date, however, the simulation of incline and elevation changes has largely been
neglected in immersive environments (IEs), resulting in 2D navigation through a
3D world. The downside of this situation is that immersed users receive a less
than realistic experience and do not learn to take advantage of vertical
information typical of real world situations; moreover, route learning and
navigation can become behaviorally inaccurate when users are able to
effortlessly glide up inclines that might otherwise require a detour. Historical
solutions to this problem are typically comprised of expensive, heavy, and
complex hardware such as a tilting treadmill or active mechanical tether; such
systems require design tradeoffs that may excel at simulating one type of motion
(e.g., an incline) while neglecting others (e.g., turning), and the specialized
hardware has generally not matured beyond the lab. The PI's prior research has
been aimed at creating low-cost, high-fidelity, and portable IE systems that
incorporate a rendering unit and a head-mounted display with a natural
locomotion interface that allows users to navigate through virtual worlds by
walking and turning normally. In this project the PI will build upon and extend
that work by implementing realistic simulations of slope and changing elevation.
Project outcomes will benefit cognitive and behavioral research on human spatial
memory and learning, as well as IE training for tasks involving route selection,
general navigation, multi-level travel, and slope perception.

Recent research has demonstrated that software-based redirected walking
techniques can subtly distort an IE (e.g., by imperceptibly rotating the virtual
world about the user or scaling user movement), to enable kilometer-scale
navigation in a confined tracking area. The PI will build on these techniques to
simulate slope with simple inexpensive hardware. The effort required to walk up
or downhill will depend upon factors such as weight, stride length, motion
efficiency, speed, incline, and distance, as one would expect in the natural
world and which can easily be measured in an IE. Although the physical surface
under the user cannot be tilted in a wearable IE system, it is possible to scale
user movement to enforce an appropriate amount of physical effort. Moreover, the
PI and his team have developed a unique high-precision locomotion interface
comprised of low cost foot-mounted inertial/magnetic sensors that can precisely
track a user's gait and stepping pattern to measure the amount and direction of
force, and can detect atypical stepping actions such as those associated with
stairs or ladders. System validation will be carried out through a series of
behavioral studies, in which subjects complete spatial perception and navigation
tasks in corresponding real and immersive environments that include slope and/or
various artefacts that lead to changes in elevation.