* 1423239
* III: Small: Characterizing and Evaluating Whole Session Interactive Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Nicholas Belkin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 507,425.00

This research addresses a newly important issue in contemporary life. As people
become more accustomed to using the Web for finding information, they are
increasingly using it for addressing ever more complex and personally important
information problems. However, current Web search engines have been developed
and specifically tuned to helping people find simple, mostly factual
information, usually as a single response list to a single, simple query. But
when they try to address the new types of problems, people need to engage in
longer information seeking episodes than the one query-one response paradigm
assumes. They may also need to engage in many activities other than just
clicking on a search result, such as reading, evaluating, comparing and using
information. Current Web search engines do not sufficiently support this model
of information seeking and use. This research addresses this problem by studying
why people engage in such complex information seeking (that is, the reasons that
motivate them to do this), and what they try to accomplish during the course of
an information seeking episode (their search intentions). The end-goal of this
research is to design and evaluate new types of search engines for supporting
people in accomplishing the goals that have led them to engage in information
seeking. This means, in essence, being able to personalize system support to the
individual, and the individual's goals and context. Specifically, this research
will establish relationships between people's behaviors during an information
seeking episode, the motivating goals that led them to engage in information
seeking, and their specific intentions at any point in an information seeking
episode. This will enable development of systems that will be able to predict
how best to support the individual person in addressing their information
problem. For example, the findings from this project could help build a system
that automatically identifies that a searcher is shopping for a car, and help
him/her compare cost-benefits of new vs. used cars, buying vs. leasing, and
eventually making an informed decision. Research will be integrated with
educational activities via developing modules to supplement courses in iSchools
and library/information science programs, etc. This is important, since a broad
range of students would learn about new methods of searching and related user
studies and evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the
relationships between observable searcher behaviors and the higher-level
intentions which a searcher wishes to accomplish at any particular point during
an information seeking episode, nor are there good methods or measures for
evaluating interactive information retrieval system support for whole
information seeking episode evaluation, or for evaluation of support for any
particular searcher intention during an information seeking episode. This
project addresses the problems of: recognizing searcher intentions during the
course of an information seeking episode through observation of searcher
behavior; developing methods and measures for evaluation of interactive
information retrieval system support for those intentions during the course of
an information seeking episode; and, developing measures and methods for
evaluating the performance of the interactive information retrieval system in
support of the entire information seeking episode. The observed behaviors
include, e.g., eye-fixations, mouse movements, clicking, following links, page
transitions and query reformulations. The project proceeds in three stages.
First, it builds on and extends the results of previous and current research in
relating observable searcher behaviors to high-level searcher intentions, with
the goal of characterizing and segmenting information seeking episodes according
to these behaviors and their associated intentions, and to develop models of
information seeking episode behaviors. This is conducted both with previously
collected data, and on data derived from a new user studies. Stage 2 collects
data on "real" information seeking episodes, through a browser plug-in logging
tool, and interviews with participants. These data are analyzed to discover new
motivating tasks, to identify new information seeking episode intentions, and to
enhance the models of information seeking episode behaviors. Stage 3, including
a further study of people conducting complex information seeking tasks,
identifies the goals of intentions during the information seeking episode and
for the whole information seeking episode, and develops and tests measures of
support for those goals, and methods for gathering the data required for
applying the measures. Stage 3 also investigates the application of the behavior
models for simulation of information seeking episodes. In essence, this project
will result in statistical models and algorithms that predict a searcher's
intentions, leading to better ways for personalization and recommendations.
These outcomes will be novel and significant because they will allow us to
address goal/task accomplishment, and not just search improvement, through a
user's information seeking episode(s). The results from this project will be
disseminated through the project website (http://inforetrieval.org/iir/). The
website will specifically include technical reports, publications, and links to
datasets and open-source software resulted from this project.