* 1423348
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalability and Reliability for Network Communication Infrastructure in Smart Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Rose Qingyang Hu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 274,305.00

As the first major milestone and the fundamental step of the overall smart grid
roadmap, an advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) is a system that senses,
collects and analyzes data on energy usage and power quality from smart meters,
and communicates with metering devices on request or on schedule. In spite of
many recent research activities on smart grid communication infrastructure,
scalability and reliability of communication architectures in smart grid AMI are
still not well-addressed yet, even though they are two of the most important
issues in this field. These have seriously hampered the development and
deployment of effective communication technologies to smart grid field.
Moreover, there is still a critical gap in the knowledge base to understand the
interactions and the tradeoffs of scalability and reliability, and to design the
best performance metrics in smart grid AMI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the challenging issues of emerging communication network design in
smart grid, and study scalability and reliability aspects and their interactions
in AMI. The proposed research aims at analysis and design of scalable
architectures for advanced metering infrastructures in the wide area network
level, and designs reliable communications for energy efficient self-sustaining
neighborhood area networks. The approaches include identifying and addressing
the new challenges in the scalability and reliability design for smart grid
communications with a large amount of data and different communication
requirements, designing novel algorithms for optimal deployment of neighborhood
area networks, and summarizing design strategies and principles for scalable and
reliable end-to-end smart grid communications under various scenarios. This
project introduces novel network design strategies and principles to achieve
scalable and reliable network communication infrastructure that can handle a
tremendous amount of AMI smart metering data in real-time. The research efforts
conducted in this project will advance scientific understanding in the field of
network communication infrastructure in smart grid, and have a significant
impact on the design of scalable and reliable smart grid AMI systems. The
outcomes of the project will foster the transition of our society into a more
energy efficient and sustainable future. The project incorporates an education
plan that engages underrepresented students.