* 1423905
* Effects of Native Language and Linguistic Exposure on Non-Native Listeners' Use of Prosodic Cues in Speech Segmentation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Annie Tremblay, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2019
* USD 258,964.00

Speech is a continuous flow of sounds where no single device explicitly marks
word boundaries. A crucial challenge for language learners is that the cues that
signal word boundaries differ across languages; thus, a speaker's experience
with her native language may be misleading when attempting to segment a second
language into words. Specifying how adult language learners recognize words in
continuous speech is very important, first because it can help resolve key
theoretical debates about how language learning and language comprehension take
place in adults. More precisely, it can shed light on whether (and if so, the
extent to which) the adult brain is sufficiently plastic to develop sensitivity
to new segmentation cues and the factors that modulate whether or not this
learning is possible. This research can therefore have important implications
for cognitive and linguistic sciences. Furthermore, speech segmentation is
essential to successful communication among multilingual speakers. As our
society is becoming increasingly multilingual, languages have become intrinsic
components of K-12 and college curricula, and computational linguists and
computer scientists have striven to develop technologies that could afford
efficient communication among multilingual speakers. Investigating the factors
that influence how adult language learners segment a second language into words
can thus have important implications for the teaching of languages and for the
development of communication technologies (e.g., automatic speech
recognition).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the influence of the
native language and of recent linguistic exposure on adult language learners'
use of prosodic cues, specifically pitch, in speech segmentation. Its primary
aim is to determine how the similarities and differences between the native
language and second language affect adult language learners' ability to use
prosodic cues in speech segmentation. Two hypotheses are tested: (i) the
Prosodic Assimilation Hypothesis: Second-language prosodic systems that are
similar to, yet different from, native-language prosodic systems are assimilated
and thus more difficult to learn in speech segmentation than second-language
prosodic systems that are very different from native-language prosodic systems;
and (ii) the Cue-Weighting Transfer Hypothesis: The functional load of
segmentation cues in the native language is carried over to the second language.
A secondary aim of this research is to assess the effect of recent linguistic
exposure on speech segmentation. A third hypothesis is tested: (iii)
Probabilistic Speech Segmentation Hypothesis: The speech processing system uses
a single set of speech segmentation strategies that reflect the probabilities of
cues to word boundaries across the native language and second language. To test
these hypotheses, this research focuses on native French, Korean, English, and
Dutch listeners with or without knowledge of French or Korean as second
languages. Listeners will complete visual-world eye-tracking and artificial-
language segmentation experiments.