* 1423998
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Ethnicity, Civic Participation, and Public Goods in Kenya
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Kirk Harris, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 17,546.00

This project analyzes the determinants of local public goods spending in a
developing democracy, Kenya, by examining variation in the management of the
country's Constituency Development Fund (CDF) between several different
parliamentary constituencies. It focuses on how local demographic features like
ethnic divisions and civic participation in public life jointly shape the
incentives of politicians to target particular communities for public works
projects. Original survey research and interview data will examine the extent to
which these social features lead politicians to privilege the interests of
certain groups over others, as well as how politicians manage the fund in ways
that are consistent with their political goals. In so doing, this study
contributes to the growth of generalizable knowledge about the efficacy of
democratic governance in the developing world, where governments struggle to
deliver basic services to their citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Recent work on ethnicity and public goods has helped clarify the
mechanisms by which ethnic diversity negatively impacts levels of public goods
provision. However, this research too often focuses on diversity itself rather
than examining the political salience of ethnic divisions. This focus tends to
examine ethnicity in a vacuum, isolated from the political institutions and
social contexts in which actual distributive decisions take place. By critically
examining how ethnic identity interacts with these contextual features, the
present study will offer a more complete picture of distributive politics in
developing-world democracies. In addition, by systematically comparing
constituencies with varying levels of civic participation, the study facilitates
a test of theories suggesting that widespread civic engagement can induce
greater public accountability from legislators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This research speaks directly to matters of practical concern about the
performance of new democracies in Africa. Understanding how ethnic identity and
the behavior of civil society impact public goods provision is essential for
ensuring representative governance and promoting equitable development. The
information will be useful to policymakers eager to expand access to public
goods provision to broader segments of the population. In addition, the
investigators will be able to share the results of the research broadly within
academic communities in Kenya, at the universities with which the researchers
are obtaining research affiliations, as well as in seminars and conferences in
the United States. Survey data from this project will likewise be made publicly
available.