* 1423635
* Variations in Claims Making and Compensation in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Nicholas Pace, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 537,011.00

After injuries and illness, people in the United States rely upon a variety of
mechanisms for compensation. People combine private insurance, public insurance,
and mechanisms within the civil justice system. Earlier scholarship found
relationships between the area of law and the demographic characteristics of
people and claims making. In recent years there has been very little empirical
scholarship on how people make claims, yet there have been substantial
transformations in both the demographic characteristics of the people of the
United States and in the insurance and civil justice institutions in the United
States. This project will analyze how people search for compensation for losses
associated with injuries and illnesses and analyze the complementary roles of
various compensation institutions. The project will rely upon a probability-
based Internet panel. After an initial screen, the project will select a
subsample to address injuries and compensation. A better understanding of how
people make claims, which systems work and in what way, how that varies by
demographic characteristics, and how people understand the compensation they
receive is fundamental to understanding significant social and private spending
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions are relevant to a broad
range of public policies, including private and public social spending. The
principal investigators will be able to provide information to policymakers
concerning complementary mechanisms. In addition, the project will train
students in methods of the social sciences.