* 1423851
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science: Signal Costs and Public Attitudes Toward Foreign Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Alexander Downes, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 21,350.00

This project addresses how states communicate foreign policy motives, and how
signals are perceived by the public. It tests the logic of different signaling
mechanisms: defensive military policies, domestic policies towards minority
groups, involvement in institutional institutions, and 'soft' foreign policies
including foreign assistance. Most of these signaling mechanisms are based on
the logic of costly signaling, actions that convey credible information about
motives because they are costly for the sender to take. States can signal benign
motives, for example, by investing in defensive military technology when
offensive technology has the advantage. Because making this investment is costly
and risky, and actors with more aggressive motives would be unlikely to take
this action, buying defense in this scenario allows the state to communicate its
benign intent. The project examines whether the logic of costly signaling is
sufficient for credible communications of states'
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research
centers on its theoretical and methodological contributions. The project will
contribute to knowledge about states' motives and costly signaling in IR:
whether and when motives matter in security affairs, and how a state can
communicate its motives. The study attempts to expand the understanding of
motives and signaling in three ways. First, it addresses debates over the role
of motives by empirically testing competing theories. Second, the project tests
the logic of costly signaling by examining the effectiveness of various
signaling mechanisms in conveying a state's motives. Third, the study tests a
new mechanism, foreign aid policies and peace-keeping activities, that has never
been considered as a signal that can indicate states' motives. A separate
contribution is methodological. The project provides empirical evidence at the
micro-level on the logic of costly signaling. Previous case study research on
costly signaling has been unable to clearly distinguish between cause and
effect. Survey experiments can overcome this obstacle, and will allow
researchers to identify a clear causal relationship between states' actions
(signals) and the attitude of the foreign public that observes those
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to have a broader
impact on the security policy community. The study will recommend policy options
to decision-makers, and suggest actions to increase national security by
conveying their government's preferences to other states. The project will
provide basic information on which types of policies are effective in reassuring
a potential adversary and to what extent. Additionally, the findings of this
research will also be applicable to areas such as social psychology, economics,
business, and political science. The project is, fundamentally, about the
communication of one's intentions between two or more parties: how actors can
make their signals credible. This research will allow scholars to examine
attitude formation from such communications. This study will provide lessons to
those disciplines on how we can make communication more effective and efficient.