* 1423074
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Repair, Maintenance and Sustainability: Enhancing Sustainability by Strengthening the Design/Repair Nexus
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Daniela Rosner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2018
* USD 201,708.00

This project will advance core understanding of maintenance and repair practices
and connect these to long-standing concerns around the design, innovation, and
sustainability of new computational tools and infrastructures. Technology
maintenance and repair constitute central elements in the long-term impact and
sustainability of computing tools and infrastructures. While there is tremendous
need for understanding their effects on engineering development, learning, and
technological change, maintenance and repair have been systematically
underrepresented in human-computer research to date. By improving the design-
repair nexus, this project seeks not only to study sustainability but also
enhance it. Pedagogically, it develops new repair-centered teaching and learning
strategies for education in engineering and the social sciences.

Deploying a mix of ethnographic, institutional, and participatory methods, the
research team will explore and enhance the design-repair nexus across three
crucial sites: (1) the rapidly growing amateur repair movements in North America
and Europe; (2) global circulations of repair knowledge and innovation within
livelihood repair communities in the global South (represented through field
studies in Bangladesh and Sub-Saharan Africa); and (3) the growing
sustainability or green computing programs and operations of large-scale
information technology manufacturers. This program of research and engagement
will deliver both theoretical and practical benefits, and will extend the reach
of computer and information science to previously neglected sites and practices
key to emerging real-world computing practices and challenges.

This project gathers and extends a growing body of research on maintenance and
repair to propose new approaches to the design, innovation and sustainability of
computational artifacts and infrastructures. The research makes three central
contributions: (1) It charts novel forms of practice, value, and engagement
embedded in repair, and their relationship to the better-analyzed practices of
industrial engineering, hacking, and other design-centered or interventionist
forms of engagement. (2) It will offer new empirical and theoretical insight
into the real-world mechanics of sustainability: the practices and institutions
by which computing devices, systems and infrastructures are made sustainable in
the world (or alternatively, discarded and replaced). (3) It broadens the
geographic and analytic reach of computer and information science by examining
practices of repair, maintenance and sustainability in sites traditionally
marginal to human-computer research that constitute the long tail of real world
computing experience.