* 1423058
* Can habitat and elevation explain mid-Miocene Neotropical mammal provinciality?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Darin Croft, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 233,934.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Why do so many species live in the tropics?
This question can only be answered by uncovering the factors that have affected
species diversity over geologic time. A better conceptual understanding of these
factors will enable government and conservation organizations to make more
informed decisions about how to preserve modern tropical biodiversity. The
project will contribute to this effort by generating a detailed picture of the
climate and habitats of a 13 million-year-old fossil site in Bolivia known as
Quebrada Honda. In addition to producing new scientific insights, the project
will have a variety of broader impacts including: increasing participation of
Bolivian students and faculty in the sciences; supporting career development of
a female PhD candidate; and enhancing Cleveland research infrastructure through
new collaborations. Results of the proposed research will be disseminated
through a variety of media in English and Spanish including a multimedia exhibit
module in the permanent exhibits of the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and
an accompanying mobile app on how scientists interpret past climates and
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Few well-sampled
fossil mammal sites are known from the South American tropics. Two of these
sites are contemporaneous (late middle Miocene) and widely separated
geographically and thus present a unique opportunity to test hypotheses about
the de-velopment of South American geographic provinciality. One of these sites,
La Venta, Colombia, has been studied in detail. The other site, Quebrada Honda,
Bolivia, will be the focus of our fieldwork-intensive project, which will
generate new data about deposi-tional environments and habitats of using a
variety of geological and paleontological techniques. The main objectives
include: (1) stratigraphically correlating the main fossil-producing areas at
Quebrada Honda with one another to determine the manner and rate by which
fossils accumulated; (2) undertaking detailed studies of ancient soils and trace
fossils to reconstruct ancient land surfaces and document past environments; and
(3) using ecological characteristics of mammals to deduce the habitats in which
they lived. These data will produce a comprehensive picture of the ancient
climate and habitats of Quebrada Honda and will be compared to data from La
Venta to test whether the great differences in the mammal faunas of these two
sites can be explained by differences in paleoenvironment. The observations will
also be used test the recent clumped isotope-based assertion that the elevation
of Quebrada Honda was more than 2 km when the fossils were deposited.