* 1423891
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The effects of community allotment gardening on health and well-being in two Chicago communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Sarah Taylor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2015
* USD 3,090.00

Medical anthropologists have long recognized that problems of poverty, hunger,
and disease are embedded in social and economic structures that constrain
people's everyday lives. Experiencing deprivation or discrimination over a
lifetime can "get under the skin" and produce detrimental health effects. With
rising rates of chronic illnesses, it is now increasingly important to
understand those situations in which people manage to counter these effects,
actively modifying their social, cultural, and physical environments in positive
ways. Community allotment gardening, a form of urban agriculture popular in the
United States since World War II, is one means by which people in cities try to
improve their local food environment. Understanding whether, and under what
circumstances, community gardening reduces health burdens will help social
scientists to better understand the relationship between culture and human
biology. The research also has practical applications for urban health providers
and for planners concerned with urban agriculture and
zoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University doctoral student, Sarah R.
Taylor, with guidance from Dr. William R. Leonard, is carrying out the research
in two Chicago neighborhoods characterized by different levels of socioeconomic
hardship. Her research explores the social, environmental, and health impacts of
community gardening over the course of a full gardening season. She is
documenting changes in health and well-being using objective measures, such as
blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar levels, as well as subjective
measures, such as perceived stress, lifestyle habits, and quality of life among
gardeners and controls. In addition, ethnographic interviews and participant
observation will yield in-depth information about how people actually utilize
their gardens, their motivations for gardening, and the perceived benefits. By
combining in-depth qualitative and quantitative research methods, findings from
this research will elucidate the underlying processes by which the practice of
community gardening works to shape the health and well-being of urban residents.