* 1423989
* RAPID:   Measurements of Hydroxyl Radicals, Sulfuric Acid, sCIs, Hydroperoxy Radicals and Organic Peroxy Radicals on the C-130 during FRAPPE
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Roy Mauldin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 197,695.00

This effort involves the deployment of a four-channel chemical ionization mass
spectrometer (CIMS) system on the NSF/NCAR C-130 aircraft platform during the
Front Range Air Pollution and Photochemistry Experiment (FRAPPE) field campaign
scheduled to take place from July 16-August 16, 2014 in the Colorado Northern
Front Range Metropolitan Area. FRAPPE is a campaign being lead by researchers
from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), with the participation
of many university scientists. The FRAPPE campaign will run concurrently with
the NASA DISCOVER-AQ (Deriving Information on Surface conditions from Column and
Vertically Resolved Observations Relevant to Air Quality)
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical species to be measured through this
effort include OH (hydroxyl radicals), HO2 (hydroperoxy radicals) and HO2+RO2
(hydroperoxy plus organic peroxy radicals), H2SO4 (sulfuric acid), and sCIs (the
sum of stabilized Criegee radical Intermediates from the reactions of alkenes
with ozone - O3). These measurements will improve characterization of the
spatial and temporal variability of the oxidizing capacity of the sampled air
masses during the campaign. They will also help to constrain the role of
sulfuric acid in aerosol formation and growth, and quantify the importance of
sCIs as an oxidant in the urban environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hydroxyl
radical (OH) is the main oxidant in the lower atmosphere and the most
significant one causing the formation of ozone. The measurements made in this
study will make a vital contribution to modeling and forecasting air quality and
in determining the sources of ozone in the Colorado Northern Front Range
Metropolitan area. This effort is expected to lead to improved model
representations of chemical processes occurring in the urban environment.