* 1423238
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Generalizable Similarity and Proximity Metrics For Data Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Arash Termehchy, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2022
* USD 292,503.00

Knowledge bases organize information into graphs of entities, and data
exploration algorithms can leverage mathematical properties of these graphs to
discover interesting and useful insights about the entities and their
relationships. For example, data exploration algorithms can use the graph of
Google Knowledge Base to identify people who have common interests, and can
discover genes with similar behavior by analyzing the graph of the Genome
Knowledge Base. Currently, data exploration tools tend to be quite sensitive to
the details of how information is represented in these graphs, making the tools
highly effective over some choices of representation but not so effective with
others. As a result, data exploration has largely remained the province of
experts and data scientists. This project seeks to overcome this dependency and
enable a new generation of more general data exploration tools that ordinary
users can use to explore data on their own, without an expert by their
side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project is creating effective
similarity and proximity search algorithms that deliver the same results over
various choices of representation for the underlying knowledge base. The key
idea of the project is to use statistical metrics to quantify the degree of
similarity between entities or patterns, in a manner that is not sensitive to
the specific representation of the data. This novel theoretical framework serves
as the foundation of more general data exploration algorithms, whose generality
and effectiveness is being validated on large real-world knowledge bases.