* 1423621
* III: Small: Characterizing and exploiting tree-like structure in large social and information networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Mahoney, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Recent technological advances have led to an explosive growth of social,
biological, and information network data. This has led to a wide range of
metrics, e.g., degree distributions, clustering coefficients, homophily
measures, and so on, to describe and extract insight from real networks. The
hope is that these metrics will help domain scientists to extract information
and actionable insight from these networks. This enthusiasm, however, has not
yet been fully realized; and an ongoing challenge is to develop finer actionable
metrics to understand the properties of real networks. This project will
facilitate the development of tools for the extraction of knowledge from large
genetic, medical, internet, financial, astronomical, and other scientific
network data sets, and it will enhance interdisciplinary education more
generally. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project will investigate
methods to characterize and exploit tree-like structure in real information
networks. It will focus on two related but complementary notions of tree-like-
ness for graphs; it will use these notions to develop tools to characterize the
manner in which real complex networks are tree-like; and it will use this
characterization to develop tools for improved analytics on real networks.
Particular attention will be paid to how this can shed light on intermediate-
scale, i.e., not very small-scale or local and not very large-scale or global,
structure in real networks; and the results of this project will provide
implementations of algorithms to determine how and where this new understanding
can be exploited for domain-specific insight more generally.