* 1423260
* CHS: Small: Advanced Design Principles for Computer Simulated Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Maya Boustani, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2020
* USD 545,618.00

This project will investigate human interaction with simulated agents in
situations where humans expect empathic communication, such as healthcare. In
domains such as this, the person interacts with computer-based interventions
(CBI) as an education process evolves. Almost all psychosocial interventions
currently available on the web are delivered merely via text. Research indicates
that many users will lose interest and drop out, although completion is critical
to achieving desired goals. Human-computer interaction literature suggests that
interacting with simulated agents can increase the user's engagement, but that
the user will expect social competence when interacting with them. This project
will answer a set of research questions for the design of simulated characters
with some empathic intelligence, to create a new modality for the delivery of
CBIs. The specific health-related application area will facilitate development
and evaluation of new techniques and design principles, that will have much
wider applicability, potentially whenever people interact with computer-based
systems through simulated agents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance the ability of computer scientists to create competent simulated agents
that can adapt their verbal and non-verbal behavior to the user's affective
states, and over time tailor their interaction to the specific user to produce
the maximum positive impact in terms of users' engagement and achievement of
their goals. The model of empathy and social competence developed will enable
simulated characters to adapt in real time to a user's short-lived emotions over
a single interactive session. Longer-term affective states will be modeled over
long-term interaction via follow-up sessions with the same individual. Thus,
development of rapport between a human and an artificial intelligence is a
dynamic process over time, and the research is expected to discover new
principles that might not be seen in exclusively short-term interactions. The
project will provide: (1) a scheme to design tailored interaction by
constructing a dynamic user-model with user's demographic information and
fluctuating personal characteristics; (2) a model of empathic verbal
communication built by combining motivational interviewing techniques with an
ontology-based dialog system; (3) a computational model for the integration of
verbal and non-verbal communication cues by adapting the character's facial
expressions, vocal modulation, and kinesics to its verbal utterances in the
context of the session. In addition, the research will engage scientific
questions about diversity in communication style across human groups,
facilitated by the fact that the project is housed at the region's principal
minority-serving research university. The fact that the research will involve
students in the development of systems that integrate multiple technologies will
give them an excellent educational experience, gaining competence that will be
valuable for a range of future careers.