* 1423113
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: A Wireless Batteryless System-on-a-Chip Platform for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Benton Calhoun, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 269,845.00

Researchers, technologists, major corporations, and the public all agree that
the Internet of Things (IoT) is the next wave of computers that will fuel growth
in the semiconductor markets for the next decade as nearly everything becomes
instrumented by wireless sensors and connected to the web. Numerous forecasters
predict the deployment of over 1 trillion (1T) wireless sensing devices for this
emerging IoT, with Cisco estimating 14.4 trillion dollars at stake at a recent
keynote speech at CES. Surprisingly few commenters identify a glaring obstacle
to this vision: the power problem. Specifically, IoT applications require these
embedded sensors to be miniaturized, but the desired functionality consumes
milliwatts of power using conventional electronics solutions. This means that
nodes will need to be significantly increased in size or that they will have
prohibitively short battery lifetimes. The scale of the envisioned IoT compounds
this problem significantly. Even if each of the 1 trillion IoT devices had a
battery lifetime of ten years, 274 million batteries would need changing every
day. This applies to rechargeable batteries as well, which lose usefulness over
time and need replacing. There is a clear need for a batteryless platform that
reliably meets functionality needs using harvested energy. This project
leverages innovation in low power circuits and systems to perform fundamental
research on a computer systems platform for embedded wireless sensors powered
from harvested energy. The envisioned platform provides a foundation for
achieving the predicted scale of the IoT.

This project addresses the problem of providing a complete wireless sensing
solution within a power budget of 50 microwatts by researching a flexible,
energy harvesting, power aware platform for the IoT. The platform comprises a
system on chip that is sufficiently low power to operate exclusively from its
built in harvesting electronics, capable of interfacing with a variety of
harvesters. The only way that a flexible platform can achieve such ultra low
power (ULP) operation is to build in power conservation, power awareness, and
power management hooks from the basement to the roof. Every block, every
interface between blocks, every operating mode, every communication strategy,
and every software option must work together to manage and to save energy. This
research pursues the best interfaces, architecture, knobs, and features to match
the flexibility and power needs of the platform with attention to scalability,
reliability, and ease of use across 1T nodes. The project leverages several
diverse fields of fundamental research within computer systems including
computer architecture and system planning, power management and regulation, ULP
circuit design for RF, analog, mixed-signal, and digital circuits, wireless
communication principles, advanced DSP algorithms and hardware/software
partitioning. These fields converge to support platform research, which is
demonstrated by simulation based study across applications and by a hardware
demonstration of a complete, wireless acoustic monitor for IoT applications.