* 1423835
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social, Economic and Legal Factors Influencing Human Rights Violations by Non-State Actors
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Ashley Thirkill-Mackelprang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 28,581.00

Existing literature suggests that insurgents, paramilitaries, rebels and other
non-state armed groups use violence strategically to obtain group objectives.
Yet, what influences the armed group's choice among the various types of human
rights violations it targets the civilian population with? This project
addresses analyzes the political-economic and legal factors underlying armed
groups' strategic use of human rights violations. It hypothesizes that armed
groups use and vary the violations they commit in order to manipulate civilians
to behave in ways that, first, maintain and maximize the armed group's funding
sources, and second, evade prosecution. Using qualitative case studies and
quantitative statistical analysis of Colombian non-state armed groups, the
project examines how the incentive structures created by an armed group's
funding sources and prosecution levels influence its selection or avoidance of
various human rights violations.

The proposed research contributes to interdisciplinary research relevant to
human rights studies, criminology, legal studies and security studies, with
specific relevance to the literature on political violence and civilian
targeting. It provides generalizable results extending well beyond the Colombian
case, since all armed groups rely on funding and strive to escape credible
prosecution. Thus, the results will interest those dealing with questions of
civilian welfare, security and defense in Latin America and beyond. The project
also reveals the relative influence of political economic and legal factors,
ultimately identifying warning signs of particular human rights violations. This
information should assist policy makers, human rights advocates, law enforcement
agencies and governmental and non-governmental organizations, prioritize efforts
to more efficiently and effectively protect vulnerable civilians. This
ultimately impacts security and defense, as more effective protection prevents
civilians from forming self-defense forces whose violence could further
complicate peace processes and prolong civil conflicts.