* 1423316
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: From Communication to Power Networks: Adaptive Energy Management for Power Systems with Renewables
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 254,786.00

Pressing environmental issues, security of energy supply sites, as well as their
reliability in case of grid outages, drive research and development efforts
toward renewable energy sources (RES) worldwide. RES however are volatile and
intermittent, exhibit large fluctuations, and are certainly uncertain.
Accounting for the uncertainty of RES is key to efficient management of
distributed energy resources (DER), which include electricity generators, energy
storage units (batteries) and programmable loads (such as smart appliances).
These are the basic entities of a microgrid comprising a localized collection of
DER that can operate in either grid-connected or islanded modes. Attractive
features of microgrids include the ability to integrate constantly growing
amounts of green energy, and highly reliable autonomous operation even in case
of grid outages, e.g., under natural disasters. The overarching theme of this
project is reliable and economic microgrid energy management that accounts for
the uncertainty and volatility of high-penetration
renewables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this research addresses the
major microgrid energy management challenges through development of (i) robust
and risk-constrained methodologies, which adapt to the uncertain RES; and (ii)
tractable, scalable, and decentralized control and coordination of DER units.
One of the main features of this project?s research is scheduling of
controllable DER, such as fuel-based generators, batteries, and smart
appliances, in a way that guarantees system-wide efficiency objectives even in
the face of unpredictable RES generation. Emphasis is also placed on development
of scalable algorithms, whose complexity increases gracefully with the
proliferation of generation and storage units as well as and controllable loads
in microgrids, and modern distribution systems, in general. In a nutshell, this
project contributes to significantly upgrading the analysis and design of
microgrid operations.