* 1423100
* AF: Small: On the Complexity of Optimal Pricing and Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mihalis Yannakakis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 449,985.00

In this project, the PIs plan to investigate fundamental questions in
algorithmic pricing, and improve the current understanding in this area.
Consider the setting where a buyer is interested in multiple heterogeneous items
offered by a seller. While values of items to the buyer are private, the seller
can exploit stochastic information on the preferences of a typical buyer to
maximize her expected revenue. Optimal pricing problems under various settings
have received considerable attention in the computer science literature during
the past decade, and have been studied from both the algorithmic and complexity-
theoretic perspectives, yet many basic questions remain open. The motivation of
studying these problems also stems from their strong connection to the general
framework of optimal (Bayesian) multidimensional mechanism design, an area that
has been investigated intensively in both mathematical economics and computer
science.

The main goal of the project is to develop novel ideas and techniques that can
help resolve some of the fundamental open problems in the area of algorithmic
pricing, focusing on the case in which the buyer's values are independent.
During the next three years, the PIs will work to develop new efficient
(approximation) algorithms for optimal pricing problems under various settings,
and to understand computational difficulties inherent within them. In addition
to the computational aspect, the PIs will also seek to identify better
structures of (approximately) optimal pricing schemes. The PIs are particularly
interested in characterizing classes of distributions and buyer preferences for
which there exist simple, easy-to-implement pricing schemes that can extract
most of the optimal revenue, or providing counterexamples that exhibit large
gaps between revenues obtained from complex and simple pricing schemes.

Results obtained in the proposed research would complement the already extensive
economics literature on optimal pricing and multidimensional mechanism design,
by offering perspectives through the lens of algorithms, approximation, and
complexity. The PIs will broadly disseminate results obtained in the proposed
research. The PIs will mentor PhD students and promote undergraduate research by
involving them in accessible research projects related to this project.