* 1423439
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender and Institutional Emergence in Global Legal Practices
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Swethaa Ballakrishnen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 09/30/2015
* USD 19,999.00

As new institutions are created in a global world, practices concerning
inclusion by gender can continue as they have been or they can be transformed by
having newly been created in a different context from instituions with
established practices. In particular, the globalization of practices concerning
inclusion by gender in emergent transnational firms seem to have different
outcomes than might have been expected by analyzing business practices as solely
domestic. This project will analyze practices of inclusion in a large
globalizing national state, hypothesizing that global norms override dominant
local practices of exclusion. Using in-depth interviews and new survey data with
past and present professionals in different organizational sites, this research
explores comparative frameworks to explain institutional emergence and
egalitarian advantage in new professional spaces. This project is empirically
significant because of the dissonance between inegalitarian norms and what may
be emergent egalitarian practices. Investigating these organizations and women
who have avoided otherwise persistent gender-priming obstacles is theoretically
significant because it speaks to three important conversations on organizational
innovation, gender stratification and the influence of globalization in emerging
markets. The question of equity of practices in employment is important to
public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New contexts such as transnational firms
provide and opportunity to test neo-institutional theorizing concerning
globalization, organizational emergence, and loose coupling between
organizational norms and practices.