* 1423505
* NeTS: Small: A Virtualized Network Resource Pool for Software-Defined Network Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Management of today's networks usually requires an army of operators who devote
tremendous time and energy. Software-defined networking (SDN) has been shown to
be a promising paradigm for simplifying network management. However, management
tasks in SDNs require the use of constrained network resources: switch memory
and CPU, and the switch-controller network bandwidth. Given these resource
constraints, network operators may have to reason about resource usage when
initiating network management tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
explore the space of resource management for software-defined network
management. Specifically, it will examine the design of virtualized resource
pools that provide the abstraction of (nearly) infinite resources (memory, CPU
and switch), while dynamically adapting to the resource needs of these network
management tasks. This approach has the advantage that network operators do not
have to reason about resource usage when instantiating network management tasks.
The research will yield resource management algorithms, improved resource usage
designs, and systems implementations for virtualized resource
pools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network operators make billion-dollar investments in
network infrastructures, but put little thought into visibility and control of
these infrastructures. This project can lead to better-managed, more reliable,
and more resource-efficient network infrastructures in ISPs, enterprises and
clouds. These efforts eventually will have broader societal impact by enabling
commercial, social, and scientific advances. The proposal will give
underrepresented groups and undergraduates opportunities to participate in
research and will likely result in technology transfer to major cloud providers
and ISPs.