* 1423413
* CSR: Small: RUI: Task Mapping for Emerging Network Topologies
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2019
* David Bunde, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 266,631.00

This project aims to improve the performance of large scientific simulations on
next-generation high-performance computing (HPC) systems by developing new
strategies for task mapping, the assignment of specific parts of an application
to each of the many processing nodes in an HPC system. A key determinant of
application performance on HPC systems is the speed of message delivery between
related parts of the application. This in turn depends upon the network
connecting the processing nodes. Task mapping has the potential to improve
network performance by arranging communicating parts of the application in a way
that distributes messages more evenly through the network, preventing any part
of it from becoming overloaded. The PI has previously shown that task mapping
can reduce application running time on current HPC systems by up to 30%. New
algorithms are needed for larger next-generation systems, which must use novel
network topologies for the internode connections due to power limitations.

The specific network topology studied is Dragonfly, two variations of which are
used in commercial systems. Dragonfly organizes network switches into groups
that form a high-radix "virtual switch". This allows a direct connection between
every pair of groups. Together with high connectivity between the switches
within a group, this guarantees that every pair of nodes is connected by a short
path. The problem is that having only a single direct connection between each
pair of groups makes that connection a potential bottleneck. The project will
develop task mapping algorithms that balance the goal of localizing related
tasks to exploit intra-group connectivity with the need to spread the job across
the system so that it can utilize many inter-group links simultaneously. The
project will also develop node allocation algorithms to support jobs of varying
size, providing each job with nodes that are well-connected while minimizing
contention between jobs.

By improving application performance on next-generation HPC systems, the project
will help realize the full potential of these powerful systems. In addition, the
project will heavily involve undergraduate student researchers, who will be
trained as future leaders in science and engineering.