* 1423500
* The Effects of Deafness and Visual Language Experience on Visual Perception from Infancy to Adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Karen Dobkins, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2017
* USD 343,299.00

Deaf individuals must rely more than hearing individuals on visual information
to understand what is happening in the world around them. As a result, the
brains of deaf people typically reorganize to help them make better use of the
available visual information. The questions addressed by this research project
are whether and how greater reliance on visual information actually changes
visual experiences. The project also investigates how differences between
hearing and deaf people's visual processing develop across infancy, childhood,
and adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is evidence that aspects of vision are
altered or enhanced in deaf people, providing evidence for plasticity of the
human brain to compensate for the absence of sound. Yet, very little is known
about how these alterations emerge during development. This project investigates
the consequences of altered early sensory experience during development,
measuring perceptual sensitivity to motion, form, faces, and objects. Deaf
people may have altered processing of these aspects of vision for two reasons.
First, lack of auditory input compels deaf people to rely more on their intact
visual modality, and, second, many deaf people use a visual language (American
Sign Language, ASL), which may enhance certain aspects of visual processing that
convey critical linguistic information. To tease apart effects of deafness
versus ASL language experience, the studies will compare visual sensitivity in
Deaf and Hearing individuals who are either Signers or Nonsigners. Also, effects
of deafness could occur during an early critical period rather than due to
accumulated altered sensory experiences across the lifespan. To address this
possibility, the project will also involve studying a group of "Hearing
Restored" children who received cochlear implants around 12-18 months, following
a period of auditory deprivation starting at birth. Results from these studies
will reveal how sensory systems adjust to altered input and elucidate mechanisms
of brain plasticity, which may have widespread implications for deaf and blind
individuals, as well as for those who lose their hearing or sight later in life.