* 1423302
* SHF: Small: Cooperative Memory Expansion (COMEX) for Networked Computing Systems via Remote Direct Memory Access
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Nian-Feng Tzeng, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 476,000.00

Legacy and emerging applications with large working sets and, when executed on
commodity servers, &lt;br/&gt;may exhibit poor performance due to frequent page
faults which rely on the slow disk swap partition. &lt;br/&gt;This research aims
to establish immense memory collectively across nodes of a networked computing
system for holding pages &lt;br/&gt;evicted from the main memory of any
participating nodes during application runs with large working sets,
&lt;br/&gt;realizing cooperative memory expansion (COMEX). It has a great
promise to advance technical understanding &lt;br/&gt;and scientific frontiers
of networked computing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Given its wide adoption
by operating systems and networking gear vendors nowadays, &lt;br/&gt;the remote
direct memory access (RDMA) technology is adopted by COMEX for ultra-low
latencies in page transfer &lt;br/&gt;between nodes whose OS kernel and CPU can
be totally bypassed. &lt;br/&gt;This project deals with five technical
challenges and the solution approaches to those challenges together
&lt;br/&gt;will constitute the basis of the COMEX Handler, able to enhance
execution performance and system throughput &lt;br/&gt;via better utilizing
overall system DRAM memory on-demand. &lt;br/&gt;The project will also improve
the research and educational activities on computer systems and distributed
computing &lt;br/&gt;on the University of Louisiana at Lafayette campus, with
its outcomes helping to integrate research and education for enriched teaching,
&lt;br/&gt;training, and learning experience and to educate quality future
workforce critical to the NSF mission, the state of Louisiana and the nation.