* 1423987
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Authoritarian  Accountability and the Regulation of Online Communication in China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Christopher Cairns, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

This project seeks to explain when and why the Chinese government censors the
Internet. Existing research at first glance appears to have a ready answer: the
government deletes text or images that contribute to street or other forms of
protest that either a) threaten social stability, or b) undermine government
credibility. Yet it is argued that the above theory about protest activity
cannot explain some crisis situations in which government authorities relaxed
censorship. Instead, this project posits that Chinese leaders, during at least
some breaking incidents, employ a more nuanced strategy when responding to the
rapid proliferation of protest-related content. The investigator theorizes that
in issue areas, and in moments where Chinese leaders' interests in promoting
reforms (on the environment, corruption, and other key issues) align with those
of key citizen groups, leaders deliberately loosen control over online media.
They do so in order to demonstrate, in high-profile online space, that they are
accountable to citizen demands in the above areas. Leaders, moreover, are
sometimes willing to do so even at the risk of allowing online speech to
facilitate street protests or other collective actions.

This project serves as counterpoint to the idea that authoritarian governments'
sole concern with the Internet is in preventing dissenters from using it to
challenge the state. While authoritarian leaders indeed fear the Internet's
potential to empower social forces that might threaten their hold on power,
regimes with more resources and sophistication, like China, also see an
opportunity to use social media to forge new connections with middle-class
(online) citizens who do not trust the government, and who no longer believe in
Communism or other legitimating ideologies. The theory proposed here, if true,
would help answer a central puzzle in political science over the past twenty
years - why do some authoritarian regimes remain strong, despite the historical
collapse of many others that underwent rapid development?

The intellectual merits of the project are associated with the research design.
To test this question, the project mixes quantitative and qualitative research
methods. It takes an innovative approach to measuring both censorship, and what
citizens are saying online by statistically analyzing raw social media data -
especially text, and using software programs to group such text by sentiments
expressed. The project also involves interviews with four groups in China -
journalists, Internet professionals, bloggers, and government officials, who
each deal with censorship.

This research concerns policymakers and the general public, in addition to
political scientists. The China policy community in Washington is currently
grappling with whether the United States should seek to engage China, or contain
its rise. China's external behavior, in turn, cannot be understood apart from
the domestic sources of Chinese Communist Party stability. Therefore,
understanding how the government manages the Internet is vital to crafting an
effective China policy. Beyond policy, many U.S. citizens are curious to
understand how Chinese citizens interact with their leaders in a censored
information environment, as such questions touch deeply on American values of
free speech and representative government. Finally, while the project focuses on
China, it has implications for two similar authoritarian states - Russia, and
Iran - who censor the Internet and whose domestic stability is of vital interest
to the United States.