* 1423419
* RI: Small: Design and Implementation of Goal-directed Solvers for Answer Set Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2018
* USD 495,109.00

This project is focused on the development of an efficient Answer Set
Programming (ASP) solver, advancing the state-of-the-art in logic based
knowledge representation, logic programming and artificial intelligence. ASP is
an elegant way to represent knowledge and perform advanced reasoning (common
sense reasoning, non-monotonic reasoning, planning, constraint satisfaction,
etc.). ASP is based on the stable model semantics proposed by Gelfond and
Lifschitz. It has gained wide acceptance in the last fifteen years in the
knowledge representation (KR) and artificial intelligence (AI) research
communities due to its incorporation of negation, its expressiveness and simple,
intuitive syntax. Considerable past research has been done in developing the ASP
paradigm as well as its implementations and applications. Implementation
techniques for realizing answer set solvers range from simple guess-and-check
based methods to those based on SAT solvers and complex heuristics.
Applicability of current ASP systems is limited due to (i) the current
implementation methods not being goal-directed (i.e., not being query-driven),
(ii) need for grounding the answer set program if predicates are present, (iii)
being forced to find the model of the entire program (even though to answer a
given query only a small subset of the model needs to be computed), and (iv) no
answer being produced even if a minor inconsistency (unrelated to the query) is
present in the knowledge base. This project addresses these problems by
developing a query-driven implementation of answer set programs containing
predicates. Current systems have to process the entire knowledge base (expressed
as an answer set program) to compute an answer. In contrast, the query-driven
method developed in this project only accesses and processes parts of the
knowledge base that are involved in answering the query. Query-driven execution
allows predicates to be directly included in answer set programs. It also leads
to efficiency in execution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The query-driven method is
based on PI's group's recent discovery of coinductive logic programming.
Coinductive logic programming imparts operational semantics to greatest fixed
point-based computations. Given a query and an answer set program, this
coinduction-based operational semantics is used to compute (partial) answer sets
that contain the query goal(s). With query-driven execution, predicates can be
supported directly, i.e., answer set programs containing predicates no longer
have to be grounded first. The main tasks of this project are the following: (i)
develop an efficient query-driven, top-down execution strategy for propositional
answer set programs; (ii) extend this query-driven execution strategy to handle
Datalog ASP (without grounding the program first); (iii) further extend this
query-driven execution strategy to handle Predicate ASP (without grounding the
program first); (iv) develop coinductive extension of ASP and its
implementation; (v) develop a query-driven abductive reasoning engine based on
ASP; and, (vi) further extend the engine to incorporate constraints over reals.
The key intellectual contributions of the research is the investigation of
techniques for query-driven execution of answer set programs and advanced
reasoning systems that employ negation. The research tests the claim that a
query-driven implementation can more elegantly (and efficiently) support
constraints and abduction in ASP. The broader impacts of this work include the
availability of more powerful applications of knowledge representation;
mechanisms for common sense reasoning; integration of advanced ASP systems into
education and research venues; and the development of the research careers of
graduate and undergraduate students, including those from under-represented
groups.