* 1423676
* RI: Small: Crowd-Sourcing the World: Scalable Methods for Dynamic Structure from Motion
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Matthew Turk, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 477,428.00

This project enables global-scale dynamic reconstructions that can scale to
eventually encompass all of the world's 3D data, to which any user may
contribute new visual data, thereby ensuring a more complete, up-to-date model
and a better experience for users of applications that rely on such data. The
abundance of publicly available imagery from a variety of sources (consumer,
industry, and government) and the proliferation of networked mobile devices
equipped with cameras provide an opportunity to build large-scale 3D models that
cover the entire world. Such global 3D models are invaluable to a wide range of
applications that require real-time access to environment structure, such as
providing assistance to the visually impaired, exploring dangerous areas for
search-and rescue operations, urban planning, self-driving cars, and virtual
tourism.

The key research question driving this work is how to efficiently and accurately
update a global-scale 3D reconstruction in order to support a dynamic global
model. The research uses structure from motion (SfM) techniques to acquire
global context for 3D modeling and then propagate local 3D reconstructions and
other visual data back to the global model via a new technique called
"globalization." The project addresses a major gap in large-scale SfM: rapidly
extending and updating reconstructions to promote real-time use. The project is
built on preliminary work in large-scale image matching, localization, and 3D
reconstruction. The research team carries out extensive data collection and
experimentation to benchmark the performance of the developed techniques and to
assess the progress of the project and the utility of the methods. The project
is developing a prototype mobile system for contributing imagery and browsing
and updating models for public use once it is available.