* 1423645
* SHF: Small: A Dynamic Analysis and Test Generation Framework for JavaScript and Web Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Koushik Sen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

JavaScript is the most popular programming language for client-side web
programming. Advances in browser technologies and JavaScript engines in the
recent years have fueled the use of JavaScript in Rich Internet Applications,
and several mobile platforms including Android, IOS, Tizen OS, Windows 8,
Blackberry, and Firefox OS, support applications written in JavaScript/HTML5.
With a renewed interest in JavaScript, many complex applications such as Google
docs, Gmail, and a variety of games are being developed using HTML5/JavaScript.
However, unlike C/C++, Java, and C#, JavaScript is significantly shorthanded in
the tools landscape. The dynamic and reflective nature of JavaScript makes it
hard to analyze it statically.

This project investigates a dynamic analysis framework and several dynamic
analysis techniques for JavaScript. The analysis framework provides a few useful
abstractions and an API that significantly simplifies implementation of dynamic
analyses for JavaScript. The framework works through source code instrumentation
and allows implementation of various heavy-weight dynamic analyses and test
generation techniques. The projects investigates and implements several dynamic
analyses including concolic testing, pure symbolic execution, a detector of
likely type inconsistencies, and a runtime memory profiler. The techniques
developed in this project are suitable for analyzing and testing that web
applications written in JavaScript/HTML5 are free of common correctness and
performance bugs. The techniques will benefit directly web applications
programmers, and indirectly the numerous users of mobile and web applications.