* 1423656
* SHF: Small: Some Error Correcting Codes for Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Bella Bose, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 288,271.00

Error control codes play a major role in achieving high reliable operations of
modern computer systems, DVDs, cameras, etc. In this project new classes of
error correcting codes suitable for high density flash memories are to be
developed. The market revenue of flash memories is estimated to be $100B per
year. The PI has close collaboration with leading Flash memory industry
(Micron). While this enables development of error correcting codes specifically
in the practical context of applications, the results of this research will not
only be easily transitioned to industry, it will also train students, postdocs
and future industry researchers via lectures, seminars and course development at
the PIs institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, multi-level flash,
in which each cell can have 4 or 8 voltage levels, will be considered.
Experiments indicate that the bit error rate of flash memory worsens as the
Program/Erasure count increases. In addition, it is observed that most of the
errors are of limited magnitude and of decreasing type. Study of error
statistics of error characteristics justify that the L1 distance codes are more
suitable to overcome errors in flash memories. New classes of L1 distance codes
are to be developed using the concepts of elementary symmetric functions. The
project will also consider the design of error correcting codes for insertion
and deletion of repeated symbols in high speed data bus and communication
systems. Furthermore, the theory and codes to be developed for flash memories
can potentially be extended to design efficient high-ordered-spectral-null codes
for optical discs and magnetic memories.