* 1423692
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Decentralization, Social Policies and Clientelism in India
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Ronald Herring, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2016
* USD 17,640.00

How do social policies generate opportunities for clientelism? How do varying
levels of decentralization in different states within the same country enable or
constrain these opportunities? This project uses variation in the design of
social programs in rural India to understand whether and how political parties
rely on the distribution of public patronage to reach out to voters. It proposes
to compare the implementation of the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS)
and the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA). The project seeks to
test whether a design that emphasizes the demand for benefits (as is the case
under NREGA) is more likely to challenge the parties' monopoly of access to
public resources, which is believed to be essential to sustain clientelism.

The intellectual merit of the project is associated with its documentation of
how the demand for benefits is politically activated or not. The project
proposes to use variation in decentralization levels in two neighboring Indian
states to test this implication in different institutional settings - one in
which decentralization has been pursued (Uttar Pradesh) and another that is
still centralized to a large extent (Bihar). After exploring the relationship
between poverty levels and spending patterns under each program, the project
will involve carrying out a survey experiment to gauge perceptions of political
involvement in the attribution of benefits in communities along the states'
common border, a bottom-up approach unusual in studies of rural clientelism.
Additional interviews conducted with representatives from political parties and
local government agencies will help hone in on the mechanisms of clientelism at
the village level in India.

The recent growth of policies emphasizing the demand for benefits has generated
interest, particularly with respect to their broader impact on the recipient
communities. In India, this analysis has often limited itself to cases of
corruption to the study of women and minority participation. The project goes
one step further than a strict analysis of policy effectiveness by investigating
the processes of discretionary benefit allocation, rather than the outcome of
these processes. This project should be of interest to scholars of
decentralization and clientelism as much as to development practitioners who
want to make social and development programs as effective as possible in
delivering assistance to the poor. Indeed, it focuses on two large social
policies implemented in India that are comparable in size yet illustrative of
two different approaches to poverty alleviation: whereas one centers on prior
means-tested targeting by state agencies (TPDS), the other is implemented based
on the anticipated demand for benefits by the beneficiaries themselves (NREGA).