* 1423304
* AF: Small: An Integrated Approach to Characterizing Conformational Changes of Large Proteins
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 458,128.00

One of the major hurdles in the understanding of physiological processes and the
design of new pharmaceutical drugs has been the understanding of the three-
dimensional structure and flexibility of molecules, which hold key insight into
their function and interactions. In many biological pathways conformational
flexibility is known to play an essential role in driving functional mechanisms
and has been the topic of both computational and experimental investigations.
Modern experimental methods such as Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange coupled with
Mass Spectroscopy (HDX-MS) can probe the flexibility of large proteins, but the
findings are mapped on the available (static) crystal structures, thereby losing
a considerable part of the dynamic information. This proposal will investigate
the extent to which computational methods can help discover and visualize
conformational changes of large proteins that are in agreement with experiment.
Because of the specific proteins selected for study in the context of this
proposal, the proposed work has a great societal impact: it helps advance the
understanding of processes that are involved in a variety of immune,
inflammatory, neurodegenerative, ischemic, and age-related diseases. This
proposal will train undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students at Rice
and the University of Pennsylvania on interdisciplinary topics. It will also
provide training opportunities to women students. All work will be disseminated
not only through technical presentations at national meetings, publications in
peer reviewed journals and book chapters, but also through visits and talks with
researchers in academia and the biotechnology industry, as well as with open
source development and distribution of the algorithms developed for widespread
use.

A central part of this proposal concerns the development of a computational
framework that samples the conformational space of proteins. It relies on a new
representation of the degrees of freedom of proteins and protein complexes and
on the definition of sampling primitives at various resolutions. The framework
draws from geometry-inspired sampling techniques that efficiently explore large
search spaces while keeping track of the extent that the search space is
covered. In parallel, HDX-MS experiments will be carried out and used as probes
for conformational variability. The experimental results will be correlated with
the results of the computational framework to select the conformations that most
closely match experiments. A distinguishing feature of this work is the
connection with experiment and the ways in which each can feed the other. This
proposal lies at the intersection of algorithms, computational geometry,
dimensionality reduction, data mining, and visualization methods and connects
with modern experimental methods which are actively under development and hold
great promise for the understanding of protein structure and function.