* 1423617
* SHF: Small: SEQUBE: A Sequent Calculus Foundation for High- Level and Intermediate Programming Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Zena Ariola, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2019
* USD 499,951.00

Title: SHF:Small:SEQUBE:A Sequent Calculus Foundation for High-Level and
Intermediate Programming Languages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern programming
languages are complex. They provide sophisticated control mechanisms, offer a
combination of different programming paradigms (e.g., functional or object-
oriented), and allow the definition of infinite objects and processes (e.g.,
servers or operating systems). To have assurance in our software, it is
fundamentally important to have a simple and intuitive framework for reasoning
about and experimenting with programs that use these features: both for
programming language designers and implementors, as well as for programmers who
need to prove safety properties of critical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, the lambda-calculus has served
as a foundation for writing and proving properties of programs. The intellectual
merit of this research consists of developing an alternative model of programs
based on the sequent calculus. Instead of starting from a core language and
layering features on top as needed, the new model naturally includes these
features from the beginning. Like the lambda-calculus, the sequent-based model
originates from logic, but is rooted in the concept of duality that provides two
ways to approach problems, where one is often more familiar. Additionally, the
sequent-based model provides a new way to organize intermediate languages used
in compilers to aid program optimization and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the research consists of providing a vehicle for disseminating
knowledge between different communities. Since the new model includes both the
functional and object-oriented paradigms naturally as duals, it provides a
logical interpretation of languages, such as Scala, that merge the two
approaches. In addition, the research will explore ways to incorporate reasoning
about infinite processes and computational effects in a proof assistant. Lastly,
an emphasis on duality is beneficial for education; given two possible
explanations, students can be introduced to the more familiar one first when
introducing difficult ideas, while using existing knowledge and intuition to
explore new concepts.