* 1423025
* Variations in Meaning and Community Response to Illness
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Claire Decoteau, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 193,972.00

This project examines the ways in which individuals and communities come to
understand illness and how their explanations impact their health behavior and
health care choices. It contributes to current sociological research which
explores how laypeople get involved in and change the course of scientific
research and policy. There is growing statistical evidence that Somali refugee
populations have higher prevalence rates of autism spectrum disorder than all
other ethnic/racial groups. This project examines the ways that groups of Somali
parents of children with autism in two national contexts (Minneapolis, MN and
Toronto, Canada) have forged movements to understand and address their health
experiences. Groups in each location have developed divergent approaches to
treatment and vaccine uptake. This is the first study to examine the ways in
which minority groups make sense of their experiences with
autism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the investigator develops the
concept of "epistemic communities" through a cross-national comparison, which
has both theoretical and practical implications. This project has four specific
aims: 1) to describe and explain the causal theories parents have about the
development of autism; 2) to describe the health experiences of parents of
children with autism (from the discovery of the disorder, through securing
diagnosis, accessing benefits and resources, and seeking treatment) in Toronto
and Minneapolis; 3) to explain when/if parents get involved in or forge a health
social movement; and 4) to examine the causal links between these three previous
dynamics. The PI will accomplish these aims through two years of qualitative
research of Somali families in Minneapolis and Toronto. This research into the
formation of epistemic communities on autism has profound implications for
understanding health behavior and the interaction of laypeople with scientific
expertise. Such information could lead to better and more accurate policy
initiatives on health care and support for those with autism, not to mention
better information on vaccine skepticism and refusal. Further, racial minorities
have been underrepresented in the research on autism, and this project seeks to
address this bias.