* 1423828
* Fields of Study, School-Work Linkages, and Inequality: A Comparative Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Thomas DiPrete, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 268,807.00

SES-1423828 Thomas DiPrete Columbia University

The overall goal of this project is to develop a greater theoretical and
empirical understanding of the pathways that lead from educational outcomes to
occupational placement. The project pays attention both to the level of
education and school-leaving credentials (i.e., diplomas, degrees, and
certificates) and to fields of study within these levels. It then analyzes the
strength of the link between specific educational outcomes and specific
occupations. The research is novel in applying recent developments in multigroup
segregation research to the measurement of the strength of linkage between
school outcomes and occupations. It uses these techniques to study the pattern
of linkage between school and work across a set of countries which differ both
in the structure of their educational systems and in the ways that education and
training are linked to occupational entry via licensing, apprenticeships,
internships, and other formal or informal skill requirements or opportunities
for skill acquisition while on the job. It then addresses the question of
whether country differences in the structure of school-work linkage produce
country differences in the relative pay of occupations and in the overall
structure of wage and earnings inequality.

The intellectual merit of the research lies in its potential to significantly
increase knowledge of how the structure of linkage between education and the
labor market varies, both at different levels of the educational system and
across different types of national educational systems. The project employs data
from six important countries: the U.S., Germany, France, the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom, and Brazil. To test hypotheses, the project utilizes segregation
measures from the generalized entropy family of segregation meaures. This
approach allows an assessment of the relative importance of educational levels
and fields of study within levels to the total linkage strength of a country. It
also allows a study of the extent of country differences that are structural and
the extent of country differences that arise from (compositional) differences in
the distribution of educational outcomes and occupational positions across these
countries. The research will be novel in determining the extent to which fields
of study provide clear pathways to jobs at different educational levels and how
the pattern varies cross-nationally. It will highlight routes involving specific
fields of study and tertiary credentials whose value in the labor market differs
considerably across countries. Such information is of scientific importance for
explaining differences in wage and earnings distributions, career mobility, and
educational attainment across countries. It also points to potentially important
social policies to better realize the potential of varying educational routes
within the differing social and economic institutional structures under study in
this project. This research product is of particular importance in the U.S.,
where completion rates in American higher education are relatively low. The
research may also improve harmonized educational schemes now widely used in
comparative research.