* 1423273
* CHS: Small: Toward a New Generation of Untethered Magnetic Haptic Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jake Abbott, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 524,000.00

This project will advance the science and technology of magnetic-levitation-
based haptic interfaces by developing an untethered hand-held interface in which
magnetic forces are applied to a freely moving tool rather than a handle that is
physically attached to a larger device. The project will extend force-feedback
devices into a new wave of development that incorporates free mobility. Current
haptic devices use mechanically linkages to impart forces and torques to the
user. These new untethered devices will use projected magnetic fields and an
externally tracked tool so that the user is freed from any physical linkage. The
project will contribute to the development of new microsurgical systems that can
be used to train and evaluate novice surgeons prior to conducting surgery on
actual patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a new type
of magnetic haptic interface, an untethered magnetic interface that renders
force/torque to a permanent magnet attached to a stylus by using electromagnets
that project their magnetic fields into free space. The position and orientation
of the permanent magnet must be tracked to provide feedback for the device to
work as a haptic interface. Unlike Lorentz-force interfaces, which must encase a
portion of the stylus, the project will produce an untethered interface in which
the stylus can be completely removed from the electromagnet system, thus
eliminating the physical linkage between the haptic stylus and the rest of the
system, and reducing stylus inertia to only that of the stylus itself. The
project has three goals: (1) To develop the analytical relationships that will
govern untethered magnetic haptic interfaces. Many of the existing basic
principles for haptic devices will need to be reconsidered, such the fundamental
trade-offs among workspace size, stylus inertia, maximum force/torque
generation, maximum stable surface stiffness, and sampling update rate. (2) To
adapt high-speed image-processing techniques to track the six degrees of freedom
of movement that are possible in an untethered manual tool. (3) To realize a
prototype magnetic haptic interface that is optimized for simulating cataract
surgery.