* 1423711
* Language as a Window on Prehistory
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Claire Bowern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2020
* USD 381,608.00

Language is fundamental to being human, but very little is known about how
language changes over time or how other aspects of human society may change in
concert with language. Language is a crucial tool for investigating the past.
While archaeology and genetics are also invaluable ways to investigate how
cultures have changed, in many areas, language provides better preserved
evidence for past contacts, migrations, and cultural change. A great deal of
previous work has shown that languages change over time, and that they do so in
regular ways. It is also known that speakers adapt their languages to their
cultures, and that languages reflect aspects of culture such as politeness.
However, in order to understand why the world's 7000 languages look the way they
do, untangling the relationships between language and society is
crucial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses the languages of Aboriginal
Australia as a case study. Previous work by this research group has resulted in
the development of tools and databases for exploring language relationships and
studying how change in cultural and language systems may happen together. The
researchers will utilize these research tools to shed further light on how
languages change, using the existing data to develop new tools for investigating
language history. Specifically, the investigators will study the patterns of
sounds, words, and meanings in these languages to uncover how they have changed
over time. Australian languages are ideal for such studies because of the
similar population sizes and political complexity of the groups in the period
before European settlement, as well as the sizable corpus of existing material.
This study will add to this material and test hypotheses about language
relationships using statistical and comparative tools. This will allow
researchers to identify new languages in old materials as well as refine
knowledge of how languages change. A substantial component of the grant work
involves including students in cutting-edge research, including training in
linguistics and statistical methods.