* 1423708
* Linking Real-Time Categorization Dynamics to Real-world Social Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jonathan Freeman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/2018
* USD 525,536.00

A seminal area of social psychological research is in understanding the root
causes of stereotyping and discrimination. How might disparities in hiring, pay,
and promotions arise? Disparities could stem, in part, from perceived
incongruities between an individual and a prototypical expectation for a
particular role, even at the level of facial features. When a target's features
fit others' expectations or prototypes, their perceived suitability for the role
could be enhanced. This might occur when an individual with more feminine
features applies for a stereotypically feminine job, e.g., child care provider,
or an individual with more prototypically Asian features seeks entry into a
field stereotypically associated with Asian-Americans, e.g., a
science/technology/engineering/math (STEM) graduate program. Individuals whose
subtle facial features deviate from these expectations may have to struggle to
demonstrate their suitability for such positions over and above others who are
more prototypical. The proposed research will examine whether the cognitive
mechanisms underlying the basic ways we see, understand, and categorize other
people influence such real-world social behaviors. In other words, how can
biases in the process of categorizing others lead to downstream outcomes of
interpersonal and societal significance, such as hiring and admission decisions
and voting behavior?

Previous work by the investigator Jonathan Freeman (New York University) and
colleagues has shown that the process of categorizing individuals is dynamic and
evolves over hundreds of milliseconds. For instance, cues specifying gender,
race, and age are processed early in the perceptual stream, but as more
information accumulates, initial tentative perceptions are gradually sharpened
until a final categorization that best integrates all cues stabilizes. Mouse-
tracking software developed by the investigator can track this process in real-
time, determining how multiple conflicting categories (e.g., "white" and
"black") may be activated and resolved while an individual categorizes another
person. This technique will be used to examine how individuals whose facial
features are slightly atypical for their gender or race may trigger competing
social categories (e.g., "male" and "female"), and how such cognitive
competition may predict downstream social behavior. The proposed research will
first examine processes underlying categorization when competing social
categories are activated, and then extend this foundational knowledge to several
societally-relevant outcomes, including how categorization on the basis of
gender and/or racial cues lead to different hiring and admission decisions.
Finally, the neural basis of these categorization decisions will be examined, to
test how cognitive and neural dynamics jointly predict important behaviors.
Together, this research has the potential to make transformative advances in
social psychology by establishing links between real-time cognitive and real-
world social dynamics, using cutting-edge methodologies to bridge multiple time
scales in person perception. The findings will expose the processes underlying
appearance-based stereotyping and their links to social behavior, and have
numerous implications for reducing the effects of discrimination in the real
world.