* 1423773
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Capital and Policy Networks: Exploring the Factors that Influence Adoption of Pollinator Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Kourtney Collum, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2016
* USD 28,444.00

In North America, the majority of crop pollination is done by commercially
managed honeybees, but in the last decade scientists have reported unprecedented
declines in bee abundance due to pesticide exposure, habitat loss, and parasite
and disease outbreak. This has led to a significant increase in the cost of
renting commercial beehives and raised concern about the sustainability of
current crop pollination practices. Declining bee abundance poses serious
threats to global food security, the agricultural economy, and the livelihoods
of farmers, as one-third of crop species worldwide are completely insect-
pollinated. Scientists are now exploring ways to secure crop pollination through
integrated use of commercial and wild bees (i.e. undomesticated bees), but
little is known about the factors that influence farmers' decisions to adopt
emerging pollinator conservation practices. As part of the Cultural Anthropology
Program's on-going support for research into the socio-cultural drivers and
consequences of critical anthropogenic processes, this doctoral dissertation
research project will investigate the factors that influence individual
conservation behavior and collective action.

The research will be carried out by graduate student Kourtney Collum of the
University of Maine, who will be supervised by Dr. Samuel Hanes. Collum will
examine the factors that influence farmers' adoption of pollinator conservation
practices through a comparative study of lowbush blueberry (Vaccinium
angustifolium) growers in Maine and Prince Edward Island (PEI), Canada. Despite
similar climates, outreach efforts, and blueberry production practices, Maine
and PEI have dissimilar policies regarding commercial bee importation. Whereas
Maine growers can import honeybees from anywhere in the United States, until
recently PEI's Bee Health Regulations prohibited the entry of commercial bees
from provinces other than Nova Scotia, creating a shortage of bees on the island
province. The regulation was revoked in 2013 and honeybees will be imported for
blueberry pollination for the first time in the spring of 2014. The research is
timely as it coincides with the new policy, allowing investigators to document
how policy does or does not influence grower pollination practices over the next
two years. A comparative study of Maine and PEI allows for a meaningful analysis
of the impact of divergent policies on growers' management practices. The
researchers will investigate the influence of agricultural policy, governmental
and non-governmental agricultural organizations, and social capital on blueberry
growers' pollination management. Investigators will visit farms, interview
farmers and representatives from agricultural organizations, and conduct surveys
to determine what pollinator conservation practices are currently being used and
what the barriers are to diversifying pollination management for increased crop
security and environmental stewardship. The research aims to identify how
agricultural policies influence conservation innovations and inform future
policy so that it can maximize existing social and political resources.
Furthermore, the investigators aim to determine if a generalized model of
conservation agriculture is possible, or if the complicated interplay between
different crops, conservation needs, and political and social environments
requires highly localized solutions.