* 1423061
* TWC SBE: Small: Collaborative: Brain Password: Exploring A Psychophysiological Approach for Secure User Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Wenyao Xu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 248,000.00

Cryptographic systems often rely on the secrecy of cryptographic credentials;
however, these are vulnerable to eavesdropping and can resist neither a user's
intentional disclosure nor coercion attacks where the user is forced to reveal
the credentials. Conventional biometric keys (e.g., fingerprint, iris, etc.),
unfortunately, can still be surreptitiously duplicated or adversely revealed. In
this research, the PIs argue that the most secure cryptographic credentials are
ones of which the users aren't even aware. On the basis of this argument, the
objective of this research is to investigate a new psychophysiological approach
for secure and trustworthy user authentication via non-volitional components of
the electroencephalogram (EEG) brainwave responses. Specifically, the research
examines how consistent these responses are over time and also formally assesses
how unique they are to individuals. By identifying reproducible, unique features
of the EEG, we are developing a method to accurately recognize and authenticate
people by extracting time-invariant and context-invariant "brain passwords."

This research holds the potential to transform existing authentication systems
into more secure, disclosure-resistant solutions; critical for high-security
applications. The cross-disciplinary content of the work also, importantly, will
allow us to strengthen our understanding of individual brain responses and apply
this new knowledge into increasingly vulnerable cyberspace. This may lead to a
far-reaching breakthrough in the possibility of "brain fingerprinting."
Moreover, the investigators are taking active roles in nourishing the
scholarship of underrepresented minorities and female students and making
substantial efforts to integrate diversity in both educational and research
activities.