* 1423719
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Conceptions of the Nature and Management of Solid Waste
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Bo Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2015
* USD 22,050.00

The monitoring, treatment, and disposition of solid waste is one of the many
daunting challenges associated with economic development and population growth.
Waste management practices vary widely around the world. Culture, social
systems, economics, politics, and even religion affect what is classified as
waste in the first place, what sites and methods are deemed suitable for waste
disposal, and how people can be motivated to comply with regulations.
Appropriate waste management is critical to sustaining eco-system services and
protecting public health but successful solutions require more than improved
technology.

In this research project, University of Wisconsin doctoral student Bo Wang, with
the guidance of Dr. Yongming Zhou, will become one of the first researchers to
look at how the many factors affecting solid waste management come together in a
non-Western context. The researcher will travel to Yunnan Province in Southwest
China to carry out a 12 month, ethnographic investigation in three sites: two
mountain villages where tourism and pilgrimage to a sacred religious site have
generated large amounts of solid waste and, in the same region, a newly
established modern landfill that employs hundreds of local people in this new
industry. In all three sites, solid waste is intimately intertwined with
people's daily lives. Relying primarily on participant observation and
interviews, the project will elucidate (1) what tourists, pilgrims, government
staff, and environmental and religious groups conceive of as waste and not-
waste; and (2) how waste affects and is affected by the delineation of sacred
sites and tourism. Findings from this research will contribute to developing
cross-culturally valid theories of how human beings understand their role in the
natural and material world as well as provide critically needed information for
the development of effective global programs for solid waste management.