* 1423306
* AF: Small: Minimalist cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Tal Malkin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Modern cryptography offers an impressive virtual buffet to a consumer who is
wealthy in resources, with powerful tools like fully homomorphic encryption
(which allows a provider to compute with encrypted values while keeping the
client's data safe) and general purpose obfuscation (which allows one to hide
the purpose of a given computation). But for more modestly minded users, who
seek to perform less lofty tasks using more affordable computing resources or
under more time-tested assumptions, the offerings are comparatively paltry. Many
fundamental and practically motivated questions remain unanswered, such as what
are the lowest complexity classes (essentially, the weakest, and thus cheapest,
computing models) containing basic cryptographic primitives? How much protection
against adversarial intrusions can information-theoretic techniques provide for
interactive protocols? Or, what levels of provable security are achievable
within fixed efficiency constraints? This project will advance a theory of
cryptography for the minimalist: a cryptography that is nimble enough to offer
attractive value propositions to conservative consumers.

The PIs will focus investigation on three main themes. First, the PIs will study
complexity (e.g., several notions of circuit complexity) of pseudrandom
primitives such as pseudorandom generators, pseudorandom functions, and weak
pseudorandom functions. Secondly, the PIs will develop Information-theoretic
techniques for robustness in adversarial environments, deepening connections
between error-resilient communication and computation. Finally, the PIs will
improve tradeoffs between security and efficiency in settings where overly
stringent security requirements obstruct practicality, by studying incrementally
relaxed notions of security and the gains in efficiency that they afford.

The proposed research activity is tightly weaved with an educational and
outreach plan for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students, with an emphasis
on encouraging participation of under-represented minorities. The PIs are
involved in computer science programs for elementary school children and for
high school girls, both being taught by undergraduate women in the department of
Computer Science, who will be mentored by the PIs. The educational plan
additionally includes integration with the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum, through incorporation of the research into the introductory and
advanced cryptography classes taught by the PIs, and through individual research
projects and mentoring.