* 1423561
* UTRAC: Using Technology to Research After Class
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kimberly Obbink, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,933.00

This Advancing Informal Science Learning Pathways project, Using Technology to
Research After Class (UTRAC), explores whether a combination of technology
(e.g., iPad-enabled sensors, web-based inquiry-focused portal) and facilitated
visits improves learning outcomes for rural and Native American elementary-age
youth in after school programs. Expected outcomes include improved engagement,
knowledge, skills, and attitudes toward science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM). Project goals include promoting STEM learning through science
inquiry activities keyed to specific Next Generation Science Standards as well
as improving how technology can be used to enhance learning outcomes in
afterschool programs. The experimental design of this project - testing the
effects of physical or virtual facilitation visits on learning outcomes - will
lead to improvements in STEM learning outcomes among rural and underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ several innovations in
utilizing technology to teach STEM topics including: (i) hands-on, real-time,
crowd sourced data collected by participants in their schoolyards; (ii) a
pedagogic emphasis on communication of schoolyard data among and between
participants; (iii) testing of motivational incentives; and (iv) partnerships
between after school providers, preservice teachers, and university researchers
as facilitators. The entire process will be modularized so that it can be
modified in terms of place, STEM topic or student cohort. The topic focus of the
project -- Life Under Snow -- is relevant to participating students, as Montana
school playgrounds lie blanketed under snow for the majority of the school year;
it includes elements of snow science, carbon cycle science, and a combination at
the intersection of three recent literacy initiatives (e.g., Earth Science,
Climate, or Energy). UTRAC will pilot and evaluate facilitated snow
science/carbon cycle science activities that couple real-time schoolyard data
with tools patterned after those available through WISE (Web-based Inquiry
Science Environment; wise.berkeley.edu). Participants will collect and compare
data with other youth participants, and researchers will use formative
assessments to define interventions with potential to maximize student
engagement and learning improvements among underserved youth. The project will
advance understanding of informal education's potential to improve STEM
engagement, knowledge, skills and attitudes by quantifying how - and to what
extent - youth engage with emerging technologies iPad-enabled sensors, and
crowdsourcing and visualization tools. The deliverables include a quantifying
metric for learning outcomes, a training model for the iPad sensors and web
application, an orientation kit, a social media portal, and database for the
measurements.