* 1423020
* NeTS: Small: Transmit Only: Green Communication for Dense Wireless Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 498,614.00

This proposal is targeted at realizing the vision of a "green'' Internet of
Things (IoT) and green communication using transmit-only devices. It is
predicted that by 2020, there will be 50 billion embedded devices deployed in
our ambient environment, most of which will be reporting data to the cloud
through wireless communication. Thus, it is imperative to design green
communication technologies in which power consumption is minimized and bandwidth
utilization is optimized. Existing communication protocols, however, are not
optimized for power consumption and bandwidth utilization because they were
designed to facilitate reliable two-way exchange of information between
communicating parties -- their requirements are completely different from those
of IoT applications. The needs of emerging IoT applications, such as
unidirectional communication flow, dense deployment, small packet sizes, are all
opportunities for significantly simplifying network design. This project aims to
simplify the protocol design by removing receiving functions from the embedded
devices, such that they only spend radio resources on sending application data,
thus minimizing power consumption and maximizing bandwidth
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study a set of algorithms
that can achieve high throughput for wireless networks using transmit-only
devices. The biggest challenge for a transmit-only network is the handling of
packet collisions as the transmitters do not have any means of knowing whether
others are transmitting at the same time. Transmit-only can be thought of as a
single-input-multiple-output multiple access (SIMO-MAC) channel, but there is a
fundamental difference between transmit-only and previous work in SIMO-MAC from
the information theory community - in almost all of the previous studies, while
transmitters do not communicate among themselves, they do rely on feedback from
receivers to make transmission decisions related to encoding and/or scheduling.
Transmit only, on the other hand, assumes once the network is deployed and in
operation, each transmitter does not have any feedback from other transmitters
or receivers. In this case, to reduce packet collisions, and to further ensure
packet collisions do not lead to packet loss, this project proposes a set of
strategies to pro-actively control the network topology as well as transmission
schedules before network deployment. First, an optimal receiver placement
strategy and a network dynamics based transmitter placement strategy are
proposed to minimize the packet loss during a collision by exploiting the fact
the stronger signal can be decoded at the receiver. Second, a transmission
scheduling algorithm is proposed to overlap transmissions that can be decoded
together (by different receivers) to minimize the collisions. The proposed
scheduling algorithm also takes into consideration transmitter mobility to
minimize their negative impact on the network throughput.