* 1423855
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expanding Rights Claims Before Supranational Courts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Michael McCann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Scholarship has demonstrated the challenges of using legal institutions to
expand rights claims; implementation is difficult and often requires continuous
attention by mobilized groups. Yet around the world organizations turn to
supranational courts to make claims. Despite the increasing number of studies on
human rights courts and how people and organizations mobilize law, we lack a
comparative study that explains when and how groups concerned with employment
conditions turn to international human rights courts, and what they expect to
gain, given difficulties of the translation of claims into law and into
practice. The involvement of supranational courts is recent in the employment
policy domain; most of the time claims have been left to national courts. This
research will generate both quantitative data on the developing case law on
labor issues at the European Court of Human Rights and qualitative analyses of
two cases of mobilization to assess the efforts concerning employment. The
project will assess the hypothesis that organizations turn to courts in
particular fields where no other institution is available. In doing so, the
project will contribute to understanding of the interplay of institutions in
significant policy domains.

This research will produce, analyze, and disseminate the first comprehensive
database on labor cases at the European Court of Human Rights, a significant
supranational institution yet one that is not well-understood. The database will
provide information concerning who mobilizes, what the effects of mobilization
are in terms of court outcomes and group claiming, and the expansion of
understandings of rights. This cross-national and longitudinal database will be
pivotal for researchers seeking to analyze the Court's evolving approach. This
timely research will contribute to multiple fields of study and provide social
benefits by investigating the consequences of using international human rights
law.