* 1423133
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Cross Layer Exploration of Position-Value Diversity for Energy Constrained Wireless Multimedia Resource Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,10/31/2014
* James Dudek, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 10/31/2014
* USD 262,040.00

Multimedia content distribution nowadays becomes the dominating traffic in
wireless communication networks. In the meanwhile, battery energy limitation
becomes the primary constraint of mobile computing devices. This project
explores solutions to bridge the fundamental gap between higher layer traffic-
intensive multimedia applications and lower layer energy efficient wireless
communication protocols. In particular, this project investigates new cross
layer approaches to identify crucial position information from unimportant value
information in multimedia and to reduce energy consumption in communication
networks with regards to position and value differences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a new energy-
quality optimized framework for wireless multimedia communications that takes
advantage of position-value diversity in natural digital images and videos. The
research objective is to test the hypothesis that position-based cross-layer
resource allocation can improve energy efficiency in wireless multimedia
communications. The project consists of three essential components: (1) a
unified higher layer position-value separation methodology for various image and
video compression formats, (2) energy efficient position-based lower layer
resource allocation algorithms to allocate communication resource unequally, and
(3) lower layer data-centric wireless relay protocols to transmit multimedia
energy efficiently. The algorithms and protocols developed through this project
casts new insights on designing energy efficient wireless multimedia
communication systems. This project also integrates research findings into
related undergraduate and graduate courses and Native American minority student
advising.