* 1423524
* Health Lifestyles and the Reproduction of Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stefanie Mollborn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 184,649.00

Health is playing an increasing role in our understandings of social inequality.
Researchers and policy makers recognize that health behaviors are often
resistant to change. Seeking to understand this problem, some have begun
focusing on health lifestyles. These are defined as groups of interrelated
health behaviors, rooted in social identities related to understandings of
health, responsibility, and risk, that are shaped by knowledge and resources and
that have important consequences for health and other life outcomes. This
lifestyle approach acknowledges that health behaviors do not happen in a vacuum;
rather, they co-occur in sets and influence one another. These sets of health
behaviors arise from deeply rooted identities that, if they do not themselves
change, can undermine efforts to alter behaviors.

The research focuses on three major unanswered questions: (1) What received
health lifestyles do children get from their parents? (2) How do those received
health lifestyles evolve into achieved health lifestyles across early life? (3)
What are the implications of young people's health lifestyles for their
development and health? Combining qualitative and quantitative methods, this
project bridges different "faces" of sociological social psychology in
considering both behaviors and identities and the social norms, structures, and
interactions that shape them. The project draws from and contributes to several
areas of sociological theory besides health lifestyles: the intergenerational
reproduction of inequalities, identity development in children and youth, the
reciprocal process of socialization, cultural health capital, and the life
course theoretical perspective. Quantitative analyses use three longitudinal
surveys that cover different phases of the early life course: the Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study's Birth and Kindergarten Cohorts, and the Add
Health survey. The project also collects original qualitative data observing
family interactions and interviewing parents, with supplemental parent focus
groups and school personnel interviews.

In addition to scholarly, academic, and public dissemination of findings, this
research has the potential to benefit society. Understanding prevalent patterns
of health behaviors and associated identity development among children and youth
is important for ultimately improving their development, health, and well-being.
Understanding their health lifestyles may help reduce inequalities in their life
outcomes. Student training and learning is an integral part of the project, with
research assistants heavily involved in data collection, analysis, and
dissemination of findings. The project will be integrated into the principal
investigator's undergraduate and graduate teaching, and findings will be
presented in a graduate student workshop.