* 1423772
* Collaborative Research: An Ultrasound Investigation of Irish Palatalization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Ryan Bennett, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 42,802.00

Irish Gaelic, a Celtic language, was the language spoken by all of Ireland
before English colonization, famine, emigration, and social pressures caused it
to become endangered. Today it is still spoken as a community language by
perhaps 70,000 to 140,000 people (between 1.5% and 3% of the population of
Ireland). Despite strong governmental support, it remains endangered.
Documenting the properties of Irish is a matter of urgency, both for posterity
and for the purposes of teaching Irish. Today there are many more people
learning Irish as a second language than as a first language, including people
in the United States, where many are of Irish heritage. Such second language
speakers could represent the future of the language. In this context, perhaps
the most difficult feature of the Irish sound system for English speakers to
learn is its palatalization contrast. Every consonant of Irish comes in two
varieties, one that is palatalized - involving a supplementary tongue gesture of
raising and fronting, and one that is velarized - involving a supplementary
tongue gesture of raising and backing. This palatalization contrast itself is
endangered and waning in the speech of younger speakers, even in Irish speaking
communities, because of the heavy influence of English. As a linguistic feature
more generally, palatalization is uncommon across the world's languages and of
interest to understand. Yet the production of Irish palatalization and
velarization has never been documented with imaging technology, and it is
inadequately documented with such technology even in better-studied languages
having palatalization, such as Russian. Beyond Irish, an investigation of the
production of a palatalization contrast will aid in understanding why languages
lose contrasts between sounds depending on things like the identity of the
consonant in question (e.g., [p] vs. [t]), its position in a syllable, or the
vowels that surround it. It will also provide information about how speakers
coordinate rapidly shifting speech gestures and what strategies they use to
maintain contrasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will gather data on the
production of palatalized and velarized consonants using a portable ultrasound
device. Ultrasound imaging provides direct information about tongue body shape
and movement, crucial to an understanding of palatalization and velarization.
The researchers will also record video of lip movement, and audio,
simultaneously with the ultrasound video. Data will be gathered from all three
major dialect regions of Irish (Ulster, Connacht, and Munster). The Irish
participants will be professional broadcasters who work for RTÉ Radió na
Gaeltachta, (the national broadcaster's Irish medium radio station). In a
context in which the speaker base is rapidly declining, these participants are
all considered exemplary speakers of their dialect. Because of their occupation,
they are comfortable with sound technology and with speaking while being
recorded. The shape of the tongue body, and of the lips, will be extracted from
video and averaged by statistical means. This data will be the basis for
studying the effects on the palatalization contrast of syllable position,
consonant identity, etc., discussed above, as well as speaker strategies for
maintaining contrast and coordinating gestures. The researchers will also
compile a substantial web repository of images of the tongue body and lips
during palatalized and velarized consonants. This repository will constitute a
valuable resource to phonologists and phoneticians who aim to develop a deeper
understanding of articulatory contrasts involving palatalization and
velarization in Irish or in other languages; it will also serve as a useful aid
to students learning Irish as a second language. In addition, the project will
strengthen domestic and international scientific collaborations and will provide
important training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in
linguistics.