* 1423208
* Dakota State University NSF-SFS Cyber Corps Renewal
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Joshua Pauli, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2020
* USD 6,549,900.00

This project seeks to continue Dakota State University (DSU) participation in
the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-
qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce.
DSU is one of the 13 Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber Operations as
designated by the National Security Agency (NSA) and graduates students in the
most technical areas of Cybersecurity in their accelerated program where a
bachelors and masters degree is earned in a total of five years. This project
will enroll three cohort groups of 10 students each and will support them for
the last three years before graduation. Almost half of students' activities are
hands-on technical exercises in offensive security practices in hardware,
operating systems, networks, databases, and software. All DSU CyberCorps® SFS
members will take part in innovative mechanisms of community building such as
the Cybersecurity Computer Club and taking part in the North Central Region on
the Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC) as a team member or
administrator of the competition. The NSF's CyberCorps® SFS program funds
projects that address Cybersecurity education and workforce development. The
Scholarship Track provides funding to award scholarships to students in
Cybersecurity. In return for their scholarships, recipients will work after
graduation for a Federal, State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a
position related to Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the
scholarship. The Capacity Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an
increase in the ability of the United States higher education enterprise to
produce Cybersecurity professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, DSU has
supported a total of 29 CyberCorps® SFS students and formed strong partnerships
with both federal and state agencies, including the NSA, Navy SPAWAR, and Johns
Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab. The applicable undergraduate degrees at
DSU have 452 students in target majors, which are made up of 200 students in
Cyber Operations, 80 students in Network &amp; Security Administration, and 182
students in Computer Science. These three majors account for over 40% of the
total on-campus student population. The graduates of DSU CyberCorps® SFS will be
well versed in security policy, infrastructure operations, and defensive
programming and exhibit strong oral and written communication skills.