* 1423338
* AISL: Innovations in Development: Community-Driven Projects That Adapt Technology for Environmental Learning in Nature Preserves
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Tom Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2019
* USD 355,543.00

While low-income and minority communities suffer disproportionately from poor
environmental conditions, members of these communities tend to be under-
represented in participatory scientific projects and informal science learning
opportunities. There are many benefits to community-driven STEM projects, both
for individuals' experiential learning and for the betterment of communities.
Expanding participation also contributes to a more complete understanding of
complex environmental problems, including STEM content and skills. This project
engages members of racially and economically diverse communities in identifying
and carrying out environmental projects that are meaningful to their lives, and
adapts technology known as NatureNet to assist them. NatureNet, which
encompasses a cell phone app, a multi-user, touch-based tabletop display and a
web-based community, was developed with prior NSF support. Core participants
involved in programs of the Anacostia Watershed Society in Washington, D.C., and
Maryland, and the Reedy Creek Nature Preserve in Charlotte, NC, will work with
naturalists, educators, and technology specialists to ask scientific questions
and form hypotheses related to urban waterway restoration and preservation of
native species. They will then collect and analyze data using NatureNet,
requesting changes to the technology to customize it as needed for their
projects. Casual visitors to the nature centers will be able to interact with
the environmental projects via the tabletop, and those who live farther away
will be able to participate more peripherally via the online community. This
study is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.

The research project, led by researchers from the University of Maryland,
College Park, with collaborators from the University of North Carolina,
Charlotte, and the University of Colorado, Boulder, will provide answers to two
questions: 1) How do community-driven informal environmental learning projects
impact participants, including their motivation to actively participate in
science issues via technology and their disposition toward nature preserves and
scientific inquiry, and 2) What are the key factors (e.g., demographic
composition of participants, geographical location) that influence the
development of community-driven environmental projects? Researchers will gather
extensive qualitative and quantitative data to understand how community projects
are selected and carried out, how participants approach technology use and
adaptation, and how informal learning and engagement on STEM-related issues can
be fostered over a period of several months and through iterative project
cycles. Data will be collected through motivation questionnaires; focus groups;
interviews; tabletop, mobile, and website interaction logs; field notes from
participatory design and reflection sessions; and project journals kept by
nature preserve staff. Through extensive research, iterative design, and
evaluation efforts, researchers will develop an innovative model for community-
driven environmental projects that will deepen informal science education by
demonstrating how members of diverse communities connect environmental knowledge
and scientific inquiry skills to the practices, values, and goals of their
communities, and how technology can be used to facilitate such connections.