* 1423784
* Constructing and Validating an Automated Coding System for Electronic News Sources
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Pamela Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 341,831.00

This project builds, tests, and validates an open-source automated system for
coding social movement data from electronically available news sources. Although
no source is perfect, scholars agree that the best general source of such data,
specifically that on social protest, is a compilation of a large number of news
sources. This project draws on the advances in machine learning developed in
computer science and statistics and combining them with our deep substantive
knowledge as sociologists of the problems of identifying and coding collective
action events in news sources. An existing highly-regarded hand-coded data set
based on the New York Times is used as the reference for "training" machine
learning algorithms -- called "classifiers" -- to recognize elements of an
action event in a news article and extract relevant information. We also collect
and hand-code new data drawn from other regional, national, and international
news sources to provide additional training sets to increase the range and
variety of protests we are able to detect. A supplement to the project provides
research experience for undergraduates who will be involved in collecting and
coding these new data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds, tests, and
validates an open-source automated system for coding data from electronically
available news sources. It advances the state of data collection in social
science and employs the latest developments in natural language processing and
supervised machine learning within computer science and statistics. The result
will be an open-source, publicly available system that may be used by other
researchers and further improved and expanded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
promises to provide an important new methodological tool of broad
interdisciplinary value to social scientists and to open the door to more
efficiently compiling collective action-data from news sources that can improve
both academic scholarship and public policy. All of the code for this project
will be released under an open-source license and publicly accessible through a
public source code repository. This work will be accessible and useful to
scholars in social movements, international relations, and foreign policy. The
work will also be of use to a large number of non-academics, such as foreign
policy analysts and decision-makers, journalists, and those interested in
computational methods of textual analysis and classification. The ability to
code collective action data more efficiently and accurately from news sources
has broad policy applicability.