* 1423496
* Pathways: Measuring the Impact of Participation in Informal STEM Programming on University Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,780.00

Effective communication of science to the public by scientists is a desired and
sought after attribute. This project which is working with graduate and
undergraduate students in Physics will determine what interventions are best in
assessing communication and attitudinal capacities in this cadre. Further, the
project will determine what strategies are best at remediation. Finally, the
successes will be generalized with regard to interventions and remediation to
other Physics programs across the country and perhaps to other disciplines in
the STEM fields.

There are a variety of factors that contribute to effective communications with
public audiences. Some of those factors include audience characteristics and
teacher/mentor capabilities. This project will ascertain the issues in the
latter teacher/mentor capacities. They will assess the mentor's baseline skills
regarding communication, teaching and emergent attitudes. These are considered
separately as each contributes uniquely to the effectiveness of communication.
In the communications skills section, the objective will be to determine
initially if the mentors are using any one of the following models: deficit,
meaning the mentor is the expert and the participants are not informed;
dialogue, where there is more back and forth between mentor and participant; and
finally participatory interactions, where there is full integration of
participant and mentor ideas. Once the baseline is established, the
investigators will introduce mechanisms for remedial intervention with the
student mentors to determine if and what types of changes can be made to improve
communication directed toward public understanding of STEM concepts and ideas.
Finally, the researchers will seek to determine if these interventions have
affects beyond the immediate challenges such as career discussions,
participation in classes and/or written products.