* 1423680
* SHF: Small: A Cross-Layer Modeling and Optimization Framework Targeting FinFET-based Designs Operating in Multiple Voltage Regimes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 429,997.00

Recent studies emphasize the importance of energy-efficient computing for
sustaining advancements in information technology and addressing critical
societal challenges. The exploration of holistic power optimization and
management solutions that cut across multiple layers of the computing stack and
infrastructure to be studied in this project will better enable available
opportunities for maximizing energy efficiency. The research will advance the
state-of-the art in sub-10nm device design, modeling, and optimization, standard
cell library design and characterization, circuit speed vs. energy efficiency
vs. reliability trade space exploration, and heterogeneity modeling at the chip
level. The challenges and opportunities in this research will provide directions
for developing many of the technologies and approaches that are needed to design
energy-efficient computing systems of the future and ensure sustainability of
the information technology ecosystem. Education, outreach, and training programs
enhanced by this project will include development of new educational modules,
recruitment of minority and under-represented students, as well as undergraduate
learning and research internship opportunities for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, this project
will innovate at two cross-layer boundaries: (i) Technology and Circuits, and
(ii) Circuits and Architectures. More precisely, a first thrust of the research
will focus on developing deeply-scaled (multi-gate) CMOS devices and logic cell
libraries that offer high energy efficiency, fast switching speed, and
reliability. A second thrust targets the design of low dynamic and standby power
circuits, circuit designs capable of robust and energy-delay optimal operation
in multiple voltage regimes, and means for effective chip-level power
management. To accomplish these research objectives, analysis and simulation
tools will be developed to characterize properties such as Ion/Ioff ratio,
energy efficiency, and variation tolerance of the deeply-scaled (e.g., sub-10nm)
FinFET devices. In addition, questions of how the new devices can be used for
designing memory and logic cells that can seamlessly operate at low (near-
threshold) and high (super-threshold) supply voltages will be explored. Finally,
key challenges in modeling, deployment, and reconfiguration of circuit fabrics
and architectural templates to improve the overall energy efficiency of system-
on-chip designs will be addressed.