* 1423544
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Matrix Multiplication, Polynomial Factorization and Generalized Fourier Transform
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Christopher Umans, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses three prominent algorithmic problems: matrix
multiplication, polynomial factorization, and the generalized discrete Fourier
transform (DFT). In the first two, the challenge is to obtain fast algorithms
for basic manipulations of matrices and polynomials, and in the third, the
challenge is to obtain fast algorithms for transforming data in certain
mathematically meaningful ways. Matrix multiplication is a central open problem
in theoretical computer science, both because of its intrinsic mathematical
appeal, and because improved algorithms for this important problem would have
immediate consequences for a broad variety of related problems. Univariate
polynomial factorization occupies a similar central position among the basic
operations on polynomials, and the generalized DFT is one of the most
interesting and useful linear maps, with structure that should admit a fast
algorithm. All three problems are fundamental and longstanding open problems,
and they have a diversity of applications in computer science, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to achieve "nearly-linear"
time algorithms for all three problems. These problems possess rich structure
that is susceptible to a sophisticated mathematical treatment; for example, one
technique is to embed matrix multiplication into algebraic structures arising
from groups and coherent configurations. This project develops these ideas, and
at the same time aims to make further progress by injecting some more "computer
science"-style ideas -- recursion, approximation, reductions, relaxations, and a
mixture of Boolean computation with algebraic operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because all three focus areas of this project revolve
around difficult and longstanding open problems, the project will take concrete
steps towards (1) building up understanding and (2) developing useful machinery,
both aimed at an eventual resolution of these central algorithmic problems.