* 1423564
* WORKSHOP: Constitutional Rights, Judicial Independence and the Transition to Democracy; November 13-16, 2014, -New York Law School
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephen Ellmann, New York Law School
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,891.00

This workshop will bring together a diverse international and interdisciplinary
group of practitioners, scholars in both law and social science, and innovative
law teachers with expertise in the processes of transition to democracy;
globalization and law; the role of constitutional courts; law and social
movements; legal pluralism and customary law; economic and social rights; and
the impact of legal education on legal professions and law. Its broader impacts
include fostering deeper connections between American and South African
scholars, assisting South African lawyers and social scientists in protecting
human rights, and building awareness in the United States both of the challenges
South Africa faces and of the contributions to democratic and legal thinking
that it is making.

The workshop will be a sustained series of structured discussions around five
core themes: judicial independence; the potential, limits and pitfalls of
judicial intervention; culture, tradition, public resistance and elite pressure
in the assertion of rights; public interest law; and socioeconomic rights and
restitution. Papers will be submitted in advance and made available to other
presenters on a workshop website, which will also serve as a resource for
additional relevant readings and materials. Each theme will be introduced with a
plenary session, followed by small-group meetings around particular issues
bearing on that theme, and culminating in a report-back session. Summaries of
each session's discussions will be posted on the workshop website. Panels will
be designed to bring together socio-legal and legal scholars, legal educators,
and practitioners. It will include participants who are from under-represented
groups and who are early-career scholars and students.