* 1423840
* A Corpus-Based Sociolinguistic Study of Spanish in the Metro-Boston Area
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Daniel Erker, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2018
* USD 175,617.00

Over 40 million Americans speak Spanish. This figure eclipses the individual
populations of every country in Latin America except Mexico and Colombia, and it
is roughly equivalent to the current population of Spain. Of the estimated 34
million Americans over five years old who speak Spanish at home, 25 million also
report speaking English 'well' (6.4 million) or 'very well' (18.8 million). By
2050, the number of Americans who self-identify as Hispanic is likely to surpass
130 million. In broad strokes, these facts paint a clear picture: Spanish is,
and will continue to be, a defining element of our national linguistic identity.
In order to better understand the current role of Spanish in American life, and
in order to predict how it may evolve in the future, it is essential to study
the linguistic effects of two forces shaping its use today. First, Spanish and
English are spoken alongside each other on a massive scale. Second, the many
different varieties of the Spanish language found across the globe are present
in a condensed setting in the United States. This means that individuals who
might rarely interact with speakers outside of their own communities in Latin
America are, throughout the U.S., in frequent contact with speakers whose
national and regional origins are different from their own.

This project studies the outcomes of these two kinds of linguistic contact
(known as language and dialect contact, respectively) among Spanish speaking
residents of Boston, MA. The analysis focuses on two linguistic features as they
occur in spontaneous speech: (1) subject pronouns (the Spanish equivalent of
words like 'I', 'you', and 'we') and (2) the acoustic properties of the speech
sound 's'. Patterns of variation in these features are akin to linguistic
fingerprints, uniquely relatable to individuals and communities. Current
research on Spanish in other American locales indicates that these features are,
unlike fingerprints, susceptible to change. Tracking and understanding the
nature of such change bears directly on a host of issues relevant to Spanish in
the United States as well as linguists' general understanding of contact-induced
language change. These include the maintenance of Spanish across immigrant
generations, the potential influence of English on the grammatical structure of
Spanish and vice versa, the persistence or erosion of dialect differences in
contact situations, and the timescale of language change. In addition to speech
data, the project also collects and analyzes speakers' personal linguistic
histories. These include their descriptions of when, how, and with whom they
acquired and use Spanish as well as their attitudes towards and use of English
in their daily lives. Together these data will create a rich profile of Spanish
in Boston that promises to increase understanding of how Spanish is used in the
United States, particularly in the large urban areas in which most Americans
live.