* 1423082
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Stochastic Sampling for Rendering, Imaging, and Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rui Wang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 319,956.00

Stochastic sampling is a fundamental component in most computer graphics
applications, including rendering, imaging, modeling, and simulation. For
example, in rendering, stochastic sampling is crucial to efficiently solving
complex integrals; in texture synthesis, it is the key to generate visually
pleasing patterns; in geometry processing, it is used to characterize important
geometry features. While much previous work has focused on planar samples with
blue noise spectrum, little research has studied more general types of
stochastic sampling. This research aims to advance the state of the art in
general stochastic sampling, providing new theoretical insights, computational
methods, and practical applications. The outcome benefits not only computer
graphics and vision, but many other disciplines that rely on stochastic sampling
techniques.

This project studies new methods for analyzing and synthesizing stochastic
samples. On the analysis side, the research introduces new techniques, based on
spatial statistics, to quantify the distribution properties of stochastic
samples. On the synthesis side, the research presents computationally efficient
methods to generate high-quality samples with desired distribution properties.
Modern GPUs are employed to achieve parallel computation. These techniques in
turn enable new applications. In rendering, the project answers fundamental
questions such as the optimal sample patterns for anti-aliasing and half-toning.
In computational photography, the project introduces novel scene-dependent coded
patterns that allow a camera system to capture more details (spatially,
temporally, and spectrally) in a single shot. In geometry processing, the
project presents new technique to generate samples on surfaces, for remeshing,
defining shape features, and performing shape matching.