* 1423334
* TWC: Small: Behavior-Based Zero-Day Intrusion Detection for Real-Time Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Sibin Mohan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) have distinct cyber and physical components that
must work cohesively with each other to ensure correct operation. Examples
include automobiles, power plants, avionics systems, and home automation
systems. Traditionally such systems were isolated from external accesses and
used proprietary components and protocols. Today that is not the case as CPS
systems are increasingly networked. A failure to protect these systems from harm
in cyber could result in significant physical harm. Many cyber-physical systems
have real-time constraints i.e., they must function correctly within
predetermined time scales. Systems that have such real-time properties are
predictable by design. The execution behavior of such systems (e.g., execution
time, memory usage, control flow, system properties, etc.) is analyzed in detail
and controlled to a high degree of precision in order to guarantee predictable
real-time behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use this very
predictability of real-time CPS to detect intrusions as soon as they occur and
take evasive and corrective actions. This will be combined with the development
of an architectural framework to (a) detect intrusions and (b) guarantee that
the underlying physical system does not come to harm. The development of these
analysis techniques and intrusion-detection architectures being proposed here
will inherently make such systems more secure and hence, safer. It will bring us
one step closer to understanding how to integrate two seemingly diverse yet
important fields, CPS and cybersecurity, while gaining a better understanding of
both areas.