* 1423321
* III: Small: A Novel Framework for Mining Multi-relation and Labeled Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Saeed Salem, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2019
* USD 345,551.00

Complex networks appear in a wide spectrum of fields including bioinformatics
and neuroscience. They are governed by intricate webs of interactions among
constituent elements. Entities and relationships in graphs are increasingly
being annotated with content, thus giving rise to rich attributed graphs.
Effective integration of attribute data with network topology will enable
scientists to ask new questions and discover novel findings that are not
possible using only one source of data. This project is developing methods to
find interesting patterns in networks that represent multiple types of
information, e.g., gene expression and protein-protein interaction networks
along with disease information, or co-authorship graphs with information on both
the conference and year of publication. As an example of the value of such
pattern discovery, protein-protein interaction subnetworks whose genes are
dysregulated in multiple disease genome-wide expression datasets are useful for
disease diagnosis and mechanism understanding.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research aims to develop a suite of algorithmic and analytic methods
for analyzing large multi-relation and attributed graphs. Specifically, the
project is: (i) developing novel concepts and algorithms for mining cross-graph
interesting patterns from multi-relation graphs, and coherent patterns from
attributed graphs, and (ii) designing computational methods for integrating
biological data (e.g., gene expression, protein-protein interaction networks)
for discovering coherent and phenotype-specific subnetworks. This poses
interesting challenges due to the computational complexity of many subgraph
discovery tasks; this project is using application (e.g., biologically)
motivated definitions as a starting point to identify interesting pattern
definitions for which discovery is tractable. In addition to dissemination to
the research community, outcomes will include software tools for use by the
broader scientific community, developing new courses in the area of network
analysis, educational material for introducing high school students to
computational thinking, and increasing minority undergraduate students
involvement in research.