* 1423874
* Collaborative Research: Separating transient and enduring forms of change in adult attachment styles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* R. Chris Fraley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 440,005.00

Having strong close relationships with others is associated with health and
well-being. However, people vary in how secure they are in their close
relationships. Although some people are relatively confident that others will be
available and supportive when needed, other people are not. These individual
differences, or what social and personality psychologists sometimes refer to as
attachment styles, have broad consequences for interpersonal functioning,
emotion regulation, and health. How stable are attachment styles? Do certain
life experiences (e.g., starting a new relationship, losing a loved one) have
the potential to change attachment styles? And, if so, are these changes
temporary or are they enduring? These relatively basic questions, despite being
foundational for the field, have been difficult to answer; the proposed research
will address this critical gap. More broadly, the proposed work will provide
valuable information on what kinds of experiences can be catalysts for change.
Given that attachment relationships can play a role in mental and physical
health, this research may shed light on how shifts in interpersonal processes
and experiences could facilitate well-being.

The primary focus of the proposed research is to determine what kinds of life
events and interpersonal experiences lead to enduring vs. transient changes in
attachment security. To accomplish this, people will be recruited to complete
self-report measures of attachment styles, personality, and interpersonal
experiences once a month for a period of 24 months. This research methodology
has the potential to advance our understanding of stability and change in in two
crucial ways. First, previous studies have rarely had access to multiple
assessments of attachment style following important life events, making it
difficult to know whether changes in security are fleeting. Second, researchers
rarely have access to multiple assessments of attachment style before specific
life events take place, making it difficult to know how people were (or were
not) changing before specific life events. The longitudinal methods in the
current research will allow estimation of trajectories of security before and
after naturally occurring life events. Moreover, because the proposed research
addresses a set of issues that are of broad significance in social,
developmental, and personality psychology, this investigation has the potential
to contribute to a framework for understanding stability and change in
personality and interpersonal processes more generally.