* 1423782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Explaining Post-Election Violence in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Gretchen Bauer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 17,898.00

This project seeks to provide an explanatory framework for understanding post-
election violence (PEV) in Africa. Not only has PEV received scant theoretical
and empirical treatment in the political violence and internal conflict
literatures, electoral violence is consistently recurring, happening at a
relatively constant rate for the past two decades even as war is on the decline.
While the scant literature on electoral violence in Africa (primarily single-
case studies) has shed light on the dynamics involved in particular contexts,
still missing are: a systematic explanation for the occurrence of PEV across
Africa, why PEV occurs in certain contexts and not in others, and a
theoretically grounded general account of PEV on the continent. This project
aims to provide these missing aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Theoretically, this research will provide an ideal-typical model that explains
PEV in Africa to be subsequently deployed in the analysis of individual cases.
Empirically, using a multi-method research design, it will provide aggregate
quantitative analysis of PEV in Africa as well as in-depth case studies of three
cases - two with and one without PEV. These are recent presidential elections in
Ghana (2012), Nigeria (2011) and Cote d'Ivoire (2010). The case studies involve
field research using semi-structured expert/elite interviews, process tracing,
and discourse analysis. This research will enhance security studies by
delineating the mechanisms and processes involved in PEV with policy
implications for mitigating post-election violence in Africa and other newly
democratizing states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: PEV has a
destabilizing effect, results in loss of lives and property, and at its most
extreme, leads to civil war. The gap in the literature identified above will be
filled by focusing on the following questions. What accounts for the incidence
of PEV? What are the mechanisms and processes involved? How can the variance in
the intensity of violence seen in PEV be explained? Why does PEV degenerate into
civil war? Successfully answering these questions will provide a comprehensive
understanding of PEV that is crucial to coming up with effective measures for
preventing and resolving PEV, with broader implications for international
security, the practice and policymaking on conflict management and
peacebuilding, not just in Africa but also in other newly democratizing
societies. Since the U.S. as a preeminent global power is enmeshed in
international security it also has national security implications as the U.S.
may intervene in cases of PEV that degenerate into civil war.