* 1423172
* CSR: Small: Effective Data Compression for Modern Memory Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Onur Mutlu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 497,618.00

Many areas of science and technology have experienced transformational changes
in recent years due to the increased ability to collect and analyze extremely
large data sets. As a result, computers are often limited by their ability to
move data in and out of their processors (or CPUs). One attractive approach to
reducing this performance bottleneck would be to compress the data throughout
the computer's memory system. Although data compression has been successful in
certain areas of computing (e.g., shrinking the size of files), it has not been
widely adopted within modern memory systems. This research is to develop a new
memory compression technique that is fast enough, simple enough, and effective
enough (in saving space) to make memory compression practical and
attractive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight to the proposed approach is
that decompression latency and simplicity of design are far more critical than
compression ratio when designing a compression scheme that is effective for
modern memory. Preliminary work has identified simple and effective mechanisms
for compressing data in on-chip caches and in main memory that achieve
significant compression ratios while adding minimal access latency overhead. The
simplicity of the proposed mechanisms also enables elegant solutions for dealing
with the practical challenges of how on-chip caches and main memories are
organized in modern systems. The anticipated data compression framework will
help improve the performance, cost, and energy efficiency of a wide spectrum of
computer systems, ranging from high-end servers (including Cloud Computing,
high-performance computing, and other distributed systems) down to mobile and
embedded devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned compression framework should
relieve pressure on both the capacity of the various layers of the memory
hierarchy (including caches, DRAM, non-volatile memory technologies, etc.) as
well as the bandwidth of the interconnects that transfer data between these
layers. This in turn would allow systems designers to avoid over-provisioning
these resources. As a result, future computer systems should be better suited to
the increasingly data-intensive workloads of the future.