* 1423128
* CSR: Small: BaaS: Benchmarking-As-A-Service for Improved Visibility, Diagnosis, and Control of Modern Data Analytics Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Shivnath Babu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,998.00

System benchmarking is a critical technique used by application developers and
system administrators to help them decide how best to perform a wide spectrum of
system management tasks. These tasks range from design-time aspects such as
picking which system to use for an application, to all pre-deployment aspects of
testing and tuning the applications and system, and to production aspects such
as reliability assurance and problem diagnosis. However, the reality today is
that the massive potential of benchmarking is seldom harnessed satisfactorily by
application developers and system administrators. Benchmarking is very human-
effort-intensive. Users may not be aware of or follow correct benchmarking
methodology. Often corners are cut to reduce either time or cost without full
awareness of the implications of doing so. Repeatability and reuse of
benchmarking results are often unattainable. The results of a benchmarking
effort may be misinterpreted, leading to incorrect or suboptimal
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines new research with recent
technology trends in order to make the power of benchmarking accessible to a
diverse community of users. The project is building a Benchmarking-as-a-Service
(BaaS) platform that runs on top of an Infrastructure-as-a-Service or Platform-
as-a-Service cloud platform. A BaaS provides four integrated services to
simplify the overall benchmarking process, while addressing a number of novel
technical challenges: 1. Design: Helps the user create the workloads and data
that best meet her specific benchmarking needs, using the concept of benchmark
design as a search problem; 2. Execute: Helps the user run the selected
workloads on appropriate data, system configurations, and hardware and software
resources in a timely and cost-efficient manner; 3. Interpret: Helps the user
interpret the results of the benchmark correctly since many users who run
benchmarks on systems are far from being experts on these systems (many
challenges arise here due to the large volume, variety, and velocity of system
monitoring data); and 4. Build: Helps the user build new system management
services on top of the BaaS. For example, BaaS enables the automatic tuning of
production database instances running on cloud platforms like Amazon Web
Services and SQL Azure. BaaS is being prototyped and opportunities for deploying
it in real-world settings will be pursued. The prototype will be used to
evaluate the transformative capabilities of BaaS towards increasing the
productivity of humans and systems, and in avoiding wrong decisions involving
mission-critical systems.