* 1423452
* NeTS: Small:  Designing Networks for High Throughput
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Alexandra Kolla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The combination of two inexorable trends - increasing parallelism and increasing
big data analytics - means computing systems urgently need efficient high-
capacity networks, capable of very rapidly delivery of data among servers.
Modern warehouse-scale data centers, operated by large Internet services like
Google, Amazon, Facebook, and many others, require networks connecting tens of
thousands of servers. High capacity is useful to support data intensive
applications such as Map-Reduce and scientific simulations. In cloud computing,
a high-capacity network gives operators the freedom to place virtual machines on
any physical server, without needing to worry about capacity constraints between
hosts. This freedom translates into higher server utilization, lower management
overhead, and thus lower operating costs.

As cloud applications have demanded greater communication among servers,
numerous data center network architectures have recently been proposed. In these
networks, both the routing and the topology of the network - that is, the
pattern of links among routers and servers - are critical in working together to
obtain high capacity. However, we lack a fundamental understanding about which
network topologies achieve high capacity and what the resulting systems design
tradeoffs are, as well as how to build real-time routing algorithms that achieve
near-optimal capacity in arbitrary topologies.

The project spans theory and systems design. The principal investigators (PIs)
will develop high-capacity network architectures, including routing and
topologies that are efficient and flexible. They will develop a suite of
software to efficiently compute capacity of network architectures in a variety
of network traffic patterns, topologies, and routing protocols, as well as build
a hardware testbed to test the designs. They will then tackle an ambitious goal
-- developing a system which achieves near-optimal multicommodity flow in real
time (e.g., tens or hundreds of milliseconds) in arbitrary network topologies.
Finally, the PIs will apply these routing advances to enable new more efficient
and flexibile data center network topologies.

The broader impact of this project lies in expected research impact and
educational impact. The data center network designs produced in this project are
expected to provide significant efficiency and operational flexibility compared
to today's data centers, potentially achieving 25-40% higher capacity with the
same equipment as current large-scape data center networks. The PIs will also
develop a course module and e-book surveying the fundamental topic of how to
achieve high capacity in networks, including past work and that of this project.
Finally, the project will include a free release of a software suite to
facilitate open and reproducible research.