* 1423826
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Causes and Representative Consequences of Invalid Voting
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Mollie Cohen, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2015
* USD 14,016.00

The project investigates the causes of invalid voting, an important issue for
democratic development. In recent elections in Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru, more
than one out of every five voters went to the polls, received a ballot, but did
not vote for a congressional candidate. To varying degrees around the world,
citizens turn out to vote and then choose not to exercise their most basic
democratic right, instead casting blank or incorrectly marked ballots. Yet,
despite the frequency of this phenomenon, little is known about who casts these
"null" or "invalid" votes, and why. This project assesses potential causes of
intentional invalid voting across the Latin American region and, also, examines
politician responsiveness to this practice using a mixed methods approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, using cross-national survey data of citizens
collected by the AmericasBarometer and the Comparative Study of Electoral
Systems, the project assesses individual-level explanations of invalid voting
behavior. Specifically, support is found for the proposed relationships between
low political knowledge, dissatisfaction with politics, and invalid voting. A
second series of analyses incorporates an original dataset to address questions
of elite strategy in response to invalid voting. In particular, this analysis
tests the hypothesis that, in strategizing about future party competition,
parties view high rates of invalid voting as a sign of electoral opportunity,
and therefore choose to enter competition where rates of invalid voting are
high. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third set of analyses involves the collection of
original interview data with sitting politicians, political candidates, and
partisan strategists in Peru. This part of the project assesses the interaction
between elites and citizens, through the analysis of semi-structured interviews
with candidates and sitting legislators from subnational regions with varied
historical rates of invalid voting: Arequipa, Cajamarca, and Piura. To
understand the implications of invalid voting for political representation, the
project will determine whether and to what extent political elites are concerned
about invalid voting, and, given this concern, whether and how elites respond to
invalid voters both on the campaign trail and once in
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: While previous scholarship has
identified some potential causes of intentional invalid voting, scholars to date
have not isolated intentional null voting in their arguments or in their
empirical tests, which have been conducted in large part at the aggregate level.
Academically, this project's contribution is twofold: First, it offers a
comprehensive theoretical framework focused on intentional invalid voting, and
tests the related theoretical propositions at the individual level using cross-
national and single-case survey and interview data. Second, the project extends
beyond the causes of invalid voting to build and test a new theory of elite
response. Measuring how political elites evaluate and respond to often-sizeable
groups of null voters, both during the electoral period and once in office,
provides a new dimension on which to assess elites' responsiveness to their
constituents, and to the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project focuses on the Latin American region, where democratic recessions
have become increasingly common in recent years. High rates of intentional
invalid voting could suggest widespread citizen discontent in the democracies of
this region. U.S. foreign policy has long made democracy-promotion an explicit
goal, with the objective of creating a more secure world. This project advances
the same goals by gauging the extent to which dissatisfaction motivates invalid
voting, and to what political effect. Additionally, this study will take place
in affiliation with a local research organization (IEP), using local university
students as research assistants. Research assistants will learn specific skills
and participate in academic research. Results will be disseminated to the
broader academic community through conference presentations and paper
publications; results will also be disseminated to the IEP and to Peru's
electoral authorities. This project thus develops local human capital, and
strengthens cross-national ties with local institutions focused on political
research and policy-making.