* 1423755
* Collaborative Research: The Psychological Difficulties and Benefits of Deliberative Reflection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Gilbert, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 179,532.00

The ability to occupy ourselves solely with our thoughts, paying no attention to
the external world, is one of the signatures of what it is to be human. Although
there is substantial research on many forms of reflection, such as problem
solving and planning, there is relatively little research on deliberate attempts
to improve one's subjective well being with one's own thoughts in the absence of
any external stimulation. On the one hand this would seem easy to do so, given
the richness of human memory (e.g., the ability to recall pleasant events from
one's past) and the ability to construct enjoyable daydreams and fantasies. On
the other hand, people do not often choose to entertain themselves solely with
their minds. When at home with nothing to do, for example, most people choose to
read, watch television, listen to music, or pursue their favorite hobby instead
of engaging in reflection. The proposed research will investigate why this is,
the conditions under which people can put their disengaged minds to good use,
and the benefits of deliberative reflection. The overall goal of the research is
to understand better the nature of human attention and mental control, and by so
doing, discover new ways in which people can reduce stress and improve their
well-being.

In preliminary research, Timothy Wilson (University of Virginia), Daniel Gilbert
(Harvard University) and colleagues found that people typically do not enjoy
spending time by themselves with nothing to do but think, that they enjoyed
doing mundane external activities much more, and that many preferred to
administer electric shocks to themselves instead of being left alone with their
thoughts. Most people seem to prefer to be doing something rather than nothing,
even if that something is negative. The proposed research will investigate three
possible reasons why this is. First, if people attempt to think exclusively
about positive thoughts for too long, negative thoughts begin to intrude.
Second, in the absence of any external stimulation people continually scan the
external environment. If there is nothing in the external world to engage the
scanner it keeps searching for input, using up resources that could be devoted
to internal thought. Third, people may not know how to engage in reverie
effectively but can be taught to do so. The 12 proposed studies will involve
laboratory experiments, field experiments, and experience sampling
methodologies, and include college students and community members as
participants.