* 1423963
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Why Media Collaboration Flourishes Despite Interreligious Conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Brian Smithson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 5,190.00

Scientists have long tried to understand the conditions that are necessary to
produce mutual tolerance and understanding within contexts where different
groups of people practice highly varied religions. Within these debates, there
is a school of thought that suggests that certain kinds of religious
interactions are likely to give rise to conflict, and there is another that
suggests that some religions tend to be more malleable and adopt ideas from a
range of different secular and religious practices. It is often claimed that
there are certain religions make their practitioners less inclined to cooperate
with individuals outside their religion. This research, which trains a graduate
student in how to conduct rigorous empirical fieldwork, examines a case where
individuals from religions that have historically been in conflict with one
another engage collaboratively to produce media in which cultural and religious
differences are a major theme. The project asks what circumstances and
relationships give rise to these kinds of collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Brian Smithson under the supervision of Dr. Charles
Piot of Duke University will investigate the strategies human beings use to
overcome religious and international tensions in order to accomplish
collaborative endeavors. He will pursue this inquiry by exploring media
production along the border of Bénin and Nigeria. This is an ideal context
within which to investigate this question for several reasons: there are vast
cultural and religious differences within a relatively small geographic space,
as participants practice three different religions; the participants are highly
variable in their media expertise, suggesting that collaborative media
production is voluntaristic, rather than driven by mutual economic or logistical
benefit. The project will test theories in the social sciences that assume that
religious interactions necessarily give rise to religious clashes or religious
hybridization. Classic ethnographic data collection methods, including
participant observation and interviews with various stakeholders in media
production will be used. This project will explore what roles national identity,
religious affiliation, and professional prestige play in negotiations over
religious attitudes and conceptions of community, as well as what methods of
media production allow for a broader debate about religious content,
iconography, and aesthetics in media. The findings of this study promise to
benefit policymakers as they struggle with increasing religious tensions in
their countries and fears that inter-religious strife may spill across borders.