* 1423168
* TWC: Small: Blameworthy Programs: Accountability via Deviance and Causal Determination
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Limin Jia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,754.00

Security protocols enable useful tasks over untrusted networks. For example,
confidential communication over the Internet between users and Web services like
Google, Facebook, Amazon and Bank of America rely on protocols like SSL/TLS and
the supporting Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). These protocols are designed to
provide global security properties like authentication and confidentiality when
various parties (e.g., the user, the Web service, and participants in the PKI
such as certificate authorities) execute their prescribed programs. However,
when individual parties deviate from their prescribed programs and the global
security property is violated, it is important to hold agents accountable by
detecting deviant behavior and determining which deviations actually caused the
violation. Such determinations are useful in a wide range of distributed
security settings, including in protocols for authentication and key exchange,
electronic voting, and online auctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops logic and language-based methods for deviance and causal determination
in distributed systems. The project addresses the following scientifically
challenging tasks: (1) Developing a language for distributed computing in which
prescribed behavior of agents are represented with contracts. The contracts are
specified via types and a type-directed distributed monitoring infrastructure is
designed to detect deviance from contracts. The technical approach is based on
novel dependent and stateful session types to express and verify security-
relevant properties of systems. (2) Developing a formal blame semantics for
distributed systems that is extensional (protocol- or system-independent).
Recognizing that some deviations may not affect the security property, the blame
semantics combines deviance from contracts with a novel definition of programs
as actual causes of global security properties. The formalization of actual
causation in this setting, while inspired by counterfactual theories of actual
causation in philosophy and in computer science, goes beyond those theories by
dealing with interacting distributed programs with nondeterministic operational
semantics. (3) Applications of these methods to conduct a comprehensive study of
proposed protocols for augmenting accountability in the public key
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has potential for significant
broader impact on society. Recent results have exposed the fragility of the
Public Key Infrastructure on which hundreds of millions of people around the
world rely to protect their communication over the Internet. A systematic basis
for design, analysis, and comparison of protocols that improve accountability of
the PKI can help protect Internet users from malicious adversaries who seek to
snoop on their communications. The project also provides extensive training and
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at Carnegie
Mellon University.