* 1423481
* TWC: Small: Attribute Based Access Control for Cloud Infrastructure as a Service
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Ravinderpal Sandhu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

When an organization moves its hardware resources to a cloud infrastructure as a
service (IaaS) provider, it faces 2 major issues: (1) cumbersome abstractions of
access control facilities provided by the cloud service provider over its
virtual assets (compute, storage, networking, etc.), and (2) multi-tenancy and
availability concerns arising due to lack of control of virtual resource
placement in the physical infrastructure. This project develops a foundational,
formal theory of attribute-based access control (ABAC) and constraints
specification, and associated enforcement and implementation as means to address
these problems. The ABAC models are designed in such a way so as to provide each
customer of the cloud service provider autonomy over access control design and
specification, and administrative functions involving the customer's virtual
resources and users. The constraints specification framework allows for
customers to express resource scheduling preferences to mitigate multi-tenancy
and availability issues (e.g. do not co-locate virtual machines tagged as
sensitive with those of other customers) which are then algorithmically enforced
by the service provider. Rigorous evaluation is performed by augmenting
OpenStack, widely-deployed open-source cloud IaaS software, with ABAC and
studying its expressiveness, user-friendliness and performance on large-scale
physical infrastructure. The expected outcome of this research is to gain
consensus in the research and practitioner community that ABAC would be a
standard and viable approach for effective access control in the multi-billion
dollar cloud IaaS industry.