* 1423624
* NeTS: Small: Pareto-Optimized Heat Diffusion Protocol on Ollivier-Ricci Curvature Controlled Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Edmond Jonckheere, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,995.00

While there are a variety of throughput-optimal wireless network protocols, more
challenging is the problem of making the protocol optimal relative to such
conflicting objectives as queue occupancy (related to latency) and routing cost
(related to power management), while holding throughput-optimality. The first
step in that direction is the design of a protocol mimicking heat diffusion, as
the celebrated Dirichlet principle of heat calculus already endows the routing
with minimum routing cost property. The next step requires a significant
departure from heat diffusion in order to make the protocol Pareto-optimal
relative to routing cost and queue occupancy, while enforcing interference
restrictions, link directionality and capacity. From this point onwards, the
research effort will be conducted along two different lines of investigation.
First, since the classical heat calculus had to be modified in a nontrivial way
to make it an implementable wireless network protocol, there is a need to
understand the ?heat equation? in the context of directed graphs, subject to
interference restrictions and capacity constraints. Classical heat calculus
involves the classical Laplacian, which is a linear operator, while here the
central mathematical object of concern of this new "heat calculus" is a
nonlinear Laplacian in the fluid limit, which describes the rate-level, rather
than packet-level, behavior of the stochastic wireless network. The second line
of investigation is dedicated to finding the network invariant that could
anticipate the potential for large queue occupancy and/or large routing cost. We
will develop the Ollivier-Ricci curvature as a computationally implementable
network parameter inversely proportional to queue occupancy and routing cost,
even under directionality and other network constraints. Also, the Ollivier-
Ricci curvature will be investigated as a predictor of the size of the capacity
region. Finally, the research will culminate with some Ricci flow technique to
optimize the network for maximum Ollivier-Ricci curvature, hence attaining the
largest capacity region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework of this proposal is
applicable to a wide family of stochastic problems with interdependent
resources, where the resources are a collection of interdependent servers that
can only be accessed under certain constraints, and the consumers are of random
service time with asynchronous completion. This general model describes a wide
variety of problems including queuing networks, product assembly systems, memory
or processor managements, call centers, agent allocations, data switches,
healthcare systems, and transmission planning or storage allocation in power
systems just to name a few. Specifically, the research will strive to achieve
cross-fertilization among this broad set of problems with classical
thermodynamics and Ohm?s law in circuit theory that open a new way to analyze
and optimize these complicated problems.