* 1424035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: A Dynamic Theory of Mass Preferences for Trade
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Ryan Powers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 21,017.00

The research investigates important questions about public attitudes toward
trade policy. Changes in trade policy lead to changes in price levels of
consumer goods. When trade policy is liberalized, people who primarily consume
imported or import-competing goods benefit because of decreases in prices for
those goods, while people who consume exportable goods lose due to increases in
prices. Because consumption patterns vary with income, the consumer price
effects of changes in trade policy are distributional. The current research on
mass trade preferences - focused almost exclusively on the potential income
and/or employment effects of changes in trade policy - ignores these price
effects. This project explores how price level effects in trade policy determine
trade policy preferences at the individual level, using a nationally
representative survey of the U.S. public with several embedded survey
experiments to test the dynamic model of trade preferences. The project also
includes interviews with U.S. economic policy-makers to better understand how
the public's reaction to changes in economic conditions influences the policy-
making process.

Intellectual Merits: The literature on mass preferences for globalization has
focused on the issue area of trade policy and the potential income or employment
effects of trade policy. Despite numerous studies, there is relatively little
consensus on the extent to which the public has stable and coherent preferences
over foreign economic policies. This research augments existing political
economy models of trade to allow individuals to be concerned with both income
and price level effects of changes in trade policy. The project provides a
hypothesized mechanism through which individuals weigh these effects against
each other: perceived economic insecurity. When perceived insecurity is
relatively high, individuals "retreat to safety" by preferring policies that
safeguard their employment and/or income. When economic insecurity is relatively
low, however, individuals are more likely to favor trade policies that make the
goods that they consume heavily relatively less costly. With this dynamic model
of trade preferences, this research works to resolve one of the key debates in
the trade policy literature in recent years and help make sense of the
conflicting results that pervade the existing literature on this topic.

Broader Impacts: The research has clear and direct implications for public
policy. Developing a strong understanding of how American citizens weigh the
costs and benefits of living in an increasingly globalized economy is important
for designing policies that maximize social welfare. Drawing on "protection for
sale" models of trade policy creation, the trade policy literature often assumes
that a democratic deficit exists in trade policy formation and other foreign
economic policy areas. By focusing on distributional price level effects of
changes in trade policy, the research will assess if this democratic deficit is
as large as previously assumed.