* 1424904
* Collaborative Research: Does sexual selection promote speciation and extinction? A test with Late Cretaceous Ostracoda from the US Gulf Coastal Plain
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* John Swaddle, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2017
* USD 67,369.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the factors that control the
origin and extinction of biodiversity is a central goal of evolutionary biology
and is directly relevant to the conservation and management of biodiversity on
the Earth today. Recent research suggests that speciation (i.e., the evolution
of new species) and extinction can be affected by sexual selection, a process
that occurs when individuals compete with each other for access to mates. To
date, tests of this hypothesis have not examined actual speciation and
extinction events, relying instead on proxies, such as the conservation status
of modern species. Here the researchers test the effects of sexual selection on
speciation and extinction using the rich fossil record of tiny crustaceans
called ostracodes. These animals are unusual because their sex can be determined
from their shells, even as fossils, and the researchers can use the extent to
which males and females differ in shell shape and size as a measure of the
intensity of sexual selection. In this research, the researchers will relate the
strength of sexual selection in ostracode species to patterns of speciation and
extinction in samples that span a time interval from 85 to 60 million years ago
along a swath of the southeastern United States from Texas to Georgia that was
under the sea during this time period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
scientific goals of this research, the researchers will mentor a post-doctoral
scientist as both a teacher and scholar, and involve multiple undergraduate
students in the project. The researchers will also develop several public
education activities for the Smithsonian Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
mechanisms that underlie species extinction and origination is central to
macroevolutionary theory and helps to explain the diversity and history of life.
Recent empirical evidence and theoretical models suggest that sexual selection,
a form of natural selection that acts upon variation in mating success, can
drive both speciation and extinction. To date, tests of the association of
sexual selection with either extinction or speciation have relied heavily on
neontological data and use weak proxies of actual macroevolutionary events, such
as conservation status (for extinction) or clade richness (for speciation). Here
the project capitalize on the rich fossil record of ostracodes and propose to
perform the first examination of whether sexual dimorphism, an indicator of the
strength of sexual selection, is associated with differential rates of actual
extinction and speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides the first
test of the macroevolutionary hypothesis that sexual selection is positively
association with both speciation and extinction, focusing on the well-preserved
and well-sampled record of Late Cretaceous through Paleocene ostracodes on the
US Gulf Coastal Plain (GCP). Specifically, the project will: (1) measure the
magnitude of sexual dimorphism?a proxy for sexual selection?using outline-based
morphometrics; (2) document the stratigraphic ranges of taxonomically vetted
ostracode species from the Late Cretaceous and early Paleocene; (3) test, using
likelihood-based model fitting, the influence of sexual dimorphism on the
propensity of species to originate or go extinct.