* 1424033
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Implementation of Peace Agreements and Conflict Recurrence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Paul Huth, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 21,026.00

Following a negotiated settlement to a civil war, what causes warring parties to
fulfill their promises of implementing reforms in different issue areas such as
elections, economic redistribution, or integration of former combatants? In
other words, why are some peace agreements fully implemented while others are
only partially or never implemented? When and why do parties to an agreement
decide to resume fighting instead of abiding by the terms of a settlement? This
project addresses these questions by explaining variation in the degree of
agreement implementation and consequently the likelihood that conflict will
recur. The main argument advanced is that dynamics at both the negotiations and
implementation stage - such as third party involvement and pressure or change in
the amount of support given to warring parties - should be taken into account in
order to fully understand successful transitions to peace. To do this the
project theorizes about a range of factors that alter warring parties'
incentives to continue implementation. Propositions are tested using statistical
analysis of disaggregated data on post-conflict years following 83 agreements
signed between 1975 and 2012 as well as in-depth case studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merits are associated with
advances in theorizing and analysis of conflict resolution. The successful
implementation of peace agreements is crucial for a durable peace. Previous
studies show that conflict among the same groups is less likely to recur if
implementation of an agreement is successful. What is missing in most of these
studies is careful theorizing and empirical testing of the factors that lead to
successful implementation. Although existing case studies look at the
implementation processes of select civil wars or that focus on individual
aspects of transitions such as post-conflict elections, there is no
comprehensive theory and empirical analysis of post-conflict years and the
implementation process. This project fills this significant gap by providing a
general theory of the implementation process and tests hypotheses with new data
on post-conflict years. Additionally, given the relationship found between
successful implementation and the duration of peace in various studies,
explaining what leads to successful implementation has significant implications
for conflict recurrence. The second part of the project thus seeks to identify
the conditions under which parties overcome problems in the implementation
process and are able to successfully renegotiate an agreement without resort to
violence and when implementation fails and large-scale violence resumes. In
addition to theoretical and empirical contributions, the data collected for this
project on post-conflict years will likely create opportunities to answer other
interesting questions about the post-conflict processes. The final data
generated will be compatible with other major datasets in the field so that
future scholars will be able to easily use and extend the data for relevant
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project not only aims to fill a gap
in the theoretical and empirical literature in conflict resolution but also
seeks to offer policy implications on how to increase the likelihood of
achieving stable peace. Fostering security and reconstruction in post-conflict
environments in fragile countries (e.g., Iraq or Afghanistan) helps to prevent
greater instability, radicalization and terrorism that would emerge in the
absence of well-established governance, which is one of the main national
security strategies of the United States. As various studies point out,
recurring conflicts have outnumbered new conflicts every year since the
mid-1990s and almost half of internal armed conflicts have recurred following a
negotiated settlement. This suggests that devoting resources to achieving post-
conflict stability and successful transition in fragile countries is an
important yet difficult task that warrants significant further research. By
identifying the factors that incentivize warring parties to keep the peace and
continue implementation of a settlement, this project will help third parties
and the international community to employ more effective post-conflict
management and monitoring strategies. Similarly, shedding light on the effects
of third party involvement in conflict areas at different stages of conflict
(negotiations and implementation) will also have direct policy implications for
the timing and effectiveness of US as well as other international actor and
donor involvement in conflict prone states.