* 1424502
* EAGER: NanoEHS Critical Needs - Determining Surface Composition in Biological Media and the Roles of Core Composition and Very Small Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Vicki Grassian, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1424502&lt;br/&gt;Vicki H.
Grassian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenges in
understanding the environmental health and safety of nanomaterials (NanoEHS)are
many but several fundamental issues in particular remain critical from a
scientific perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In fact, it has become apparent
that progress will be limited without studies to address these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
proposal will address several critical needs in a concentrated program with
specific objectives, hypotheses and goals. These critical areas
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The nature of the surface of nanomaterials in
biological media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The role of the core in surface
functionalized nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The unique behavior
imparted to very small nanoparticles that is not just due to physical size but
instead due to quantum and other intrinsic size dependent electronic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of targeted experiments are proposed to
address these needs. These experiments are feasible and will provide the
necessary results to define a framework to address the issues discussed in this
proposal. In these experiments, nanoparticles will be covered using different
surface functionalities including proteins. We will conduct these studies in
different media relevant to understanding the toxicity of these particles, i.e.
several simulated biological media of different pH to reflect both stomach and
lung fluids. Furthermore, we can quantify the amount of dissolution and ROS
production in each of these and as a function of particle&lt;br/&gt;size, within
a size range where quantum confinement is important and outside of that size
range where bulk properties of electronic state structure, e.g. the band gap,
are relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are several broader impacts and translational aspects of the proposed research.
First, the proposed studies are designed to gain better insight into the
environmental and health impacts of nanomaterials. These studies will contribute
to the growing database on the potential environmental and health implications
of nanoscience and nanotechnology. This society relevant research is designed to
address potential environmental problems for the nanotechnology industry.
Therefore overall it has the potential to provide for the greater good of the
public and consumers. The proposed activities provide an opportunity to train
students in a highly interdisciplinary research area that involves environmental
science and engineering, chemistry, nanoscience, colloid and surface chemistry.
The PI has a track record of successfully mentoring students at all levels from
high school to postdoctoral associates and visiting research scientists and will
continue this effort to mentor the next generation of scientists and engineers.
Many of the students are from underrepresented groups in science and engineering
including a large percentage of women (more than 60%) and minorities including
students on free and reduced lunch programs and typically more diverse student
populations. Funds from this NSF&lt;br/&gt;grant will be used to train graduate
and undergraduate students to better engage these elementary students as well as
the public in science and engineering.