* 1424210
* The Rise of Insecure Work and Changes in Durable Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Enobong Branch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 219,757.00

This project examines how access to and experiences in skilled (and unskilled)
and secure (and insecure) work has changed over time relative to workers' race
and gender. It examines the period starting in the 1970s when minorities and
women were gaining increasing access to skilled jobs, just as those positions
were becoming increasingly insecure. The project poses five central questions.
Do race, gender and skill shape exposure to and experiences of insecure work?
Has employment insecurity become a distinguishing feature of racial and gender
divisions? What do these broad economic changes mean in the lives of people? Do
the narratives that men and women use to explain their own economic fortunes and
struggles?and those of others?confirm or depart from the narratives that have
been traditionally used to justify durable inequalities? How is the rise of
insecure work affecting conceptions of masculinity and femininity, across
different racial and class positions?

This study will answer these questions by studying employment insecurity,
through the lens of racial and gender inequality, over the last 30 years. We
utilize an innovative mixed-method approach with three components: (1) a cross-
sectional panel based on Current Population Survey - Merged Outgoing Rotation
Group (CPS-MORG) data from 1979 to 2012 which enables us to analyze trends over
the past 30 years in exposure to insecure work; (2) an analysis of the CPS
Contingent Worker Supplement (CPS-CWS) from 1995-2005 to document racial-gender
variation in the experience of employment insecurity; and (3) 80 in-depth
interviews to investigate the extent to which the rise of insecure work has
disrupted or strengthened narratives of privilege and disadvantage in access to
work. This three-pronged approach enables us to unpack the implications of the
rise of insecure work for understanding racial and gender inequality, and
determine the extent to which durable inequality has persisted or been
transformed in the postindustrial era.

The proposed research advances social scientific understanding of employment
insecurity and gauges the durability of racial and gender inequality. Our
quantitative analysis builds and extends the existing literature on job
insecurity by specifying its impact on different segments of the population. Our
qualitative analysis goes a step further and focuses on how individuals
conceptualize and make meaning of their experiences under insecure work
conditions. Finally, having designed a multi-faceted plan for public engagement,
we will use the findings and insights from our study to contribute to civic
discussions of rising employment insecurity.