* 1424089
* A Life History Perspective on Social Integration after Prison
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Bruce Western, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 228,639.00

SES-1424089 Bruce Western Harvard University

Each year, over 700,000 men and women are released from prison, mostly to poor
inner-city communities. This proposal describes an innovative analysis conducted
under the auspices of the Boston Reentry Study (BRS); a longitudinal survey of
122 Massachusetts state prisoners newly-released to the Boston area. The project
will use BRS interviews -- nearly 700 interviews with men and women released
from prison and members of their family' to produce small biographies recording
the life histories of each of the BRS survey respondents. Combining quantitative
survey measures of housing, employment, and family relationships in the year
after incarceration with qualitative life history narratives allows a unique
analysis of how individual biographies shape the transition from prison to
community. The research will explore how the process of community return is
associated with individuals' histories of family relationships,
institutionalization, and their sources of material and social support.

Despite the importance of the topic, research on the formerly-incarcerated is
challenging for conventional quantitative and qualitative approaches. Survey-
based studies find it difficult to sample from a hard-to-reach population and
measure the process of transition from prison to community. Qualitative field
studies find it challenging to fully reflect the great heterogeneity of the
formerly-incarcerated population. The project will use analytical transcription
of nearly 700 interviews to produce searchable narrative life histories for each
of the 123 BRS respondents. Unlike prior quantitative research, the current
approach will yield far more detailed information, particularly about early life
experiences and the sequencing of major life events. And unlike ethnographic
research, the relatively large sample size represents the real diversity of
those leaving prison, from the young men involved in drug dealing and serious
violence, to the older men and women who have struggled over a lifetime with
drug addiction and mental illness. In addition, by tracing life histories to
early childhood, the project goes beyond much of the recent work on prisoner
reentry "quantitative and qualitative" by linking developmental experiences to
adult transitions from prison to community.

The project promises three broader impacts. First, the research will provide
methods that can be useful to researchers of hard-to-reach populations for which
traditional methods may be poorly suited. The current study synthesizes
quantitative and qualitative methods providing data collection at scale that
facilitates understanding of the life history and processes of integration for
those at the extreme margins of social and economic life. Second, the problem of
prisoner reentry is also now a question of key policy significance. Several
recent and significant criminal justice reform efforts have focused on former
prisoners and the conditions of community supervision. The current research will
thus inform the policy process and criminal justice reform more generally.
Finally, the proposed research, like the BRS project more generally, is
conducted by a closely-knit research team comprised largely of students and
other young researchers. The laboratory environment of the project provides a
unique training opportunity where researchers are actively involved in all
phases of the study design, data collection and analysis.