* 1424682
* The Valence Multipole Model:  Linking Structure and Reactivity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Barry Bickmore, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2018
* USD 433,818.00

Broader implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding chemical processes
(what happens to molecules and atoms) on mineral and other solid surfaces is a
critical part of the science underlying how minerals behave throughout nature.
The science of such surfaces also has implications for industrially important
processes involving solid surfaces, such as the catalysis used for plastics
manufacturing. Scientists have found that in order to understand what happens on
surfaces at the molecular scale, computational modeling of these processes is
absolutely essential. This work focuses on advancing modeling of mineral
surfaces, which is important for both geochemistry and chemistry. Currently, the
theories and models used to simulate interactions between atoms and molecules
exhibit a large range in both the quality of results and the kinds of problems
that can be addressed. There is a great need for models that are mathematically
simple enough to be applied to large systems of atoms, but that are capable of
greater accuracy and transferability. The research team will work on creating
such a model by expanding a simple bonding model commonly used by
crystallographers, the Bond-Valence Model, in a manner that is easily applied to
atomistic simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional component of this
award entails building a future US STEM workforce that is capable not only in
geoscience, but also in computer programming, modeling, and data analysis. In
geoscience (as well as all fields of STEM), both in industry and academia, the
ability to comfortably use computing is growing in its importance.
Traditionally, geoscience degree programs do not require students to acquire
significant computer programming and data analysis skills. This project will
require undergraduate researchers to do data mining, exploratory data analysis,
and optimization, using the MATLAB scientific programming environment. Training
in these skills will be provided to the students by the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has implications for science
beyond geochemistry, and, as such, is being jointly funded by the Environmental
Chemical Sciences program (NSF Division of Chemistry) and the cross-disciplinary
NSF Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, principal investigator Barry
Bickmore and his group will continue work to create a simplified chemical
bonding model, based on the bond-valence model (BVM), that can be easily
transferred to a molecular mechanics framework for atomistic simulations. The
potential energy terms in this model are primarily based on multipole (monopole,
dipole, and quadrupole) expansions of bond valences about each atom. These terms
tend to be surprisingly predictable, and describe all major aspects of molecular
structure, including distortions due to electronic structure effects (lone-pair
and Jahn-Teller). They are also intrinsically multi-body terms that describe
aspects of the total bonding environment about each atom, rather than focusing
on individual atom pairs. This allows for very complex interactions to be
modeled using a small number of parameters. The present work focuses on
developing the bonding model to predict ideal values of the BVM-based structural
descriptors, as well as energy cost functions for deviations from the ideal
values. In addition, we are developing some preliminary molecular mechanics
force fields to further test the concept. A number of undergraduate researchers
will be involved in the project, and will learn computer programming, data
analysis, and optimization techniques.