* 1424213
* Evaluating Models of Victim Participation at the International Criminal Court
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Eric Stover, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 10/31/2015
* USD 74,575.00

This study uses in-depth interviews with more than 500 victims involved in cases
before the International Criminal Court (ICC) to understand victims' experiences
participating in trials for war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
When established in 2002, the International Criminal Court was hailed as a new
type of international court, one that would promote justice for victims as well
as punishing perpetrators. Yet no studies have examined why victims apply to
participate, how they view participation programs, or what they hope to achieve
through their participation. This research will fill that gap by evaluating
participation models used in different criminal cases. It will contribute to a
growing literature on the importance of procedural fairness and respect for
court participants and their broader communities.

The study will be completed in three phases: (1) interviews with key ICC staff
and judges in The Hague, as well as an examination of motions and rulings
pertaining to victim participation; (2) interviews with victim participants;
their legal counsel; and ICC field staff in Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, and Uganda; and (3) report writing, publication, and presentation of
findings to the Court and victims' communities. Fieldwork for the study will be
conducted in English, French, and a number of local languages, and researchers
will use an intentional sampling method to include members from affected
communities across the cases, including members of differing ethnic groups, and
both men and women. By documenting for the first time the lived experiences of
victims' participating in trials at the International Criminal Court, the study
will provide insight into the social-psychological dynamics of victim
participation in order to strengthen the functioning of the Court.