* 1424091
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Effects of Climatic Volatility on Economic Conditions and Voter Behavior in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Nicholas Obradovich, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 17,624.00

This project investigates two pressing questions in the study of democracy and
political stability in Africa: do Africans vote based upon their economic well-
being, and how do economic effects induced by climatic volatility affect
behavior? While climate-induced conflict, protest, and migration have been
studied, no research has yet investigated the possible effects of climatic
conditions on democratic practices. The research addresses questions of
importance to policy-makers and foreign policy specialists: Will economic shocks
associated with extreme weather events affect electoral politics, and how might
these shocks alter African democracies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The intellectual merit of the project is associated with its connection of
theories of economic voting to underlying climatic causes of economic
conditions. Because populations in sub-Saharan Africa rely upon subsistence
agriculture for their economic well-being, shocks to the foundation of economic
activity could influence decisions at the polls. To address the question of
economic voting, abnormal weather is used as a proxy for economic shocks to
uncover whether shocks to economic conditions alter voter behavior. These
dynamics are linked to the second question given current projections for
increasing weather volatility across the sub-continent. Understanding voters'
responses to weather variation will help provide insight into possible future
dynamics. Empirically, the project will construct a novel, sub-national
electoral database containing past district-level electoral results and turnout
data from sub-Saharan nations. This database will be coupled with spatial data
on administrative boundaries to include district-level temperature and rainfall
abnormalities. Where available, fiscal data will be included to capture
government responsiveness to poor economic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Climate affects physical and social
systems, and volatility in climatic conditions may dramatically alter these
systems. The project seeks to examine the possible effects such change may have
on democratic behavior in a region of the world often lacking democratic
stability and most susceptible to the harsh realities of volatile climate
patterns. A rigorous, theoretically informed understanding of the mechanisms
through which resource scarcity can alter electoral outcomes and affect
political volatility will help aid donors and policy-makers better target their
resources and policies towards more efficient humanitarian goals. Moreover, if
Africans vote heavily based on economic well-being, extreme weather conditions
that disrupt sources of jobs and income could influence the course of democratic
development. These findings will be of critical importance to democracy
promotion practitioners.