* 1424170
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DETERMINING PATHWAYS OF DIAGENETIC SULFURIZATION OF ORGANIC MATTER USING COMPOUND-SPECIFIC SULFUR ISOTOPIC ANALYSIS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Josef Werne, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2017
* USD 253,497.00

Sulfur is an essential element for all living organisms because it plays a
critical role in transferring biochemical energy, enzymatic reactions, and
protein synthesis. Thus, the biological and geological chemistry of sulfur is of
widespread interest in the Earth science community. Organic sulfur deposited in
sedimentary environments is of particular interest due to its impact on
petroleum formation and refining and its relationship to microbial sedimentary
processes, organic carbon accumulation and the overall interpretation of
environmental records. This sedimentary organic matter retains the organic and
inorganic history of sulfur initially incorporated into organic tissue (primary)
or added during chemical reactions occurring in the sediments (secondary).
Despite the importance, little is known about organic sulfur in the natural
environment in part because there are a wide variety of organic sulfur compounds
and a number of different ways these compounds form. In addition, these
compounds can be altered after they are deposited in the sediments. The
investigators will use the stable isotope composition of organic sulfur to gain
insights into these processes and sources of organic sulfur. Recent
technological advances have greatly improved the ability to measure sulfur
isotope compositions of individual organic sulfur compounds possible with high
precision and at natural abundance. This project will use compound-specific
sulfur isotope analysis to study the reaction pathways that form organic sulfur
in two anoxic (oxygen free) lakes. The sulfur isotope signature of these
compounds will be used to infer reaction pathways to increase understanding of
the reactions between sulfur and organic matter that occur in sediments. These
new advancements in sulfur isotope analysis have tremendous potential for
understanding past changes in elemental cycling, metabolic and ecologic changes,
as well as changes in past climatic and environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate education will be one broader impact
of this project, and we will foster this through extensive collaboration and
training in the state of the art sulfur isotope analysis. A second important
impact of this project will be to develop educational modules about hypoxic (low
oxygen) conditions common to northeast Indiana lakes, and Lake Erie,
Pennsylvania, in collaboration with the IUPUI Center for Earth and Environmental
Sciences (CEES) Discovering the Science of the Environment (DSE) program. DSE is
a public outreach program focused on formal and informal delivery of STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) education to fourth through
ninth grade students. We will translate knowledge learned from studying sulfur
cycling in anoxic lakes into material for teaching modules that inform students
about the environmental hazards of human-induced hypoxia.