* 1424029
* Summer Institute in Museum Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Candace Greene, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 402,219.00

Museum collections of anthropological material are an American treasure. They
engage and inspire millions of Americans through exhibits and programs, serving
as an important educational resource for communicating knowledge to a wide
audience. The objects that museums preserve also constitute an invaluable
scientific record of cultural practices, past and present. They are a databank
of physical material that can be examined, analyzed, and reassessed again and
again as questions and methods change over time. Objects document dynamic
aspects of cultural behavior that are not recorded in written sources; they are
one of the few ways to gain information directly from past societies that did
not have writing. However, these collections are not being used to their full
potential. Many interested researchers cannot effectively utilize museum
collections because they lack the skills and methods to approach or evaluate
this type of data, which presents distinct challenges. There are few graduate-
level courses in museum-based research in the United States. The few that do
exist seldom can offer the hands-on learning that is essential for object study.
Students wishing to tap into the research potential of American museums either
have had to study abroad or to train themselves. The result is that we are not
fully capitalizing on the investment the nation has made in the assembly and
maintenance of museum collections.

The Summer Institute in Museum Anthropology (SIMA) was created in response to
this need. Based in the Smithsonian Institution's Department of Anthropology, it
is an intensive four-week residential program providing training in museum
research methods. Each year it accepts 12 graduate students from across the
country who show promise to contribute to development of the field of cultural
anthropology through object research. SIMA is a rigorous program that includes a
mix of formal class time, individual research work, and extensive mentoring.
Support from the National Science Foundation covers student participant costs
and the bringing together of a specialized faculty of visiting experts with
Smithsonian scholars whose time is contributed to SIMA. The Smithsonian offers
its extensive collections as a laboratory for learning, giving students an
opportunity for in-depth work with one of the greatest anthropological research
collections in the world. Over the period of 2009 to 2013, SIMA has provided
training for 60 students from 41 universities and 22 states. It now has a solid
training model for graduate students in place, and former participants are
beginning to gain university positions where they are using SIMA as a model for
their own teaching. Work under the current grant will explore additional methods
to disseminate training in collection-based research more widely. While
continuing to provide training for graduate students, SIMA will add a module for
faculty developing courses in museum research and also will hold a workshop to
bring together universities interested in collaborating on institutes similar to
SIMA. The goal of all these activities is to create a new generation of American
scholars who are able to use anthropological collections effectively in their
research. These new scholars will revitalize museums as sites where knowledge is
produced as well as disseminated.