* 1424329
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The perception and production of prominence in Spanish by heritage speakers and L2 learners
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Ji Young Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2016
* USD 12,785.00

Spanish is the second most-spoken language in the U.S., after English, and 17%
of the country's population self-identify as Hispanic or Latino/a. A significant
percentage of U.S.-Latinos are bilingual to different degrees. Most U.S.-born
Latinos have Spanish as their heritage language, but are dominant in English.
Given the demographic importance of this population and an increased awareness
in the research community of the benefits of bilingualism, determining the
linguistic competence of these heritage speakers of Spanish in their two
languages is a socially-relevant topic of research.

Although heritage language acquisition is recently gaining more attention,
research in this area is still very scarce. This dissertation will contribute to
a better understanding of heritage speakers' linguistic system by examining
their phonology, more specifically, the use of word- and sentence-level stress
cues in the perception and production of Spanish by US Spanish heritage
speakers. Although word stress is contrastive in both Spanish and English, it is
realized differently in the two languages. Unlike English in which segmental
cues (i.e., individual sounds like consonants and vowels) play a critical role
in the distinction between stressed and unstressed syllables, in Spanish the
distinction occurs more on the suprasegmental level (i.e., pitch, amplitude, and
duration). Therefore, studies have shown that English listeners experience great
difficulty in perceiving stress in Spanish. Using a set of psycholinguistic
experiments, this dissertation examines whether Spanish heritage speakers
successfully attend to suprasegmental cues when they perceive Spanish stress.
Moreover, Spanish heritage speakers' production will be acoustically analyzed to
investigate whether they effectively use suprasegmental cues when they produce
Spanish stress. Results between their perception and production will be compared
to see whether different patterns are found in these two domains. Since it has
been reported that heritage speakers grow up hearing the heritage language more
frequently than speaking it, asymmetrical acquisition of perception and
production is likely to occur. Spanish heritage speakers' performance will be
compared to that of Spanish monolinguals and English second language learners of
Spanish, in order to see whether Spanish heritage speakers differ from these two
groups, and, if so, in which aspects and to what extent. Analyzing the ways in
which heritage speakers may differ from monolingual speakers and second language
learners will help determine the best methodologies to achieve balanced
competence in two languages.