* 1424097
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutional Influences on Agenda-Setting in State Courts of Last Resort
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Christopher Zorn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 06/30/2016
* USD 29,344.00

Political institutions play an important role in shaping the government's
attention to different issues and the types of policies adopted, including by
courts and other judicial bodies. Existing research has focused on the U.S.
Supreme Court, but because the Court has not undergone significant institutional
change over time, our understanding of how institutional rules and procedures
influence courts' agendas is limited. This project develops a generalized model
of judicial agenda-setting that accounts for both the motives and behavior of
judges and litigants, interacting within specific institutional structures. The
project evaluates institutional characteristics that shape courts' agendas,
including the nature of the court's jurisdiction (mandatory vs. discretionary)
and the rules for granting appeals,. The project empirically tests several
hypotheses derived from this model with data from state supreme courts.

The project will innovate in the analysis of court decisions by using automated
text analysis in addition to supervised topic coding to measure the issue
attention and procedural path of all recorded state supreme court decisions
published in the 2000s. In doing so, the project will create the first dataset
of discretionary appeals that were rejected by those courts without a decision
on the merits. These measures are combined with data on institutional
characteristics that are predicted to influence the actions of individual judges
and litigants. Analysis of these data will contribute to understanding how
judicial rules of procedure and the individual motivations of judges and
litigants influence a court's overall policy agenda and the specific cases heard
by the court. This research thus comprises the first comprehensive study of
state-level appellate agenda-setting in the United States, and has the potential
to inform policy decisions regarding judicial selection and retention,
institutional design, and judicial administration. The project will also
contribute to training students in methods in the social sciences.