* 1424001
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Civil-Military  Bargaining, the Threat of War, and the Path to Civilian Control
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Paul Huth, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 18,556.00

When do militaries withdraw from politics and submit to civilian control? This
is a vital question given that civilian control of politically passive
militaries is a prerequisite for democratization and is also strongly associated
with international and domestic peace. This project examines the effects of
international and domestic conflict on the military's role in politics in non-
democracies and states transitioning to democracy. It argues that conflicts that
threaten to topple a state's leader increase military intrusion into politics,
while conflicts that do not pose the same risk exacerbate splits in the
military's officer corps and decrease military involvement in politics. While
previous studies use proxy measures to capture different aspects of civil-
military relations, this project will use a new cross-national dataset on
military intrusion into politics and relative civilian control. The scope of the
study is all non-democracies and states transitioning to democracy from 1960 to
the present. Accordingly, the project will provide new insight into the civil-
military relations of such states as China, Russia, Ukraine, Afghanistan,
Thailand, and Iraq. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
provides an answer to the puzzle of civil-military relations: It is the degree
to which the state leader is threatened that matters it military intrusion.
State leaders can leverage domestic or international threats that do not
directly endanger their rule to exacerbate intra-military tensions and to compel
the military to withdraw from politics. However, conflicts that pose a more
severe threat to the leader weaken that leader's position, given their need for
military protection. This leads to military intrusion into politics and weaker
civilian control. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The testing of this theory will rest
heavily on novel, cross-national data collection on the role of the military in
politics. Preliminary analysis in the proposal using extant data on military
control of ministries of defense (MODs) for a limited number of years provides
initial support for the theory, but this project proposes to conduct tests using
a much-expanded dataset that covers 1960 to the present and captures much deeper
aspects of states' civil-military relations. These data will include not only
military control of the MOD, but also military representation in national
cabinets, intelligence agency leadership positions, and national security
councils. These objective measures map much more closely onto the concepts of
civilian control and the military's political role than existing data and can,
thus, allow for truer tests of theories that incorporate civil-military
relations as either dependent or independent variables.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project provides a broader impact on society in
two ways: by addressing a pressing national security dilemma for U.S. policy-
makers, and by generating a dataset which will be useful to scholars addressing
a wide range of policy questions. First, the events of the Arab Spring have
demonstrated the importance of the military as a political actor-with the
military asserting a political role for itself in some cases, but in others,
stepping back and allowing democratization to proceed. This project will
generate and test a theory that provides a framework for policy-makers to
predict military intrusion into politics in a range of states, including those
undergoing democratic transitions. This will allow policy-makers to more
accurately assess the prospects for democracy to take hold in such
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, this project will generate clear
predictions about the effect of a state's security environment on the propensity
of its military to take a political role. Accordingly, given the ability of the
United States to affect other countries' security environment through troop
deployments, military aid, and military cooperation agreements, this study has
clear relevance to U.S. policy-makers interested in reducing military intrusion
into politics in recipient countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the data
generated by this project will have broad applicability beyond testing the
theory outlined here. This data could be used by scholars to address such
questions as the relationship between civil-military conflict and states'
tendency to get involved in international crises and the propensity for crises
with states with poor civil-military relations to escalate to war-questions that
directly relate, for example, to the ongoing Ukraine-Russia crisis.