* 1424627
* RAPID GOALI: Chemical Contamination and Remediation of Plastic Drinking Water Infrastructure during the West Virginia American Water Drinking Contamination Incident
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Andrew Whelton, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/28/2015
* USD 69,999.00

Whelton&lt;br/&gt;1424627&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An accidental spill of a
currently unknown quantity (estimated between 3,000 and 7,500 gallons) of
4-methylcyclohexane methanol from a coal preparation plant in Charleston, WV has
compromised the drinking water supply for up to 300,000 water users in
Charleston and nearby counties. This tragedy has caused the ban of use of
potable water and has resulted in closure in several establishments including
schools and business. President Obama issued a federal disaster declaration for
the state on Friday, January 10, 2014 to provide federal aid for the state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utility and government responders do not have the
information needed to determine the extent of plastic pipe contamination and
their ability to be decontaminated by clean water flushing. It is well known
that plastic drinking water pipes are particularly susceptible to chemical
permeation.This project will explore the processes that control contaminant fate
with plastic polyvinylchloride (PVC), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), and
cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) pipes and contaminant desorption during flushing
activities. These materials are also used in ice makers, refrigerators, and
dishwashers. &lt;br/&gt;This project team will:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Investigate
premise plumbing system drinking water quality,&lt;br/&gt;(2) Determine the role
of contaminant concentration, pipe material type, and diameter on observed
chemical concentration during stagnation,&lt;br/&gt;(3) Quantify diffusivity and
solubility values for several organic contaminants and pipe
materials,&lt;br/&gt;(4) Determine significant relationships between chemical
fate, physiochemical properties, and plastic pipe properties, and&lt;br/&gt;(5)
Elucidate the ability of flushing activities to remediate contaminated plastic
pipes. &lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will be:&lt;br/&gt;(1) incorporated
several in-class drinking water contamination investigation activities that
require them to go through the same fact finding processes as the emergency
responders, utility staff, and homeowners;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Presented results at an
AWWA National conference to the drinking water utility and regulatory industry;
and &lt;br/&gt;(3) Submitted a research paper to an environmental science and
engineering focused journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the larger gaps in our
scientific understanding of the effect of chemical spill of
4-methylcyclohexanemethanol (MCHM), in the drinking water treatment plant and
hence the potential risk to consumers, is the "solubility" of the chemical in
plastic pipes or is adsorption to pipes, tanks and infrastructure in a treatment
plant. Then, once ad- or absorbed, how long will it take to be released into the
water as time progresses. These information will then be evaluated in the
overall long-term effect of the spill.