* 1424927
* Nano- and Macroscale Physico-chemical Processes Impacting Arsenic Mobilization
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Young-Shin Jun, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 340,576.00

Managed aquifer recharge (MAR) is one water reuse technique with the potential
to meet growing water demands. In MAR, reclaimed wastewater is injected into
aquifer formations for later use. Although filtration and adsorption in the
vadose zone and underlying aquifer can remove some contaminants from reclaimed
water, unfavorable soil-water interactions can mobilize arsenic from arsenic-
bearing aquifer formations. This work will investigate how the interactions
between water and arsenic-bearing pyrite, such as arsenopyrite/arsenian pyrite,
impact arsenic mobility during MAR, and investigators will provide new
quantitative and qualitative fundamental information on the redox-promoted
dissolution mechanisms of arsenic-bearing pyrite and the consequent nucleation,
growth, and phase transformation of iron (hydr)oxide nanoparticles, which are
closely linked with arsenic mobilization and attenuation. By combining novel
multidisciplinary approaches and in situ observations, including atomic force
microscopy using an electrochemical control, small angle X-ray scattering, and
batch reactor experimental measurements, they will obtain quantitative
parameters and clearer qualitative descriptions of the thermodynamics and
kinetics of initial iron (hydr)oxide nuclei evolution at the mineral-water
interface. For the first time, new information on nucleation will be
incorporated into geochemical reactive transport models to improve the
prediction accuracy. The experimental results will also be compared with
available data from pilot-scale column experiments at the U.S. EPA's Test &
Evaluation Facility in Cincinnati, OH, and from MAR field sites. The results
will help determine pretreatment requirements for reclaimed water sources and
will provide a basis for developing more sustainable MAR operation guidelines.
Beyond this application, the knowledge gained can be applied to related
geochemical systems, including regions struggling with pervasive arsenic
contamination of groundwater and environments where quantification of arsenic
sorption onto nanoscale iron (hydr)oxide precipitates is a source of great
uncertainty.

The proposed outreach plan will provide educational, research, public
engagement, and professional development opportunities for middle school, high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. It will have far-reaching societal
impacts. In addition, the participation of traditionally underrepresented
students will be encouraged. To achieve this goal, investigators will develop a
"Hot Topics" website and related workshops focused on water quality concepts, in
collaboration with Washington University's Institute for School Partnership and
teachers from St. Louis' middle and high schools. To encourage high school and
undergraduate students' early involvement in science and engineering, they will
provide scientific research projects and offer public lectures on water quality.