* 1424798
* Understanding and Reducing Biases in Jury Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Michael Leippe, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 348,750.00

This research addresses questions about racial and ethnic prejudice in criminal
trials. Reviews of convictions and sentencing in actual cases, and findings from
trial simulation experiments, provide evidence of discrimination against
minorities. National polls and media stories reveal that prejudice remains
prevalent in America. But research has provided little insight into how
prejudice operates in the courtroom and has not identified critical factors that
increase or decrease discrimination. Through a series of experiments involving
trial simulations, the project seeks better theoretical understanding of how and
when a defendant's race/ethnicity influences jury decisions. It also aims to
identify interventions that lessen courtroom bias, thereby providing policy and
practice suggestions to the legal community. These are important undertakings in
a diverse society that seeks equal justice for all.

Eight trial simulation experiments will be conducted in which Black, Hispanic,
and White jury-eligible citizens serve as mock-jurors. They will provide verdict
preferences and other impressions after reviewing a trial in which the defendant
is a member of either their racial/ethnic group (an "ingroup" defendant) or one
of the other groups (an "outgroup" defendant). In some experiments, mock-jurors
will also deliberate. Social-psychological theory guides the research and offers
a framework for integrating diverse findings from sociology, criminal justice,
criminology, and psychology. Based on social-psychological theory, a sense of
threat -- to social identity, cultural worldview, or security -- should increase
discrimination in the form of greater perceived guilt and convictions of
outgroup defendants. Prejudice is understood to exist at an unconscious or
implicit level, even among many who consciously reject prejudice. To assess the
impact of these factors, some experiments examine whether discrimination
increases when participant-jurors experience these threats through information
encountered prior to the trial. Additional experiments focus on ways to reduce
discrimination, including judges' instructions to guard against prejudice and
the opportunity to deliberate. Results will inform decision making in the
criminal justice system.