* 1424111
* Transitioning into Adulthood during the Great Recession
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Robert Crosnoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 322,317.00

Robert Crosnoe&lt;br/&gt;Shannon E. Cavanagh&lt;br/&gt;Leticia
Marteleto&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Great
Recession has generated widespread concerns that contemporary cohorts of youth
making their way into adulthood are in danger of becoming a lost generation.
This project explores these concerns by examining how the Great Recession has
affected many of the statuses that signal the transition from adolescence into
adulthood, including various aspects of socioeconomic attainment and family
formation. Potential effects involve both the length of time that young people
in their late teens and early twenties take to acquire these statuses and the
various ways that they combine them. Special attention will be paid to the
potential for these effects to vary across diverse racial/ethnic and
socioeconomic groups in the U.S., across geographic locales that were more or
less hard hit by the economic downturn, and across the U.S.-Canada border, given
how the recession started here and then filtered northward. The theoretical
value of this research lies in its ability to inject sociological and
developmental thinking into considerations of macro-level economic processes,
including the ways in which short-term historical events shape long-term
trajectories, the potential for young adulthood to be a critical period in the
life course, and the interplay of socioeconomic and family experiences. More
practically, by unpacking the scarring effects of a major economic recession,
this project will serve the future interests of the youth actually undergoing
that recession as they age into the next generation of workers, parents, and
citizens and identify future youth who may be especially vulnerable in any of
the inevitable recessions yet to come. Overall, the goals of the study are to
develop a multi-dimensional understanding of the specific case of young adults
in the Great Recession that advances interdisciplinary thinking among
scientists, inform the public about an issue of great interest, provide valuable
training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students, and better serve
the interests of American youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on life course
concepts such as standardization and individualization as well as related areas
of research, this project will test two set of competing hypotheses. First, did
the Great Recession speed up or slow down the acquisition of major young adult
statuses (e.g. full time employment, general higher education enrollment/STEM
studies, marriage/partnership, and parenthood)? Second, did the Great Recession
lead to more disordering or coupling of these statuses during young adulthood?
To test these hypotheses, this project will apply multiple statistical tools
(e.g., sibling fixed effects, latent class analysis, joint entropy calculations)
to survey and geocode data from multiple 18-25 year old cohorts in the National
Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979-Young Adult Survey. The prevalence of young
adult school and work statuses (in general, within STEM) will be compared across
multiple points before and after the start of the Great Recession (specifically,
2004, 2006, 2008, and 2010) and in relation to variable state and local economic
conditions (e.g., unemployment rates). Moreover, the ways in which these
statuses go along with (or not) with partnership and parenting before, during,
and after the Great Recession will be assessed, with special attention to
socioeconomic, racial/ethnic, and gender disparities in these transitional
patterns over time. Integrated data analysis and group modeling will then adapt
the U.S. models to the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and
Youth for a selected cross-national comparison designed to shed light on the
U.S. case.