* 1424806
* Reaction rate scaling in porous media in the transport controlled regime
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Allen Hunt, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2015
* USD 33,500.00

This research applies a theory of solute transport in porous media developed by
the investigator to predict the time dependence of chemical reaction rates near
the earth's surface. Chemical weathering rates, for example, of silicate
minerals, have significant impacts on the global carbon cycle, with implications
for climate change, extinctions, and soil production. It is well known that
chemical weathering rates in the earth's crust decrease rapidly with increasing
time, diminishing by as much as seven orders of magnitude (a factor of 10
million) as the time scale for observation increases from hours to millions of
years. These weathering processes are complex. A full solution would require
simultaneous treatment of the chemical equilibration of various compounds on
particle surfaces and in solution, the movement of reagents and reaction
products through the porous media, and changes in the nature of the particle
surfaces. Researchers apply the greatly simplifying assumption that weathering
rates are proportional to solute transport velocities, which they know how to
predict. Without reagents, the reactions do not occur; without removal of the
weathering products, reactions reach equilibrium and cease. As the weathered
layer of the surface deepens, the transport paths that bring reacting species
together become longer and more tortuous (i.e., they exhibit frequent changes in
direction). This research clarifies the degree to which the paths become more
tortuous and thus how drastically the reactions are slowed. In addition, it
provides insight into how the tortuosity of paths relevant for solute transport
can be altered.

Investigators' results may also applicable to rates of deposition and leaching
of toxic chemicals in the subsurface, making them relevant to a wide range of
threats to our environment. Nutrient transport in agricultural run-off can be a
serious threat to streams, estuaries, and near-shore environments. On the other
hand, efficient nutrient transport in the shallow subsurface enhances the
success of industrial agriculture. Understanding of how to influence the
tortuosity of such paths can thus aid in the optimization of agricultural and
environmental needs. The present research is relevant not only for solute
transport in fluid flow, but also for applications as diverse as cellular
mitosis, blood perfusion in the brain, chromatography, filtration, secondary oil
recovery, catalysis, the behavior of packed bed reactors, degradation of
building materials, tissue physiology, migration and epidemiology, heat
dispersion in foams and the internal dynamics of the atom.