* 1424127
* Collaborative Research:   Quantifying Sediment Storage Transit Times For Geomorphically Explicit, Watershed Scale Suspended Sediment Routing
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Diana Karwan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2017
* USD 98,029.00

Nontechnical Explanation of the Project's Broader Significance
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspended sediment and associated contaminants and
nutrients are leading causes of environmental degradation in rivers, but
predicting the movement of fine-grained material through watersheds remains
difficult. Most watershed management planning treats fine-grained suspended
sediment as "washload" that is rapidly transported to receiving waters once
particles enter stream channels. However, sediment particles actually move
downstream by a series of discrete jumps, with each jump punctuated by a period
of resting in floodplains and other alluvial deposits. According for this view,
particle travel times from upland sources to estuarine sinks may be very long
(up to 1000 years for the Chesapeake Bay watershed, for example). The disparity
between these two views is most critical where Best Management Practices are
used to reduce the contribution of sediment and other contaminants from upland
watershed sources to downstream receiving waters, such as the Chesapeake Bay.
Sediment travel times are not currently incorporated into existing watershed
modeling schemes used to evaluate and design Best Management Practices, so the
time required for them to achieve their maximum effectiveness is unknown. During
this project, particle waiting times will be determined for a sub-basin of the
Chesapeake Bay watershed, and these results will be incorporated into a new
modeling framework for predicting the movement of particles through watersheds
that explicitly incorporates measured particle waiting times. These results will
help evaluate restoration schemes designed to reduce loading of sediment and
other particles from watersheds to ecologically damaged receiving waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the
Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geomorphologists widely acknowledge that suspended
sediment routing through large (100-1000 km spatial scales) watersheds must
account for the 100-10,000 year timescales associated with alluvial storage, but
this knowledge is rarely reflected in watershed models. A few recent modeling
schemes include both sediment transport and storage, but the necessary reach
averaging introduces a new variable, the sediment-storage (waiting) time
distribution that is virtually undocumented. This study will use pollen analyis,
optically-stimulated luminescence, radiocarbon dating, and fallout radionuclide
concentrations to measure contemporary waiting time distributions for all
significant alluvial storage reservoirs in a mid-Atlantic Piedmont watershed
where rates of erosion, deposition, and transport are well-constrained. The
measured waiting time distributions will be used with a suspended-sediment
routing model in a series of scenarios designed to illustrate timescales
required for suspended sediment to move from upland sources to basin outlet in
the Chesapeake Bay watershed. The results will improve existing theory
concerning sediment waiting time distributions and sediment budgets within
fluvial systems. The results will also help interpret the complex histories of
watershed disturbance amd provide a means for a more accurate prediction of
future changes. This study is designed to test the following hypotheses: 1)
sediment storage or waiting time distributions can be quantified using measured
erosion rates, geomorphic mapping, radiometric dating, and reservoir theory; 2)
sediment waiting times for mid-Atlantic upland watersheds range from months to
millennia, with characteristic values on the order of 1000 years, implying very
long timescales to transport most suspended particles from upland sources to
basin outlets; 3) observed waiting time distributions are not exponential,
suggesting that valley storage reservoirs are not well-mixed.