* 1424025
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exclusion and the Social Construction of Citizenship
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sadaf Hasnain, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2017
* USD 21,516.00

Research has shown that what it means to be a responsible, law-abiding, and
fully engaged citizen is more than legal status alone. People also have to feel
that they are accepted as belonging. Religious and other minority populations
may be economically successful and yet find themselves excluded from full social
participation. Furthermore, as the world becomes more interconnected, external
pressure groups can affect the effective citizenship status accorded minorities
or, alternatively, minorities may have external ties as important to them as
their internal ones. Such developments challenge the very ideas of nation and
citizen, both for social theoreticians who study them and for governments that
serve them. In this research project, Northwestern University doctoral student
Sadaf Hasnain, with the guidance of Dr. Robert Launay, will investigate this
phenomenon through the lens of youth socialization. How do young people
understand their belonging to a nation-state when they face ambiguous
citizenship status? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in
Pakistan and will focus on the citizenship of young adherents of the Ahmadiyya
faith, a 19th. century off-shoot of Islam. The economically successful Ahmadi
regard themselves as Muslims but are not so regarded in Pakistani law. Their
ambiguous status makes them ideal for this research. The investigator will carry
out participant observation, group and individual interviews, content analysis
of relevant news media, and archival research. These data will be used to assess
the relationship between Ahmadi youth's sense of citizenship and belonging, the
opposition to their religious identity and practice, and their social class and
transnational religious ties. Findings from this research will provide insight
into the relationship between legislation, exclusion, socio-economic status, and
transnational links on the one hand and the construction of nation and
citizenship on the other. This research will contribute to the NSF Cultural
Anthropology Program's research focus on socio-cultural drivers and consequences
of critical anthropogenic processes, including those that produce and transform
socioeconomic differentiation.