* 1424052
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Local-level Effects of Centrally Mandated Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Marcia Inhorn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2016
* USD 22,485.00

Social scientists contribute to understanding the complex dynamics of particular
areas of social behavior by attending to the larger contexts in which they
occur. Currently, one potentially fruitful arena for developing new theory of
mandated change is the worldwide concern about the causes of differential health
outcomes. Observers have noted that unprecedented resources are being poured
into funding healthcare initiatives, yet serious disparities persist. Efforts to
alter this situation give social scientists valuable opportunities for
investigating the causal relationships in social systems at multiple interacting
levels of scale. Findings from such investigations have important implications
for developing new social science theory as well application in many social
spheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, Yale University doctoral
student Gabriela E. Morales, with the guidance of Dr. P. Sean Brotherton, will
undertake research on one such natural experiment of planned, top-down change.
It is occurring in Bolivia where the government has proposed to end health
inequalities by creating an expansive new national health policy. The new policy
increases low-cost, rural primary healthcare that also incorporates indigenous
worldviews, including an unusual holistic model of health and well being,
community decision-making, and intercultural care. This is a fascinating
opportunity for social science investigation. The changes are only now underway
and the smaller-scale of the Bolivian context makes intensive research feasible.
The researcher will first study policy making and the training of health care
providers in the capital city and then investigate local implementation of the
new program in a rural district. Data will be collected using a range of social
science methodologies including: semi-structured interviews, oral histories,
therapeutic narratives, participant-observation, archival investigations, and
document analysis. By drawing on these ethnographic methodologies, this research
links large-scale processes of social change with a fine-grained analysis of
implementation and on-the-ground effects. Lessons learned will useful for those
concerned with many areas of planned social intervention.