* 1424196
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant:  The Political Economy of Educational Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Erik Wibbels, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 11/30/2015
* USD 14,318.00

If parents value their children's education and elections make politicians
accountable to voters, why does educational inequality vary so drastically among
the world's democracies? This study formulates an answer to that puzzle by
proposing a new theory to explain how the incentives of both families and
elected officials shape a democracy's distribution of schooling. Its core
hypothesis is that a democracy's level of educational inequality results from
the interaction of two factors: 1) perceptions of social mobility within
society, which shape how much parents politically prioritize education vis-a-vis
other social spending programs; and 2) the degree of autonomy that local
politicians have over education, which determines whether elected officials
cater to geographically concentrated or diffuse interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study argues that democracies that possess both low
social mobility and high local government autonomy over education will yield the
most unequal distributions of schooling, irrespective of other factors. Low
social mobility will cause poorer parents to devalue education politically
relative to richer parents because the expected utility of educational
investments will be less than the immediate gains they receive from short-term
social spending programs. In the presence of residential sorting by income and
class, high local government autonomy over schools will then cause politicians
to court these heterogeneous voter preferences. This study tests its key
theoretical assertions with large-N, cross-country data, nationally and sub-
nationally representative surveys, and a set of quasi-natural experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In both Mexico and Poland, the project will implement
original household surveys that cover a nationally representative sample of
low-, middle-, and high-income voters. The surveys will cover: 1) the expected
returns to education; 2) how education ranks in a list of voter spending
priorities; 3) the engagement of citizens on issues of education and how this
shapes political behavior; and 4) background demographics. Information gleaned
from the surveys will offer unique insight into how citizens translate demand
for schooling into political action, conditional on personal income and
perceived social mobility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although
prior studies in comparative politics have explored the causes of cross-country
differences in educational averages-as measured by levels of student financing,
test scores, etc.-few have sought to explain the wide dispersions of achievement
and resources that exist within nations. Understanding the roots of cross-
country variation in educational inequality is vital given that distributions of
schooling are equally, if not more, instrumental than averages in influencing
far-reaching social outcomes such as health, wealth, and political
participation. This study fills that void by advancing a theory about how social
mobility interacts with political institutions to precipitate equal or unequal
educational systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Education-perhaps
more than any other policy area-implicates a wide range of social and economic
outcomes that bear directly on human well-being. This study helps to elucidate
the structural causes of today's most pressing educational challenges: closing
achievement gaps, reforming under-resourced and dysfunctional schools, and
graduating students who are equipped to compete in a globalized, skill-intensive
world. In the United States and across the world, policymakers struggle to
provide all students with a baseline level of educational opportunity. This
study provides a fresh lens for understanding the roots of such inequities and
how policymakers can design innovative solutions to mitigate them.