* 1424962
* Using Multilevel Regression and Poststratification to Measure and Study Dynamic Public Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will develop techniques for using national survey data to
estimate dynamic measures of public opinion across a variety of types of
subnational units such as states, congressional districts, and state legislative
districts. These techniques will allow researchers to generate accurate
estimates of public opinion over time by fine-grained demographic-geographic-
temporal subgroups. National surveys are designed to give good estimates of
national public opinion at a particular point in time. They do not, however,
necessarily give good estimates of opinion for subnational units. They also do
not allow for understanding time trends of within these units. Recent advances
have been made on estimating subnational opinion, but this work has yet to meet
the special challenges of measuring opinion over time. This research will
improve statistical tools, assess the accuracy of these tools, and create a set
of guidelines for proper implementation. The researchers will employ these new
tools to make substantive contributions to social science research. The newly
developed techniques will be made available to a broad range of researchers and
poll analysts through the creation and distribution of statistical software
packages.

This project will develop a dynamic multilevel regression and poststratification
(MRP) technique that will allow researchers to generate time-varying estimates
of public opinion. MRP is a statistical technique that uses individual survey
responses from national opinion polls coupled advances in Bayesian statistics
and multilevel modeling to generate opinion estimates by demographic-geographic
subgroups or "types." Dynamic MRP improves on standard MRP by taking advantage
of additional information over time. Using this approach, the project will
undertake a new investigation of the relationship between public preferences and
policymaking at the state level. Specifically, the project will focus on two
important issues: the death penalty and same-sex marriage. By tracking and
tracing changes in opinion and policy over long periods of time, the
investigators will gain causal leverage on the effects of public opinion that is
lacking from existing research efforts. The project is supported by the
Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal
statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey
and statistical methodology.