* 1424433
* Characterizing Nonresponse Error across General Population Survey Data Collection Modes
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Philip Brenner, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2017
* USD 308,225.00

This research project will advance knowledge about nonresponse error introduced
by different modes of data collection for a wide variety of survey measures. The
results of this research will contribute to the development of surveys employing
multiple modes, thus enabling greater public participation and strengthening
survey data quality. Population-based surveys are used to measure everything
from unemployment to the health of the nation, guiding policy decision making at
national, state, and local levels. But responses to surveys in general, and
telephone surveys in particular, have declined significantly over the past two
decades. As a result, researchers are exploring multiple modes of survey data
collection. This project will provide additional information about the magnitude
of nonresponse error among alternative modes of data collection.

This project will estimate nonresponse error directly rather than inferring it
from demographic differences between those who respond and do not respond to
different survey protocols. Nonresponse error will be measured for two modes of
survey administration: computer-assisted telephone interviewing (CATI) and
telephonic interactive voice response (IVR). To minimize mode effects, questions
for the test surveys will be selected among those least likely to be impacted by
mode. These questions will be chosen among questions included in several federal
surveys, such as the Health Information National Trends Survey, National
Household Travel Survey, the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System survey,
the National Crime Victimization Survey, the National Immunization Survey, and
the Current Population Survey. Using an address-based sample frame, residents in
diverse neighborhoods in the Boston metropolitan area will be randomly assigned
to one of two experimental survey modes: CATI or IVR. At the end of survey field
period, nonrespondents will be assigned to in-person interviewers. The
interviewers will contact household members who did not respond to the survey,
inviting them to complete the survey. Monetary incentives will be provided to
encourage response. In-person interviews typically have the highest response
rates among any survey administration mode. Data from CATI and IVR
nonrespondents will be used to assess nonresponse error for key measures
included in the survey. The resulting combined samples will provide direct
estimates of the variables included in the survey with a minimum of nonresponse
error against which to compare estimates from the two survey administration
modes. The project is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics
Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part of a joint
activity to support research on survey and statistical methodology.