* 1424042
* Community Adaptations and Knowledge Sharing in Alaska and Siberia: Utilizing Indigenous Research Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2023
* Stacy Rasmus, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,075,045.00

Colonialism and environmental change threaten the overall survival of Indigenous
Arctic people. They must continually innovate and adopt new strategies for
social persistence, adaptation and transformation. The goal of the Community
Adaptation project is to discover indigenous patterns of adaptive and resilient
responses to critical situations through an exchange of knowledge between
members of two arctic communities in Alaska and Siberia. The project aims to: 1)
develop and implement a fieldwork course and knowledge exchange with indigenous
youth, community members and leaders from Alaska and Siberia; 2) conduct two
fieldwork exchanges in Alaska and Siberia with indigenous community
collaborators; 3) develop a comparative model of social resilience and community
sustainability that describes how diverse communities in the Arctic are coping,
adapting, and transforming as a result of changing social and environmental
conditions; and 4) establish an innovative methodology for engaging arctic
indigenous community members in collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The study will be the first to engage indigenous community members
from Alaska and Siberia in a collaborative exchange and discovery process as
part of a research design utilizing innovative indigenous research
methodologies. The study adds a critical new perspective to resilience theory
that takes into account the transformative capacity of indigenous peoples and
communities. The proposed study aims to impact the international indigenous and
scientific communities by broadening the inclusion of underrepresented
minorities in research, and more effectively engaging indigenous communities and
peoples as part of research collaborations.