* 1424203
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ecological niche evolution of Homo and Paranthropus at East Turkana, northern Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Rene Bobe, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2016
* USD 21,157.00

A comprehensive understanding of a species' evolutionary history includes
determining the ecological factors that drove its adaptations. All species
occupy a particular ecological niche whose breadth is determined by the
interplay of abiotic (e.g., climate and dispersal barriers) and biotic (e.g.,
competition) influences. The niche of a species is rarely static through time
and the inevitable changes can result in a variety of outcomes, including
further adaptation, speciation and extinction. Although it has historically been
difficult to reconstruct the ecological niches of fossil taxa, recently
developed paleoecological techniques, mean that it is now possible to test
hypotheses about the role of ecology might have played in the separate
evolutionary histories of two important early hominin
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining how our early human ancestors
interacted with their environments is fundamental for understanding human
evolutionary history. The fossil record suggests that our genus, Homo,
originated in eastern Africa around 2.4 million years ago (Ma), and shared the
environment with a closely related species called Paranthropus boisei. However,
the record also suggests that by approximately 1.3 Ma, the Paranthropus lineage
went extinct and Homo had expanded its geographical range outside of Africa.
Although these lineages coexisted in time, we lack a logical framework for
testing hypotheses related to their ecology during this period. This
dissertation project by doctoral student David Patterson (under the supervision
of Dr. Ren√© Bobe, The George Washington University) will contribute to
addressing these gaps in our knowledge by using novel methods to generate the
first high-resolution reconstruction of the ecological niches of these two
lineages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines quantitative methods from
mammalian community ecology with stable isotope geochemistry to investigate the
ecological niches of Homo and Paranthropus within a spatially constrained
ancient ecosystem. The proposed study will use paleoecological data collected
directly from localities where these hominin fossils occur, and from
archaeological sites dated to between approximately 2.0 and 1.4 Ma in the Koobi
Fora Formation of northern Kenya. By concentrating on specific fossil
assemblages within the same region, this study will provide new insights into
the ecological niches of these two lineages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
this research will be amplified via the Co-PI's involvement with the Evolution
of Terrestrial Ecosystems (ETE) program at the National Museum of Natural
History (NMNH) and with the Koobi Fora Field School (KFFS). As part of ETE, the
Co-PI will disseminate project results to educators through lectures at
sponsored workshops and via the NMNH Q?rius Science Center. Additionally, the
Co-PI will create a series of field- and laboratory-based entries for the
Paleobiology Department's blogspace. The Co-PI will also participate in "The
Scientist is in" program, which will give the public the opportunity to ask
researchers about their research, as well as about other topics associated with
human origins. Lastly, the Co-PI's fieldwork will be completed in conjunction
with the KFFS. This collaborative effort between the National Museums of Kenya
and GWU provides students from several countries, including Kenya, Ethiopia,
South Africa, and the United States with hands-on field experience in
paleoanthropology.