* 1424843
* Collaborative  Research: Monetary DSGE Models at the Zero Lower Bound: Policy Analysis and Econometric Inference
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Frank Schorfheide, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,964.00

This award funds research in macroeconomics, focusing on the development of
tools and methods for building and testing mathematical models of an entire
economy. The goal is to better understand how economies operate when nominal
interest rates are very close or equal to zero; standard models use mathematical
assumptions that do not work well with 0% interest. These challenges limit the
ability of researchers to study the causes of business cycle fluctuations when
an economy is near this interest rate. Because policymakers use some of the same
modeling methods, the challenges also affect policymakers' ability to understand
the possible effects of changes in monetary policy. The PIs will develop new
algorithms and methods for modeling economies with 0% interest.

The PIs will examine monetary policy analysis at the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB),
considering the effects of forward guidance at the ZLB and characterizing the
optimal target inflation rate when the ZLB is a constraint and there are also
realistic frictions that generate money demand. They will consider the multiple
equilibrium problem caused by impose the ZLB in many DSGE models by considering
two specific equilibria, one in which inflation and inflation expectations drift
slowly, and one where the change in regimes is triggered by fundamental shocks.
Finally, the team will develop two kinds of nonlinear vector autoregressive
models that mimic the nonlinearities in the DSGE model without imposing tight
cross-coefficient restrictions.