* 1424711
* Collaborative Research: Determining Functional Correlations Between Geochemical Factors and Microbial Metabolisms in Ultrabasic Serpentinizing Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Nealson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,508.00

The study of extreme environments, especially those that are similar to
conditions thought to be prevalent on early Earth, provide insights not only
into how life ekes out an existence in the most hostile places on our planet
today, but how it might have done so long ago, perhaps at the dawn of life. This
work will examine life in such an extreme environment. It is a serpentinization
site where liquids emerge from the Earth at very high pH, very low redox
potential, with almost no organics to eat, and virtually no oxygen or other
things to respire: one of the most challenging environments on Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies of two geochemically-different highly-
alkaline groundwater sources revealed genomically and phylogentically unusual
organisms and microbial isolates having highly-adapted physiological and genomic
features to the serpentinizing environments. Here the PIs will expand their
previous studies studies, focusing on questions related to the geochemical and
microbial metabolic interactions occurring at this site: e.g., 1) how do each of
the major microbial groups/players cope with the stringent geochemistry of The
Cedars, 2) how do these microbes interact with one another to sustain the
taxonomically stable communities of The Cedars serpentinizing environments, and,
3) how do the microbial activities potentially contribute to the occurring
geochemical transformations? To answer these questions the PIs will test a
number of conceptual, strategic and metabolic hypotheses, using several
approaches, including: 1) a combination of advanced microscopic observations to
visualize the localization of each organism, 2) stable-isotope probing to
identify organisms that utilize a given carbon substrate, 3) stimulus-induced
metatranscriptomics to illustrate the gene responses to the specific geochemical
compounds (conditions), 4) metaproteomics to obtain the in situ protein
profiles, and 5) detailed metabolic capabilities of isolated strains that are
abundantly observed in terrestrial serpentinizing sites on Earth. Successful
integration of results from these five strategies is expected to produce a
functional interaction-model between geochemical factors and microbial metabolic
activities in a relatively simple microbial community, functioning under extreme
environmental conditions.