* 1424077
* Computing constraint-based derivations: Phonological opacity and hidden structure learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 317,613.00

The scientific study of the structure of human language offers not only insights
into the workings of the human mind, but also societal benefits in leading to
improved methods for language teaching and treatment of language disorders. This
research has revealed that language contains intricate patterns at many levels,
including not only the organization of words into sentences (syntax) but also
the organization of sounds into words (phonology). This project aims to better
document the range of intricate phonological patterns found amongst the world's
languages, and to create and test computational learning models that can acquire
these patterns. This basic research will lead to a better understanding of human
language learning, which is key in working toward the societal benefits of
improved teaching and treatment of disorders. This project also aims to increase
the representation of women in science. Women are well represented amongst
linguistics students, but under-represented in computer science, both in
academia and in industry. This research project will build intellectual bridges
between linguistics and computer science; the project will also engage students
in research, with a special emphasis on establishing mentoring relationships
amongst female undergraduate and graduate students. In this, this project will
provide opportunities for students to engage in computational work,
illustrations of its importance for understanding language, and role models for
young women looking for a career path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction
of Joseph Pater and John McCarthy, this project will focus on a particularly
intricate set of phonological patterns whose technical term reflects their
complexity: they are called "opaque". Much research in phonology characterizes
phonological patterns in terms of constraints: statements about what kinds of
sound combinations are allowed in a language. Opaque patterns are ones that fail
to hold in all circumstances, and that are impossible to characterize in terms
of constraints on the words of the language, even when those constraints are
allowed to conflict with one another. The project team will create a database of
all known opaque patterns amongst the world's languages, and make it publicly
available on the internet, so that others can use it and contribute to it. This
database will be used to develop new analyses of opaque patterns in terms of
constraint-based derivations, a synthesis of two major theoretical approaches to
phonology. Finally, the project team will develop computational learning models
for constraint-based derivations, which pose interesting theoretical challenges
because they involve "hidden structure": linguistic structure that is not
apparent in the pronunciation of words, but that is posited by linguists, and
presumably by learners, to explain the patterns that are observed in languages.
This research will involve creating new software, which will also be made freely
available on the internet.