* 1424176
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Judicial Power in Political Transitions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Nicolas Van de Walle, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

The transitions that began in 2011 in Egypt and Tunisia have had nearly opposite
effects on the status of courts in the two countries. Egypt's troubled
transition has seen the country's courts, especially the Supreme Constitutional
Court (SCC), rise to new levels of prominence. In contrast, the Tunisian
transitional regime - considered the most stable of the Arab Spring - suspended
the Constitutional Council for the duration of the transition. The status of the
courts has important implications for the distribution of power within the
transitional regime. In Egypt, power was divided between the SCC and several
elected legislative, executive and constituent institutions. In Tunisia, power
was concentrated in a single legislative-constituent Assembly unchecked by
judicial review. The focus of this study is on the origins of judicial power,
but it will also touch on the problem of democratization. The Egyptian and
Tunisian cases are a challenge to the view that strong courts and
democratization always go hand in hand. The greater power of the Egyptian
judiciary did not prevent the Egyptian transition from collapsing in the July 3
coup, and the absence of constitutional review in Tunisia did not result in a
dictatorship of the National Assembly.

The rule of law upheld by an independent judiciary is an essential part of any
consolidated democracy. Nevertheless, prior research has not adequately
addressed the question of how the judiciary aids the democratic process or which
forms of judicial power are conducive to democratization in the context of
democratic transitions. This project assesses three alternative hypotheses to
explain the divergent outcomes in Egypt and Tunisia. These hypotheses address
the role of majoritarian and counter-majoritarian institutions and interests in
each country; the different institutional structures of the constitutional
court, which may create different opportunities for interaction between civil
society and the courts; and the different relationships between the
constitutional court and the ordinary judiciary. Archival work and interviews in
Egypt and Tunisia will assess these explanations.