* 1424920
* Developing a Novel Framework for Analyzing Dynamic Interactions in Movement Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Jennifer Miller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2019
* USD 264,988.00

Technological advancements in global positioning systems and related satellite
tracking technologies have resulted in significant increases in the availability
of highly accurate data about moving objects. These advances, however, have
dramatically outpaced the development of appropriate methods for analyzing
movement data. This research project will develop a benchmarking framework for
measuring and interpreting dynamic interactions based on both temporal and
spatial criteria among individual entities such as people or animals. The
project will advance the spatial study of movement beyond the identification of
the location of individual entities as specific objects and consider interaction
as a variable for which a basic unit of observation is a set of locations with
time stamps for multiple individual entities. Analyses of interactions, for
example, can provide more information about possible attraction and avoidance of
individuals that are in the same area at the same time and can be useful for
understanding how two individuals interact in the context of disease
transmission and social behavior. While this research focuses on animal movement
and interactions, the results will be applicable to other moving objects that
interact. Project results therefore could potentially be used to study a wide
variety of phenomena, including disease spread, information diffusion, crowd
movement, and traffic behavior. The project also will promote education and
training through support of student research and development of curricular
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will involve the conduct of an
extensive comparison of existing dynamic interaction metrics. The investigator
will examine their strengths and weaknesses, how they are affected by temporal
resolution, spatial uncertainty, and level of interaction. The ability of these
metrics to quantify interactions will be assessed using two simulated movement
datasets as well as one high-quality real dataset for which the level of
interaction is known. This comparison will contribute recommendations and
guidelines for research that aims to quantify interactions among animals,
people, automobiles, or other moving objects. The results from the comparison
also will be used to develop new interaction metrics that will be more
appropriate for measuring context- or behavior-specific types of interactions.