* 1424968
* Collaborative Research: Highly reactive thiol binding sites on bacterial cell envelopes and their influence on metal speciation in aquatic systems
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Bhoopesh Mishra, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2018
* USD 70,785.00

Bacteria are ubiquitous in natural environments. The adherence of metal ions
onto the surface of bacterial cells can affect the global cycling of elements,
the mobility of metal contaminants, and the effectiveness of contaminant
mitigation techniques. Past studies have identified the importance of certain
bacterial surface sites in adhering metal ions at unrealistically high metal
concentrations. However, recent studies suggest that at environmentally relevant
metal concentrations, previously unrecognized sites may be more important. The
goal of this study is to better understand the impact of high-affinity, but low
abundance, bacterial surface binding sites on metal uptake and reactivity in
aquatic systems. Because most metals are present at low concentrations both in
natural and contaminated systems, the outcomes of this research could help
better understand the environmental fate of heavy metals in natural
environments.

An innovative approach will be used to isolate the influence of R-SH sites on
bacterial cell envelopes. Specifically, an R-SH-sensitive fluorophore molecule
(qBBr) will be used that binds strongly to R-SH sites on the cell envelope. qBBr
fluoresces when bound to R-SH sites, and the charge on the molecule prevents it
crossing the cell membrane easily; and hence can be used for previously
impossible direct determinations of R-SH site concentrations on cell envelopes.
In addition, because qBBr binds so strongly to cell envelope R-SH sites, we can
use it as a blocking agent in order to isolate proton- and metal-binding
reactions with cell envelope R-SH sites. The funded research will, for the first
time, directly probe the role of cell envelope thiol sites, and will enable us
to study their interactions with metals. Using fluorescence and x-ray absorption
spectroscopies, coupled with potentiometric titration and bulk adsorption
experiments, the PIs will measure the thiol concentration on cell envelopes of
selected bacteria common to most aquatic systems, and to determine how different
environmental variables, such as the growth medium and growth conditions
(aerobic versus anaerobic) influence the thiol concentrations. The PIs will
measure Zn adsorption onto thiol sites, and determine the molecular structures
and binding constants of the Zn-thiol complexes on bacterial cell envelopes
using sorption and spectroscopy approaches. The detailed measurements that the
qBBr approach makes possible have the potential to transform our understanding
of how bacteria bind metals under realistic conditions. The results of the
proposed research are critical for evaluating the role of these important
binding sites on metal speciation and distribution in the environment. The
results from this study can be applied not only to contaminant transport
modeling, but also to bioremediation engineering and to understanding heavy
metal cycling in the environment in general. The funded research will support a
number of outreach activities, including teacher training through Princeton
University?s ?Quest? program; the development of a geomicrobiology/environmental
chemistry module in South Bend high school science research programs; and
teaching a water pollution technology module in South Chicago-area high schools.