* 1424348
* Transparency, Accountability, and Corruption Displacement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Clark Gibson, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,415.00

Despite ample funding from the international community, anti-corruption
interventions have largely failed to contain corruption. Scholars and
policymakers agree that increasing transparency and improving accountability
should reduce corruption. Armed with information about corrupt actions, citizens
will punish corrupt officials. Institutions of accountability are a key part of
this mechanism, as they provide the channel through which citizens and political
superiors can act on the information. Yet, the evidence to support these
arguments is mixed. Corruption is common across different transparency and
accountability environments, from countries rich in information and avenues for
taking action against corruption to countries lacking in both. This project will
address several possible reasons for this divergence between theory and results.
Drawing on work in behavioral economics, it will discern whether politicians
respond strategically to anti-corruption interventions by shifting their
corruption to forms less vulnerable to detection and punishment. Furthermore, it
will combine top-down anti-corruption efforts, such as large-scale audits of
accounts, with a bottom-up effort targeting citizens, which typically are
executed separately. Finally, the interventions in this project will educate
citizens about the roles and responsibilities of government and the action
options available to them, in addition to informing them about corruption among
their government officials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The interventions of this
project will occur in Malawi's local (district) government. To address some of
the deficiencies of past anti-corruption interventions, the interventions will
combine a regularly scheduled top-down audit of the district government with a
bottom-up intervention designed to involve citizens in the anti-corruption
process and educate them about their government and avenues of action available
to them. The citizen transparency intervention will include broadcasting the
main findings about their officials on the local radio, providing written
reports about the treated officials to a randomly selected group of citizens,
and calling selected district officials before a group of chiefs, civil society
representatives, media representatives, and a randomly selected group of
citizens to discuss the findings. The meeting will also educate citizens about
the avenues of reporting corruption and demanding a reduction in corruption
available to them. Shifts in corruption patterns within each district will be
measured by conducting a survey of the district officials after the transparency
interventions and comparing the results to the 2013 baseline survey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work holds great promise for both policymaking and
science. Donors and international organizations believe that corruption
undermines prosperous and peaceful governments in Africa. By providing a
specific theory of behavior and creating precise measures of individual
corruption, this project will advance the debate regarding institutions,
politician incentives, and behavior. By using randomized experiments, this
project employs some of the most rigorous designs and tests available to social
scientists. Finally, by sampling actual politicians in the surveys measuring
outcomes, this project explores political phenomena with those who actually
practice politics. Insights from this project can prove invaluable to inform not
just the study of corruption, but also its practical dimensions. The design uses
actual audits executed by official government personnel, making this study's
findings and implications very relevant to those interested in combating
corruption. The project findings will be presented to policymakers and
researchers in the form of discussions, policy papers, and research articles to
academic, government, and policy audiences. This project will also train dozens
of citizens -private and government officials- in research methods.