* 1424248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparing Computational Environmental Modeling Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Michael Paolisso, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2016
* USD 19,085.00

Modeling, the creation of simplified representations of complex systems, has
always been a part of how people understand and interact with their
environments. Recently, computers have supported the development of
computational modeling to study complexity through computer simulation.
Computational modeling has become important in environmental research and
policy-making. This new and increasingly prevalent modeling practice raises a
number of questions about model use and model choice. Do computational models
mediate our relationships to the environmental systems they are made to
represent? Are these effects different from those of other kinds of models?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions and explore the roles and
effects of computational modeling more generally, University of Maryland
doctoral student Jeremy Trombley, advised by Dr. Michael J. Paolisso, will
undertake research in the Chesapeake Bay region. Trombley's research has three
focal components: 1) an examination of the role that a particular set of
hydrodynamic models -- the Chesapeake Bay Modeling System -- plays in the
Chesapeake Bay socio-ecological system; 2) documenting the socio-ecological
effects of producing and using these models; and 3) the comparative effects of
an alternative computational modeling practice on the same socio-environmental
system. Trombley will collect data from scientists, policy makers, environmental
managers, and farmers using a combination of social science methodologies,
including social network analysis, participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, and structured survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding critical
transitions, transformations, and change, including the effects of anthropogenic
processes and the impacts of new technologies, is a research emphasis area in
the NSF Cultural Anthropology Program's project portfolio. Findings from this
project will contribute to that Program focus.