* 1424892
* High-precision U-Pb zircon geochronology and intracontinental correlation of terrestrial ecosystems during the "zenith" of dinosaur diversity in the Late Campanian of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Samuel Bowring, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 10/31/2018
* USD 254,616.00

High-precision U-Pb zircon geochronology and intracontinental correlation of
terrestrial ecosystems during the 'zenith' of dinosaur diversity in the Late
Campanian of North America&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samuel
Bowring&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1424892--MIT&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
overview:&lt;br/&gt;A major question is whether global environmental change
cause changes in biological evolution. The time period between 80 and 70 million
years ago has been described as the ?zenith? of dinosaur diversity and western
North America contains unparalleled exposures of rocks with abundant dinosaur
fossils from this time period. We do not have a good understanding of what
triggered this burst of evolutionary diversity but we do know that at the same
time were profound, global-scale environmental changes, including an increase in
global atmospheric temperatures and an abrupt rise in sea level. However some
have argued that the apparent increase in diversity has more to do with
preservation than evolution. To test whether global environmental changes or
preferential preservation are responsible, we must be able to correlate rocks
and fossils from southern Canada to the southwestern United States. This project
will focus on high precision dating of volcanic rocks interlayered with fossil
bearing rocks so that we determine the rates of evolution across more than 2000
km of latitude in western North America. This will allow us to in turn evaluate
whether evidence for environmental change preserved in the rocks can be
correlated with dinosaur evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on developing an unparalleled
chronostratigraphy for an approximately ten million year (80-70 Ma) interval
across a 2000 km long corridor of Late Campanian (Cretaceous) strata preserved
in the Western Interior Basin of western North America (Laramidia). This
represents one of the most laterally extensive and fossiliferous continental
successions in the world, and includes the famous Two Medicine-Judith River
fauna/flora in Montana and Wyoming, the Dinosaur Park fauna/flora in Alberta,
the Kaiparowits fauna/flora in Utah, the Kirtland-Fruitland fauna/flora in New
Mexico and the Aguja fauna in Texas. The research team will use high-precision
U-Pb zircon geochronology on volcanic ash beds to build age models for each area
and allow detailed correlations and insight into evolutionary/preservation
trends.&lt;br/&gt;The Western Interior Basin has been pivotal in the formation
and assessment of many hypotheses relating to Late Cretaceous vertebrates, from
physiology and behavior to biogeography and evolution. Recent discoveries from
the southern Western Interior (i.e., Utah, New Mexico, Texas, Mexico) and the
far north (Alaska) have revealed new Campanian-aged vertebrate faunas,
highlighted by an array of previously unknown dinosaurs, other vertebrates and
plants. Following more than a century of intense sampling and study, more is
known about Campanian terrestrial vertebrates from Laramidia (western North
America) than from any other continent-scale region of Mesozoic age. Thus,
Campanian Laramidia represents arguably the best time and place to investigate
major questions surrounding the tempo and mode of evolution among Mesozoic
terrestrial vertebrates and associated ecosystem changes. A major hurdle to
addressing questions of these types in ancient ecosystems is the ability to
precisely and accurately constrain the depositional age of important fossil
localities and to correlate floras and faunas through space. U-Pb zircon
geochronology can be used to date ca 90 million year old volcanic ash beds to
better than Â± 20-30 thousand years. When multiple ash beds are dated in
stratigraphic succession, age models can be constructed that allow resolution at
millennial to decamillenial levels and thus high-precision
correlation.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will focus on the following key
faunas and floras: 1) the Two Medicine-Judith River formations in Montana and
Wyoming; 2) the Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta; 3) the Kaiparowits Formation
in Utah; 4) the Fruitland-Kirtland formations in New Mexico; and the Aguja
Formation in Texas. Together, these continental units and their floras and
faunas have been interpreted as contemporaneous, and by developing a high
precision chronostratigraphy, the research team will create an unparalleled
opportunity for investigating the mode and tempo of evolution in a Mesozoic
terrestrial ecosystem, with opportunities for investigating and testing concepts
of latitudinally arrayed provinciality, turnover rates, diachroneity in
evolutionary changes, predictions from molecular studies and the roles of
eustasy, tectonics and climate as drivers of such changes. In addition, once
completed, it will be possible to compare the record from Laramidia with those
from South America and Asia.