* 1424720
* Collaborative Research: Deconstructing Nitrate Stable Isotope Ratios in Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Craig Tobias, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Anthropogenic nutrient loading and the consequent eutrophication of aquatic
systems pose a substantial environmental threat. Excessive nitrogen can have
profound detrimental effects on the diversity and function of ecosystems, and on
human health. The proposed study is an important venture to establish a robust
rubric in nitrogen isotope systematic, to allow for accurate and more
quantitative interpretations of nitrate isotope distributions in the
environment, and thus a sound understanding of inherent nitrogen
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the study is to investigate the
isotope dynamics of nitrogen species in the West Falmouth Wastewater Plume in
Falmouth, Massachusetts, in order to resolve differences in isotope
discrimination observed between studies of mono-cultures of nitrifying and of
denitrifying bacterial isolates and patterns ascribed to analogous
transformations in aquatic environments. For one, nitrate 18O/16O values
produced by nitrifiers in cultures reveal isotope effects that are largely
overlooked when interpreting environmental trends. Second, the fractionation of
18O/16O relative to 15N/14N has a characteristic and consistent slope of ~1 in
cultures of denitrifiers, in contrast to a slope of ~0.6 observed for nitrate
attenuation by denitrification in aquifers. The investigators seek to (1)
constrain the nitrate 18O/16O values produce by nitrification in relation to
environmental conditions and (2) investigate the organism-level 18O/16O versus
15N/14N enrichment imparted on nitrate during denitrification in situ as
compared to culture observations. They propose to test hypotheses with a set of
in-lab incubations of environmental samples from the site, as well as an in situ
tracer test. The project is in collaboration with the US Geological Survey and
will support a graduate student. The investigation is important because the
discordance of culture to field observations raises the possibility that isotope
trends in the environment are misinterpreted, possibly overlooking important
fluxes in the nitrogen mass balance of aquifers.