* 1424057
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-cultural Responses to Water Scarcity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Dorothy Hodgson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

How do the practices of extractive industries, such as mining and
hydrofracturing, affect people's beliefs, practices, and experiences of water?
Water connects and integrates realms of life that might otherwise appear
separate. Through water, the extraction, refinement, and trade of natural
resources are linked to individuals, households, and communities. Thirst,
hygiene and health, the availability of local fish and agricultural products,
and perceptions of environmental change make industry effects on water apparent
in everyday life. Therefore, to fully understand how extractive industries
affect people, it is necessary to investigate how these industries affect water
practices and experiences. As part of the Cultural Anthropology Program's
support of research into the socio-cultural drivers and consequences of critical
anthropogenic processes, and the resilience and robustness of socio-cultural
systems, this award supports such an investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher, Rutgers University doctoral student Siad Darwish, working under the
direction of Dr. Dorothy Hodgson, will undertake an intensive field
investigation into how a single extractive industry, phosphate mining for
fertilizer, has affected people's experiences of and ideas about water in the
past and continues to do so in the present. The research will be conducted in
the Tunisian oasis cities of Gafsa and Gab√®s, two towns on the edge of the
Sahara desert that were for centuries defined by their locally and sustainably
managed availability of fresh water. The heightened importance of water in this
context will make the relationships to be investigated particularly clear.
Locally, phosphate extraction and refinement over the past century have resulted
in the depletion and pollution of water resources; the industry was at the
center of both the Arab Uprisings and of the country's 2012 water riots. The
research will build on two prior field trips to Tunisia in 2012 and 2013 and a
long-term research engagement in the region. The researcher will employ a mix of
social scientific research methods. Archival research will document the
emergence of the phosphate industry and transformation of water management
systems. Mapping exercises and the development of a water-use typology will
establish how the industry's pumping facilities and waste waters connect to
local waterscapes today. Where these connections are found to be particularly
salient, the researcher will use ethnographic research methods to investigate
social beliefs, practices, and experiences of water in households, ritual,
agriculture, and fishing. Findings from this research will have application to
understanding how people everywhere cope with natural resource scarcity and to
theorizing the linkages between critical resources and socio-cultural systems.