* 1424907
* Land-Use and Climate Influences on Lake Tanganyika Floor Sediments and Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Todd, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 314,000.00

The goal of this project is to determine the degree to which agricultural and
urban development activities on the shores of Lake Tanganyika affect the bottom-
dwelling and -nesting organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake Tanganyika is widely
considered a "natural laboratory" for the study of evolutionary and ecological
processes, because many of the organisms have evolved and diversified within the
lake itself. This ecological treasure is under threat. Numerous studies have
focused either on open-water fisheries or on watershed (sedimentation and
pollution) issues as these affect the health and wealth of the four riparian
countries. However, the vast shell beds within the shallow (10-30 m) regions of
Lake Tanganyika have received much less attention, even though these
accumulations of dead shells are a unique habitat to Lake Tanganyika and host a
diverse, endemic fauna, including numerous Cichlid fish. These accumulations of
dead snail shells are pervasive, but appear to contain no living snails in the
same habitat. If living snails are absent, then it implies either natural
environmental change or acute anthropogenic impacts. Thus, these shell beds, if
measured correctly, may provide a means of assessing natural and human-induced
environmental change. The researchers will use the results of this work in
courses and within a summer science camp for middle school students taught at
the University of Oklahoma. The chief investigator also leads study abroad
courses in which the topics of conservation and resources of African lakes are
featured. The team will publish the results of the research in both scientific
and popular press venues, and will carry out public outreach through posting to
related web sites (e.g. Cichlid fish hobbyists) and through blogging of the
field experience to make it accessible to both American and African science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will compare and contrast three
sites within shallow regions of Lake Tanganyika that are floored by shell beds,
but that vary in terms of their land-use (highly disturbed, moderately
disturbed, and a control site). Data to be collected will include: the nature of
the lake bottom at each site, including the age and character of the shells as
well as the texture and composition of the intermixed sediment; the diversity
and abundance of certain bottom-dwelling organisms among the sites; changes in
sedimentation over time inferred from data from core collected at each site; and
changes in sedimentation patterns over time as inferred by geophysical (seismic)
data from each site. Comparison of the data among the sites will allow the
investigators to determine whether the accumulation of the shells record lake-
wide or regional changes and whether the distribution of modern organisms using
the shell beds as a habitat vary as a result of land-use changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results would impact researchers interested in the
biodiversity, conservation and evolutionary history of Lake Tanganyika and other
modern and ancient tropical lakes. The proposed activity will train one PhD
student and six undergraduates within an integrated research program. This
research would involve the University of Oklahoma, the University of Arizona,
and the National Museum, London. Work with the United States Geological Survey
and Northern Arizona University would also enhance exposure and
interdisciplinary research. The team's collaboration with Tanzanian Fisheries
Research Institute would provide their scientists with increased experience in
studying benthic ecology, and the results would vest governments and other
stakeholders, such as conservation groups, with knowledge to manage these
critical ecosystems.