* 1424234
* RAPID:  Role of Physical, Chemical and Diffusion Properties of 4-Methyl-cyclohexane methanol in Remediating Contaminated Water and Water Pipes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Daniel Gallagher, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 01/31/2016
* USD 69,887.00

Dietrich&lt;br/&gt;1424234&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate
fundamental and applied research in these key areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The
chemical-physical properties of 4-methyl-cyclohexane methanol (MCHM) have not
all been evaluated and they are necessary to determine the fate and transport
within the drinking water treatment, distribution system (for example, consumers
homes), and natural waters. The first stage of this research will be to quantify
the chemical properties of MCHM. Specifically: the octanol-water partition
coefficient (Kow) will be generated using C18 HPLC retention time; the aqueous
solubility (S) will be measured by saturating water with MCHM and measuring the
aqueous concentration; and the Henry's Law constant (H) will be measured using
static headspace equilibrium and SPME-GC/MS.&lt;br/&gt;2. Previous work by the
researchers has developed a predictive model of diffusion coefficients and
solubility for a wide range of organics in plastic pipe. Using Kow and S values,
diffusion and pipe solubility's will be estimated. This will help validate
laboratory results from other research also investigating the MCHM
spill.&lt;br/&gt;3. MCHM has a low aqueous odor threshold of approximately
0.00001 mg/L. Thus consumers can potentially become important monitoring
sentinels for exposure to low levels of MCHM. The main location in the house to
detect off-odors is the shower because of high water temperatures and water
flows in a confined area. Using previous modeling work by the researchers and
the measured Henry's Law constants from stage 1 above, dynamic models of MCHM
air concentrations for typical showering conditions will be developed. This will
confirm if consumer sensory detection can aid in detecting locations of residual
MCHM. It will also aid in the utility's understanding of consumer complaints,
and in the longer term will aid in exposure assessment through
inhalation.&lt;br/&gt;4. While polyethylene pipe materials have been shown to
interact with organic chemicals, less is known about the interaction of organics
with epoxy materials used to line water pipes and storage tanks. Drinking-water-
grade epoxy-liner will be used to evaluate sorption/uptake performance for MCHM.
Diffusion coefficients and solubility in epoxy will be determined using weight
gain/immersion, time lag, and diffusion/ permeation methods. Similar experiments
will be conducted on polyethylene pipe materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On
January 10, 2014, residents of nine West Virginia counties were told by their
governor "Do Not Drink the Water" because it was contaminated with odorous
4-methyl-cyclohexane methanol (MCHM) which is used to clean coal. Even though
the water restrictions began to be lifted on January 13, 2014 and all residents
are eventually expected to be able to drink tap water, there are still many
scientific knowledge gaps in the short and long term fate and transport of this
chemical in water systems. This RAPID Grant will address many of those gaps.
This research seeks to provide fundamental scientific data that can be used to
avoid potential health and environmental problems caused by the MCHM spill in
West Virginia and the subsequent contamination of the drinking water treatment
and distribution system. The knowledge gained will be shared with the scientific
and engineering communities through journal publications and presentations at
professional conferences. The knowledge on pipe material contamination and
decontamination will be shared with the general public through a short, citizen-
oriented publication to be posted on the Water Resources Research Center web
page. Student researchers will disseminate the knowledge gain through blogs on
our "Water INTERFACE Interdisciplinary Research" website.