* 1424325
* Computer Science Roadtrip (CS Roadtrip)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Brian McAllister, Roadtrip Productions LTD
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 03/31/2017
* USD 199,866.00

Roadtrip Nation proposes to design and develop pilot materials for a Computer
Science Roadtrip (CS Roadtrip). Roadtrip Nation is an independent, award-winning
organization that empowers students to define their own roads in life through
resources such as its annual public television series, live campus events,
publicized books, multimedia online content, and innovative educational
resources. The Roadtrip Nation Experience curriculum connects students to the
vast Roadtrip Nation Interview Archive, which chronicles the diverse personal
stories and pathways of successful individuals from across the United States and
other countries around the world. The individuals featured within the Interview
Archive share personal tales about navigating life's choices, overcoming
obstacles, and working hard to define their own roads in life. They range from
CEOs of Fortune 500 companies to scientists, mechanics, artists, TV producers,
accountants, and beyond. To date, very few of the interviewees have been
computer scientists or have even made use of computing in creative ways in their
chosen careers. This pilot project will pilot the Roadtrip Nation approach for
computing, building a small number of initial interviews and related materials
that showcase computing careers in ways that are engaging to students. The goal
would be to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach in expanding student
appreciation of the wide range of applications of computing. If the approach is
successful, it could expand into an entire Roadtrip focused on computer science.

Through this pilot project, Roadtrip Nation will lay the groundwork and provide
proof-of-concept for a CS Roadtrip, leveraging a combination of multimedia
deliverables, an evidence-based educational curriculum, and dynamic engagement
strategies that will provide critical connections between students' natural
interests, positive role models who align with those interests, and
corresponding CS educational and career pathways. To that end, the CS Roadtrip
Pilot will develop up to four student-facing videos that feature the stories of
diverse computing professionals, appropriate for on-air, online, and classroom
purposes, along with the appropriate Learning Guides. The materials and
curriculum will be implemented in up to four partner schools in California. In
partnership with the Educational Policy Improvement Center (EPIC), Roadtrip
Nation will develop an evaluation strategy that measures the pilot project
impacts, particularly with underserved students, and illuminates the potential
of a fully developed CS Roadtrip Project.