* 1424668
* RUI: Measuring the effects of winter storms (2013-2014) on the movement of boulders in western Ireland
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Ronadh Cox, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2016
* USD 74,997.00

a. A nontechnical explanation of the project's broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As coastal populations grow, sea level rises,
and climate models predict increasing storminess, there needs to be a better
understanding of the effects of high-energy waves on coastal regions. The
urgency of this need is underscored by landmark storms that have struck world-
wide in recent years. Western Europe was ravaged by a series of unusually strong
storms this past winter, which generated the largest waves ever measured in
Irish waters (25 m high). Damage to coastal infrastructure will cost tens of
millions of dollars to repair, and major amounts of erosion and sediment
movement are now being documented. This project will use these storms as an
oppportunity for before-and-after analysis that can increase our knowledge of
how storm waves move large objects. Using an existing database of photographs
(most taken last summer) at surveyed sites tied to specific GPS locations, this
research will use repeat photography to document and measure changes wrought by
the winter storms. This investigation will establish a relationship between
storm power and the inland extent of boulder movement that can serve as an index
of the destructive power of storm waves. The results will be applicable to
coastal regions world-wide and can serve as the basis for developing effective
public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b. A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of storm waves to move large objects
such as boulders is controversial. Some researches have suggested that only
tsunami have the power to move massive objects to higher elevations, yet the
distribution of coastal boulder ridges in areas not prone to tsunami indicate a
more widespread and common mechanism. This project will use existing benchmark
photographs and measurements of boulder distribution at key sites in the west of
Ireland to make quantitative comparisons of boulder locations before and after
thw winter storms of 2013-2014. The surveys will use recent field photographs
taken mostly in 2012 and 2013 to make on-the-ground comparisons with the present
boulder configurations, documenting which boulders have moved and measuring both
the sizes and translation distances of the transported clasts. Because these
sites have been topographically surveyed, the masses and movements to elevations
above high water and distances inland will be documented, thus generating
relationships between the maximum sea states recorded last winter and the inland
extent of boulder movements. Data generated during this project will quaintify
the connection between storm waves and boulder transport. The results will be
applicable to other regions at risk from severe storm damage and can be used as
the basis for refining models of coastal transport. This project will train
students in the process of approaching a scientific problem that has societal
relevance, and will broaden their understanding of geoscience and its broader
roles. Undergraduate students, a high proportion of whom are from under-
represented groups, will receive intense one-on-one mentoring and training in
the field and in lab, as well as hands-on experience with a variety of field and
analytical tools. The international nature of the work, the wide range of
techniques involved, and the relevance for public planning will help prepare
these undergraduates for successful, effective careers in research and teaching.