* 1424026
* Workshop: Bilingual Morphology at the crossroads--New directions in the study of word structurMay -May 20-24, 2015, New Brunswick, NJ
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Jose Camacho, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 21,779.00

Large numbers of people in the US and around the world are bilingual. How are
words in a speaker's two languages represented and processed in their minds? Do
they treat parts of words similarly in the two languages? Does bilingualism pose
any special challenges? This NSF funded workshop brings together researchers
from multiple disciplines to discuss recent findings about how bilingual
speakers learn, process and represent the internal structure of words.
Presentations from two internationally recognized researchers and 10 selected
presenters will set the scene for a discussion about what the minds of bilingual
speakers tells us regarding the mental representation of human languages.
Participants will assess the larger social repercussions of this emerging field
for a society with increasing levels of bilingualism, specifically for
accurately diagnosing speech problems, and for the design of educational
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of bilingual morphology presents
unique insights into how the mind represents and processes complex words, how
the representation of those words interact with one another, and how they are
put together to form sentences. Researchers have proposed different possible
ways in which morphology (the inner structure of words) works. Bilingual
speakers provide a fertile testing ground for these different models, because
bilingual speaker deal with languages with potentially very different ways of
constructing words. Additionally, many studies suggest that morphology plays an
important role in explaining why people learning a second language don't always
have the same degree of success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From an applied
perspective, the study of morphology has important implications for clinical and
educational professionals. For example, many of the clinical tools developed to
assess children's speech development rely on how well they are able to parse the
internal structure of words. At the same time, normal bilingual development has
shown similar patterns to atypical monolingual patterns, leading to inadequate
over- or under-diagnosing of difficulties in language development among
bilinguals. For this reason, it is essential to establish a baseline for
bilingual children with typical acquisition of lexical morphology in order for
clinicians to be able to distinguish them from bilingual or monolingual children
with symptoms of language disorders. This is particularly important because
learners of English as a second language are at higher risk than other children
for educational under-performance, making the accurate diagnosis of language
impairments in this group essential for their educational prospects.