* 1424298
* Mesoamerican City Urbanization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Love, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,925.00

Dr. Michael Love, of California State University, Northridge, along with
colleagues and students from US and Guatemalan universities, will conduct an
archaeological investigation of early urbanism at the site of La Blanca,
Guatemala. Previous scholarship on Mesoamerican urbanism has placed its first
appearance in the Classic Period (ca AD 300- AD 900), but recent evidence
suggests that urbanism began much earlier, during the Middle Preclassic period
(ca 1000-600 BC). Urbanization is a phenomenon that brings into focus many
topics of broad interest to the social sciences and the humanities. As a
process, urbanization changed the relationships between many social and cultural
variables including demography, economy, political structures, and religious
practices. Analysis of first-generation urbanization therefore offers an
important opportunity to achieve a holistic perspective on important changes in
the human condition as well as a myriad of social issues. As one of the limited
number of cases in the world where urban centers developed independently,
Mesoamerica plays a major role in the worldwide comparative analysis of first
generation cities and urbanism. As one of Mesoamerica's first settlements of
urban scale, La Blanca is a key site in understanding first-generation cities.

Love's research will examine how daily life was altered by urbanization and how
people brought together in an early city negotiated their lives with one
another. La Blanca was established when groups from a broad hinterland came
together at a new location. This form of aggregation seems typical of early
cities throughout the world. A primary question is whether these people of
different backgrounds merged into a single new group, or whether they remained
mostly independent of one another and maintained separate identities. Love's
study will examine three different areas of the city and ask whether they were
integrated with one another through a single hierarchical system, or whether the
districts were autonomous and only loosely integrated with one another. Love and
his colleagues will examine the material remains of a number of households in
each district of La Blanca and analyze the evidence of daily life preserved in
houses, food remains, tools, and ritual items. The team will collect data on
household economic activity (such as subsistence practices, craft production),
as well as domestic ritual activity, including rituals of ancestor veneration.
Those data will then be used to determine whether economic and ritual activity
were organized primarily within each district or integrated at the level of the
city itself.