* 1424229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Housing, Family, and Economy in a Post-Socialist Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Ferry, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2015
* USD 19,451.00

The Cultural Anthropology Program supports research on the local-level effects
of global processes. This research project fits into that category through its
focus on how social and cultural change is brought about by engagement with the
global economy. The researcher asks, "What happens to local cultural and social
norms when basic human needs that used to be met through social and family
obligations are purchased on the open market instead?" The researcher focuses on
housing but in human history similar transformations have occurred in many
areas, including health care, education, and access to natural resources such as
water and land. Through a case study of a situation where the change has
happened recently and society is still adjusting, we can better understand the
complex ramifications of other changes, past and future, as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by Brandeis University
graduate student, Mengqi Wang, under the direction of Dr. Elizabeth Ferry. Wang
will undertake research in eastern China on how changes in China's housing
market, induced by greater engagement with the global economy, have affected
cultural notions of family, marriage, and gender. The opening up of the Chinese
housing market in the late 1990s was followed by years of inflation and then,
since mid-2011, deflation. This has proved a challenge for families who bought
when the market was high, often to fulfill a cultural obligation for the groom's
family to provide housing as a marital gift. The resulting crisis has produced
contested gender and economic norms that are centered on people's definitions of
the rights to housing despite the changed context of post-socialist mortgage
practices. Wang will gather data in multiple sites, including real estate
agencies, financial institutions, and households of marital housing buyers. Data
collection methods will include interviews, participant observation, and
compilation of historical cultural materials. Findings from this research will
elucidate the complex micro-level processes through which cultural and social
transformations takes place as local communities become more directly affected
by global economic forces.