* 1424016
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Insurgency, Security Sector Reform, and Local Support
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Dan Reiter, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2016
* USD 17,640.00

Can states at risk of experiencing renewed civil conflict prevent insurgent
violence through the use of different domestic security sector reforms? This
project addresses a fundamental problem in accomplishing domestic security
sector reforms and influencing civilian support for the state: too much of a
militarized security sector signals the state's ability to protect, but also the
state's ability to abuse, and too much of a demilitarized security sector
signals the state's inability to abuse, but also its inability to protect. In
order to understand civilian support for the government in the context of the
problem, the project uses a novel field experiment in Liberia to determine
whether security sector reforms that focus on protection (militarized reforms
such as arming the security sector) or those that focus on rebuilding trust
(demilitarized reforms such as including more women in the security sector)
enhance perceptions and increase local support. The project builds on previous
work with the Liberian National Police (LNP) and randomizes LNP outreach to
eighty communities in rural Liberia. Communities are to receive visits by armed
male, unarmed male, armed female, or unarmed female police officers. During the
visits and after a period of two weeks, the co-PI will measure individual
perceptions toward the LNP and government institutions and community support for
the LNP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is
associated with enhancing understanding of how reforming domestic security
forces leads to conflict prevention and state consolidation. While much
attention has been placed on the prevention of civil war recurrence and the
effects of counterinsurgency strategies on violence, little attention has been
direct to understanding how domestic security sector reforms directly enhance
civilian perceptions and increase civilian support for the government. The
current literature finds that security sector reform plays a role in preventing
civil war recurrence and that local support for the government helps
counterinsurgency efforts, but this literature does not specify which security
sector reforms help prevent insurgency nor directly links security sector reform
to civilian support. This project develops an overarching theory of security
sector reform, specifically developing hypotheses about which reforms may lead
to more or less civilian support for the government given that some reforms may
generate fear of government abuse, or fear of the government's inability to
protect. The project also analyzes the importance of gender in security studies,
an angle that is often neglected in the conflict literature. There have been no
systematic empirical studies on how gender-balancing reforms in the security
sector impact local perceptions and support. Moreover, the field experiment is
the first to randomize actual deployment of government security forces and could
serve as a model for future micro-level analysis on the impact of governmental
reforms on civilian perceptions and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
which types of domestic security sector reforms generate support for government
security forces is very important for broader policy making. Currently, the LNP
deploys groups of armed, male officers on patrols in rural counties, and
anecdotal evidence suggests that these patrols create fear of abuse in the
population. Thus, understanding which types of reforms actually mitigate fears
and enhance perceptions and support becomes critical for policymaking in post-
conflict states. More broadly, given that the United States and UN have spent
billions of dollars restructuring various security forces, it is imperative to
know which types of reforms are successful in preventing future conflict. This
project will inform policy analysts about reforms that may generate local
support and consequently help prevent the growth of insurgent groups.
Additionally, the project may help to improve gender equality in post-conflict
countries by demonstrating the potential benefits of gender balancing policies
on enhancing security. Given that the co-PI has already worked on several
projects with the LNP for over two years, and has established relationships with
members of the UN Mission to Liberia (UNMIL), the results of the project will be
disseminated throughout the UN, the LNP, and the broader Liberian public so that
more resources can be devoted to policies that improve civilian support of the
Liberian government.