* 1424100
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Medical Neutrality as a Strategy for Health Care Delivery in Conflict Zones
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Guy Shalev, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,145.00

Medical neutrality has been an influential doctrine about the noninterference of
health care during periods of armed conflict. Increasingly, scientists and
health care professionals have asked whether its principles can be used
strategically by practitioners as a method of improving health care delivery in
situations where conflict is enduring and unresolved, or in situations marked by
vast socioeconomic, cultural or political differences. This project, which
trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, scientifically grounded
fieldwork, examines how health care delivery can be improved in areas of
conflict, and among and between individuals who are socially marginalized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores how medical neutrality is used as an
ethical doctrine to deliver health care in a conflict arena. The research takes
place in Israel, and is focused on the Palestinian doctors who make up 12% of
the physicians working in Israel. The researcher asks how claims of neutrality
and expertise allow Palestinian physicians to gain legitimacy and a sense of
belonging within Israel. The project follows pilot research conducted in 2013
among Palestinian medical students, physicians, and administrators. The 12-month
product would involve ethnographic fieldwork at four sites using a range of
inductive data collection techniques, including participant observation,
interviews, clinical setting ethnography, and archival media research and
analysis. The project will make important contributions to medical anthropology.
Importantly, the project would explore how professional scientific and
technological knowledge plays a role in political and social processes, and how
such expertise can create opportunities for individuals from marginalized
populations. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology, the project would improve understandings for how to
deliver health care in an area of conflict.