* 1424481
* New Methods for the Analysis of Human Performance Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Mario Peruggia, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,981.00

This research project will develop new statistical models to facilitate the
analysis of human performance data. The improved techniques will reduce the need
for ad hoc data processing and increase the amount of data available for
analysis. The factors that influence human performance usually extend beyond
those identified as important by a researcher's restricted theoretical
framework. A person's level of education, for example, may well influence
performance of a simple task for which a theory of perception concerns only
levels of illumination and spatial location. As a result, it often is difficult
to determine why particular people fail to perform tasks as expected.
Researchers rely on ad hoc strategies to identify and remove from a data set
people who perform poorly or who seem unmotivated. Such strategies generally
have little theoretical justification and thus have the potential to degrade the
information available in the data and to introduce bias in the conclusions drawn
from the data. The models developed in this research will help ensure the
accuracy of conclusions drawn from experiments on human performance. These
models will be of interest to researchers across a range of disciplines that
care about human performance data and also may be applied to other types of data
in medicine, engineering, and finance. New software will be developed and made
available to other researchers. The project will contribute to the training of
both undergraduate and graduate students in Psychology and Statistics and help
further connections between those disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning
about the processes that determine how well people perform tasks in different
circumstances requires at least two things: first, a theoretical framework
consisting of models that can predict how the human cognitive system responds to
and interacts with the environment, and, second, accurate and robust statistical
techniques that can be used to analyze data within the context of these models.
The investigators will develop hierarchical Bayesian models that incorporate
stimulus-independent response strategies to minimize the need for data pre-
processing. The models will separate task appropriate (stimulus-dependent) from
task inappropriate ( stimulus-independent) responding in such a way that (i) no
data need to be removed, and (ii) task performance changes over time can be
examined within a coherent theoretical framework. The researchers will collect
new data from experiments that will provoke people to move from task-appropriate
to task-inappropriate performance strategies over time. This will enable the
investigators to evaluate their theories of human performance and the techniques
they will develop to analyze the data.