* 1424191
* Qualitative Data Repository 2015-2016
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Nancy McCracken, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2017
* USD 899,042.00

The Qualitative Data Repository (QDR) launched in January 2014 at Syracuse
University. QDR is the first general purpose venue in the United States for
storing and sharing digital data generated or collected through qualitative and
multi-method research in the social sciences. The repository curates, manages,
preserves, and shares digital data, and also develops and disseminates standards
and techniques for engaging in these practices. It also vigorously promotes the
effective management, sharing, and reuse of qualitative data, and engagement in
research transparency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QDR has made excellent progress,
and will continue to advance, along five dimensions: (1) governance - developing
internal management structures and policies and engaging with the broader data-
management community; (2) technical capacity - securing the hardware to house,
and developing the software to enable the deposit, indexing, search, and
download of qualitative data; (3) content - soliciting and curating qualitative
data projects for secondary analysis, to increase research transparency, and to
enhance teaching; (4) ideational frameworks - developing the intellectual
framework for, a language to talk about, techniques and practices to engage in,
and guidance to facilitate data sharing and transparency in qualitative
research; and (5) promulgation and persuasion - stimulating and participating in
debate and dialogue to generate standards for sharing qualitative data,
conducting secondary data analysis, evaluating empirical research, and teaching
with data, and encouraging and teaching people to do so.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutionalized repositories such as QDR produce multi-
faceted benefits. First, they allow shared data to be more usable, discoverable,
meaningful, citable, secure, durable, and broadly accessible, and they increase
data visibility. Second, they also reduce data-collection redundancy, allow data
to accumulate, and allow for secondary analysis, encouraging comparative study
and new research. Third, by offering a platform for data-sharing, such
repositories encourage transparent research; such research can be evaluated and
replicated, encouraging methodological rigor and facilitating the continued
development of research methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The value QDR adds on
each of these fronts is particularly important given the weak tradition of
sharing the rich and heterogeneous data that qualitative social scientists
generate, often through considerable effort. QDR is staffed by scholars with
experience curating qualitative data, and offers a broad range of guidance,
educational resources, and training focused on storing, sharing, and reusing
such data. Qualitative political scientists are comfortable sharing their data
with QDR as they perceive it to be a venue that is sympathetic to the goals and
techniques of their research tradition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QDR enhances the
data-management infrastructure in the United States, an infrastructure that
underpins both research and teaching: it allows for their integration and
thereby strengthens both. QDR has the potential to broaden the access of
scholars from around the world to a wealth of qualitative social science data.
In addition, by increasing researcher visibility, the repository encourages
intellectual exchange and the formation and growth of epistemic communities, and
serves as a platform for research networks and partnerships.