* 1424768
* Scholar's Award: A Social Scientific Study of how Stakeholders Produce Knowledge about the Cause and Treatment of Colony Collapse Disorder
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Chloe Silverman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,513.00

Colony Collapse Disorder [CCD] is the as-yet unexplained disappearance of large
numbers of honeybees from their hives over the past four years. CCD has captured
public interest, but many environmentalists and entomologists believe that it is
an early indication of an even more troubling decline in all pollinator species,
including many varieties of native bees, flies, and bats. A sustained decline in
honeybees alone would have significant consequences for commercial agriculture,
food security, and the environment, and a decline in pollinator species more
broadly would have even more impact. This project uses CCD as a case study to
refine our understanding of how different groups define, produce, and
communicate what they see as valid evidence in situations of scientific
uncertainty. The investigator will conduct a multi-sited participant ethnography
at several bee research labs, open-ended interviews with scientists, bee
keepers, and other stakeholders, and textual analysis of scientific publications
and media coverage to study this issue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes
advantage of a unique opportunity to chronicle a group of scientists as they
work on an emerging problem of societal importance. A social scientific analysis
of the evolving research communities for CCD demonstrates how existing models of
contested illnesses and studies of the affective components of scientific and
ecological knowledge can be adapted and applied to a study of agricultural
science. The proposed study investigates how knowledge about Colony Collapse
Disorder (CCD) has been and continues to be produced. It analyzes how the cause
of CCD is defined and the social and economic dimensions of proposed solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCD has the potential to become a major social and
environmental problem with wide-ranging effects. A social scientific perspective
provides insights into the different interests and values that may affect the
design and execution of research projects. The research project contributes to
scholarship in science and technology studies, sociology, and anthropology, as
well as audiences in apiculture, entomology and science policy. Research
findings will lead to broadly applicable best practices for creating successful
collaborations among natural scientists, social scientists, and members of the
public.