* 1424049
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Group Connections and Mass Partisanship
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Howard Lavine, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 21,280.00

This study evaluates a critical question about the causes of partisan
resurgence: Is this phenomenon driven by heightened ideological sophistication
or more intense partisan group-centrism? Answering this question is crucial for
understanding how partisanship affects the ability of the public to
constructively participate in democratic politics. This project develops a
survey experiment to adjudicate between competing explanations of the resurgence
in mass partisanship on a representative sample of the
electorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project's theory
suggests that polarization has made partisanship more capable of providing core
psychological benefits, such as uncertainty reduction, to group members. An
implication of this theory is that strong psychological motivations to identify
with social groups should increase partisan intensity. The study will directly
evaluate competing arguments about the underpinnings (psychological or
ideological) of partisan resurgence. It advances the polarization literature by
specifying the psychological underpinnings of heightened partisan intensity. The
project also offers a new perspective on the effect of personality on political
evaluations. By evaluating the personality basis of partisanship and partisan
strength, this project extends research on personality and politics in a new and
fruitful direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study addresses
crucial questions about the quality of democratic citizenship and whether
polarization contributes to or undermines the quality of political decision-
making. By evaluating the causes of the public's heightened ties to parties,
this study will assess how actions on policies are driven by representational
concerns.