* 1424312
* Signals of Relative Sea Level perturbations: Defining the divide between signal shredding versus preservation in the stratigraphic record.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Kyle Straub, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2019
* USD 166,516.00

The tug of relative sea level change influences the evolution of coastal
environments, including land growth or loss and changing river patterns in
deltaic settings. Relative sea-level change also influences the architecture of
sediments that form continental margin stratigraphy. These sedimentary deposits
frequently contain energy and water reserves and can serve as hosts for carbon
capture and storage. Improved methods are needed for interpreting and predicting
stratigraphic patterns in order to (i) manage these resources and (ii) invert
the stratigraphic record for paleo-climatic records, which could inform
predictions of future Earth system response to climate change. Recent
theoretical work suggests that internally generated processes in sediment
transport systems have the capacity to destroy, or "shred", external
environmental signals prior to locking them into the stratigraphic record.
Through a combination of experiments and analysis of field data, the team will
determine the necessary rates and magnitudes of relative sea level cycles for
them to be recorded in stratigraphy. This work will advance the ability to
recover meaningful data about past climate change from coastal stratigraphic
datasets and generate predictive models for coastal response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent theoretical work suggests that autogenic
processes in sediment transport systems have the capacity to shred signals of
environmental and tectonic perturbations prior to transfer to the stratigraphic
record. Many argue that changes in Relative Sea Level (RSL) represent the most
important boundary condition affecting continental margin transport systems.
However, we still lack quantitative theory to explain the necessary properties
of RSL cycles in order to store them in stratigraphy, thus limiting the
usefulness of stratigraphy for defining paleo-environments. Results from
previous experiments suggest that RSL cycles with amplitudes less than one
channel depth, and of periodicities less than the amount of time necessary to
deposit one channel depth of stratigraphy over a delta-top, are susceptible to
signal shredding. The team will test this hypothesis using existing data sets
and new laboratory experiments. Quantitative theory and predictions produced
from this work will be benchmarked against stratigraphy from the Late Miocene to
Quaternary stratigraphy of the Mississippi Delta.