* 1424875
* Analyses of Overly Dispersed Covariance within Latent Structures and Applications in Psychological and Behavioral Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Edward Ip, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 279,076.00

This research project will investigate models for covariation of multiple
variables over time and apply the various models to analyze data from the social
and behavioral sciences. Understanding covariation often is a first step in the
study of causation and possible mechanisms that lead to specific outcomes. The
study of covariation over time may reveal interesting and important patterns
within a system of interconnecting variables. In economics and finance, for
example, studying the change in patterns of covariation of market data has
important implications for asset management and portfolio diversification.
Stock-market indexes across the world often are correlated, but the correlations
during bear markets and crisis periods tend to be much higher than during normal
times. Covariation in cognitive domains, such as memory, reasoning, and speed of
processing information may be used to assess early cognitive impairment. For
example, divergence in performance across domains within the overall trend of
general cognitive decline due to age could indicate problems. The project will
develop tools for the research community to facilitate the interpretation of
covariation in data. The project also will train graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers.

This project will examine different approaches for studying overly dispersed
covariation in the context of modeling with latent structures. Overly dispersed
covariation refers to sources of variation that drive the association between
variables but are not captured by regular latent structures. The project will
use state-of-the-art tools from statistics and machine learning to examine data
from the social and behavioral sciences. A unique intellectual contribution of
the project will be the adaptation of these toolsets to social and behavioral
science data that often emphasize multiple outcome variables rather than
multiple predictor variables as in the case of statistics and machine learning.
The project will be organized by several exemplary applications including (1)
response consistency in attitudinal survey, (2) patterns of cognitive
impairment, (3) dynamics of change in forming friendship among children, and (4)
cognitively demanding daily activities in older adults. The applications are
broad in their respective content. While they illustrate different and specific
strategies for handling overly dispersed covariation, they serve as prototypical
examples for further development of similar applications in other fields of
study.