* 1424058
* The Emergence of Uncertainty Monitoring from Two to Three Years of  Age
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Simona Ghetti, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Individuals' ability to recognize when they know something, when they do not,
and when they are unsure is critical for everyday functioning. To operate
effectively in day to day activities, individuals must realize when they need to
seek out additional information in order to avoid acting on faulty or
insufficient information. An important question is how young children develop
the ability to assess their own knowledge and how they learn to recognize and
act on their own uncertainty. This project investigates the emergence of this
ability in 2- to 3-year-old children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research
indicates that children as young as three years of age recognize when they are
likely to be wrong in answering a question. They avoid answering questions to
which they do not know the answer, express low confidence in their responses,
and request further information. Even toddlers exhibit behaviors that suggest
they are tracking their own knowledge states, hesitating when their knowledge is
limited and looking confident when they have relevant information. However, it
is not clear if these indicators reliably reflect the accuracy of toddlers'
knowledge, and whether they contribute to later emerging abilities to introspect
on how well they know. In this project, Dr. Simona Ghetti will address this
question, investigating the developmental emergence of these abilities. The
study investigates the hypothesis that toddlers' behaviors (e.g., hesitation)
and their rudimentary awareness of their states of ignorance (e.g., captured by
such statements as 'I don't know') are developmental precursors of the ability
to overtly introspect on uncertainty. Using a longitudinal design, the
investigator will explore how these precursor behaviors at age 2 relate to
measures of the ability to introspect on uncertainty at age
3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new insight into the
emergence of introspection, which will be beneficial in educational settings.
Findings from the proposed research may help identify early cues to uncertainty
that could signal to educators the need to provide additional information, and
might promote the development of age-specific procedures to enhance young
children's ability to monitor their own knowledge states.