* 1424728
* Processes controlling the shape and evolution of sandy spits along coastlines
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Andrew Ashton, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2020
* USD 264,492.00

Coastal regions are often highly developed, and sustained rates of change of the
position of the shoreline can be on the order of meters per year, substantially
faster than many other landscape processes that affect human development and
infrastructure. Despite a long history of the study of the historic and geologic
evolution of these dynamic landforms, it is still not possible to arrive at
quantitative prediction of shoreline change. This project will take a major step
forward by investigating the controls on the growth and shape of the coastal
feature known as a sand spit. These curved accumulations of sand are common
features of many coastlines. This project will focus on outer Cape Cod, one of
the most recognizable of these features, to conduct field measurements and
develop a sophisticated numerical model that documents the evolution of this
sand spit. This project will interact directly with the population and decision-
makers affected by coastal change by developing a short course and informational
materials about coastal processes on Cape Cod and similar
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate how waves affect
spit evolution and the sensitivity of spit-headland systems to wave climate
changes over both long (millennial) and short (decadal) temporal scales.
Quantifying these constraints over historic and geologic time intervals will
facilitate a stronger understanding of the evolution of the Cape Cod and Islands
region that is applicable to coastal settings over a wide area. The project will
use numerical modeling, geologic investigations, and analysis of historic change
to 1) identify the controls on spit shape and recurving, 2) investigate how wave
climate affects spit development and shoreline evolution, 3) determine patterns
of shoreline change in the Cape Cod region over historic (10-100 years), and 4)
reconstruct the development of Cape Cod spits over longer (100 - &gt;1000 years)
periods.