* 1424039
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science: The Role of Identity, Rules, and Values in Public Goods and Accountability
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Nicholas Sambanis, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 17,640.00

Public accountability is a critical component of democracy, but how do citizens
hold officials accountable? For example, citizens may seek to dismiss (or vote
against) an official who abuses his power, but will they be as willing to do so
after hearing the justifications that politicians often make? Will their
response be different if they share a political identity with the authority -
party membership, race, or ethnicity? Which has the greatest impact? This study
investigates the effect of an authority's political identity, performance, and
persuasion on public accountability in South Africa. There is evidence that each
of these factors affects how citizens view politicians and thus their
willingness to hold them accountable. This study will extend that research by
using a novel experimental design that can test not only how each factor
operates individually, but also how they interact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the study is connected to its design: assignment of
participants to different "treatment" groups is random. Because assignment to
the specific identity, performance, and persuasion of the authority is random,
differences in how participants respond can be confidently attributed to the
treatment. Participants will be recruited from public spaces near Johannesburg,
South Africa. South Africa was chosen because the research questions are
especially important for new democracies. In particular, the ruling African
National Congress (ANC), which liberated South Africa from apartheid, has come
under increasing scrutiny for abuses of power. And yet to date the ANC appears
to have paid only a limited political price - in May 2014 the party won national
elections with more than 60% of the vote for the fifth consecutive time since
1994. This study examines why this is the case. It may be because abuses are
unimportant to voters relative to other ANC achievements. It may be because
voters identify so strongly with the party that they are willing to condone
abuses. Or, it may be because the ANC is still able to appeal to values of
freedom and equality that they demonstrated in the liberation struggle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are associated with the implications
for development, democracy, and policy. The ANC delivered democracy to South
Africa, but its dominance makes it hard for checks and balances to operate. This
puts an added burden on the public to hold officials to account. The study
provides insights into the conditions under which they are likely to bear that
burden well. It also contributes to a broader theory and planned research agenda
about the role of public accountability in institutional development of any
democracy: the research is replicable in different national and cultural
contexts. With a theory of public accountability built on sound micro-
foundations, better strategies can be developed to strengthen it.