* 1424896
* Structural Monitoring of Rock Arches
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Thorne, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2019
* USD 365,394.00

Rock arches are dynamic natural structures that bend, sag, sway and shake in
response to a variety of environmental forcings. Visitors to these features are
confronted with their fragile nature, however few appreciate the dynamic life of
what are often perceived as stoic geological structures. The investigators will
monitor the ambient resonance of a number of prominent rock arches, as well as
daily and seasonal deformation at select sites. Their goal is to understand how
arches respond to changes in their environment (e.g. thermal stresses,
rainfall), and ultimately be able to discern subtle changes in internal strength
over time. Key to their approach is measuring how arches vibrate. Rock arches
are relatively simple mechanical structures with measurable resonant frequencies
and mode shapes. This project measures resonant frequencies using broadband
seismometers. The researchers then generate 3D models of each arch from the
analyzed field measurements and input these into a numerical simulation to
predict the resonant mode shapes and frequencies, and calibrate to match field
data. This multidisciplinary project combines concepts from the fields of
structural dynamics, seismology, rock mechanics, and geomorphology, with the
goal of establishing a new method to quantitatively evaluate changes in the
dynamics and structural performance of rock arches. The research will lead to
new understanding of the life-cycle of natural arches, their response to
different external loads, and failure processes leading to their eventual
collapse. Our project also provides an excellent opportunity for public
engagement and science education. In the long-term, the envisioned outcomes may
lead to new methodology for assessment of natural hazards and visitor
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rock arches are spectacular natural landmarks that
connect visitors with the dynamics and beauty of earth surface processes.
Delicate Arch, for example, is an icon of the western United States and is as
recognizable as many national monuments. However, there is currently no
methodology in place to evaluate the structural health and integrity of these
natural landmarks as they change through time or in the wake of a damaging event
such as a strong storm or earthquake. Unlike engineered structures, the internal
composition and strength of critical elements in natural rock features cannot be
known a priori. The only means available to evaluate structural damage requires
understanding the structure's current behavior and response to external loads,
and being able to sense relative changes in performance. We propose new
methodology to evaluate the dynamic behavior of natural rock arches, estimate
fundamental mechanical properties, generate data for short- and long-term
relative change monitoring, and ultimately provide a means to distinguish
elastic and inelastic behavior and evaluate changing structural health. The
project's core technique utilizes ambient vibration monitoring (i.e., measuring
the resonant frequencies of an arch under weak background excitation and
detecting changes through time that may be either progressive or punctuated in
nature). The concept used merges three scientific disciplines: structural
dynamics, seismology, and rock mechanics, building on established concepts from
the field of structural health monitoring. Changes in behavior will be assessed
by measuring the spectral characteristics of ambient vibrations and through
time-dependent modal analysis. By sensing how an arch vibrates we can interpret
its behavior and response to external loading, and detect reversible or
irreversible changes in mechanical parameters. Resonant frequency shifts will be
related to deformation and environmental measurements to assess driving forces
and sensitivity of the monitored arches to external perturbations. The
measurements are non-invasive and non-destructive, and all instruments are
selected to be mobile with a small footprint. The goal is to establish a new
method to evaluate the long-term structural integrity of natural rock arches,
some of which are internationally recognized landmarks.