* 1424676
* Assessing the role of methanogens in driving earth oxygenation using Ni isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Laura Wasylenki, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2019
* USD 174,997.00

The first substantial and long-lasting accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere
and surface waters of the oceans ~2.4 billion years ago was arguably one of the
three most important turning points in the history of life, but exactly why and
how this transformation took place remains poorly understood. One phenomenon
that likely drove or at least stabilized the transition to a more oxidizing
state was collapse of methanogens, a dominant form of life throughout much of
the Archean Eon that sustained global anoxia through production of abundant
methane. The objective of this project is to test the recent hypothesis of
Konhauser et al. (2009; Nature 458, 750), who attributed the decline of
methanogens to a shortage of nickel, an essential trace nutrient for these
organisms. These authors argued that biogenic methane production might have
waned well before the rise of oxygen, because oceanic Ni concentrations
decreased substantially between 2.7 and 2.5 Ga. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent
discovery that modern methanogens strongly fractionate stable isotopes of Ni
suggests that Ni limitation of methanogens may have left an isotopic fingerprint
in the sedimentary record. The aim of this study is to analyze Ni isotope
compositions of the same samples in which Konhauser et al. documented the Ni
concentration decline, to see if an isotopic shift reflecting the onset of Ni
limitation of methanogens is evident. Samples will be extracted from the
hematite-rich layers of banded iron formations by microdrill, and isotopic
compositions will be measured by MC-ICP-MS. Investigator will focus in
particular on relationships between Ni concentrations and Ni isotopes for
samples with ages between 2.8 and 2.3 billion years, the interval over which
methanogens may or may not have assimilated increasingly large proportions of
available dissolved Ni in seawater.