* 1424250
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Optimizing Resource Allocation Decisions in Clinical Trials
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* David Veenstra, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 12/31/2014
* USD 7,255.00

Fewer than half of all medical interventions in use today are supported by
clinical evidence. Despite allocating more than $11 billion each year to support
clinical research, the federal government's funding of medical research lacks a
coordinated, quantitative system for allocating resources to efficiently address
these important knowledge gaps. This research will directly address whether or
not promising advances in value-of-information analyses and risk prediction can
be used to improve decision-making within a publicly funded cancer clinical
trials co-operative group. This project will develop, test, and validate
processes for rapidly estimating the expected risk and return for clinical
trials proposals, and using these estimates explore how a portfolio optimization
framework could improve allocations of limited public resources.

In terms of broader impacts, this research will provide new insights into
factors associated with risk and return of publicly funded clinical trials'
information that can directly contribute to the improved design of clinical
research and policies that advance the efficient and systematic allocation of
limited research funds. Furthermore, the findings from this work will advance
efforts to develop a coordinated system to prioritize clinical research, a
critical step to direct limited public funds in ways that are likely to have the
greatest impact on public health.