* 1425004
* Metal(loid) Sequestration by Natural Bacterial Sulfate Reduction and Field-Scale Biostimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* James Saunders, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 344,348.00

1425004&lt;br/&gt;Saunders&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal(loid) Sequestration by
Natural Bacterial Sulfate Reduction and Field-Scale
Biostimulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arsenic is a common metal contaminant found
in groundwater from both natural and anthropogenic sources. In particular,
natural arsenic contamination of groundwater poses a major human health threat
in many parts of the world. Arsenic in groundwater may be removed or sequestered
by adsorption or co-precipitation on sulfide bio-minerals if they form naturally
or can be ?engineered? to precipitate. The proposed research includes
educational and research activities for undergraduate and graduate students. The
research will expose students from an EPSCoR state to field, laboratory, and
modeling research on a significant environmental health problem. The results
will be of great interest to the broad fields of mineralogy/geochemistry,
hydrology, geomicrobiology, bioremediation, and environmental health. The
results will have significant implications for mitigation of arsenic problems at
both natural and industrial sites. The results will provide critical information
to industry as they plan and implement cost-effective remediation strategy for
the large number of arsenic (and other metals) contaminated industrial and
military sites. Moreover, because natural As-contamination is a pressing problem
worldwide, the optimized cost-effective bioremediation technology we develop in
US may benefit many arsenic-affected developing countries (Bangladesh, Vietnam,
Cambodia, India, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this
study is to assess how bacterial activity, biomineralization, and geochemical
sorption work together to remove arsenic from groundwater at the field scale. To
achieve the research goal the research team will conduct long-term field
injection experiments at an industrial site amended by labile water-soluble
organic carbon and electronic acceptors; and, characterize contaminant
assimilative capacity of sulfide biominerals formed in a natural aquifer
setting. The team will integrate field experiments with lab-based studies and
geochemical modeling to assess the key microbial activities and biogeochemical
reactions that control arsenic mobility and groundwater geochemistry under
changing redox conditions. This research offers an unparalleled opportunity to
monitor the natural attenuation processes and evaluate a potential remediation
tool. To address critical gaps in the understanding of key biogeochemical
processes of arsenic sequestration in natural aquifers, the proposed study will
center around three questions: 1) What is the main mechanism causing arsenic to
be removed? 2) Can the proposed biostimulation technology be optimized so that
the Fe-sulfide biominerals continue to sequester arsenic by sorption after
bacterial metabolism ceases? 3) How does the natural microbial community
structure change in response to biostimulation in the field? &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will characterize sorption and attenuation (both biotic and
abiotic) of metal contaminants, will develop a greater understanding of the
effect of chemical and biological processes and their associated rates on
contaminant behavior, will develop tools to estimate the natural contaminant
assimilative capacity of natural aquifers, and also will develop geochemical
methods to determine whether natural attenuation processes are still occurring
after biostimulation (and will likely to continue into the future).