* 1425679
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Cultural Effects of Remaking Urban Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Catherine Fennell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2016
* USD 7,396.00

The Cultural Anthropology Program supports research on the socio-cultural
drivers and consequences of changing patterns and processes of urbanization.
Urban blight, which frequently follows deindustrialization, is one such process.
Some United States cities, such as those in the rust belt, have experienced
urban blight as a follow-up to factory closings, unemployment, and population
decline. Similar problems are being faced by post-industrial cities elsewhere in
the world, too. Thus the world can be our laboratory for evaluating potential
solutions to the problems posed by urban decay.

Germany's approach to its post-industrial cities is particularly interesting,
possibly even unique among Western nations. Their plans combine new nationwide
energy policies with residential consolidation, demolition, and renewal in
blighted cities. To understand the new programs and how they affect residents,
Columbia University doctoral student Samantha M. Fox, advised by Dr. Catherine
Fennell, will undertake research in one such city, Eisenhüttenstadt, located
near the border between eastern Germany and Poland. This is an especially apt
site because this city was founded in 1950 as a worker's utopia and steel
manufacturing hub. Today, the city's population is much reduced and its obsolete
urban infrastructure is being transformed and pushed towards green energy. The
researcher will collect data with multiple social science research methods
including archival research in city and national archives, interviews and focus
groups with residents and planners, attendance at meetings in planned
neighborhoods, and participant observation in people's daily lives. The
researcher will focus on how changes in infrastructure and the built environment
affect residents' lives and their imaginations of future possibilities, and how
those understandings may or may not diverge from what planners past and present
intended.