* 1425067
* Investigating the effects of sediment supply, width variation, and unsteady flow on riffle-pool dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Peter Nelson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2018
* USD 279,000.00

Many gravel-bedded rivers feature quasi-regular alternations of deep and shallow
zones known as riffle-pool sequences, which, in straight sections of the river,
are often influenced by variations in channel width. These zones provide an
important diversity of habitats, and the reestablishment of riffle-pool
sequences can be a desired outcome of river restoration projects. How pool-
riffle sequences persist is a century-old question in geomorphology that is
still not fully resolved, and there is currently a lack of field-based,
theoretical, or experimental studies that explore the relationship between
unsteady flow, sediment supply, sorting, and riffle-pool morphology. This study
aims to fill this gap through numerical modeling, flume experiments, and field
observations. The project will train a graduate student, engage several
undergraduate students in supervised independent research projects, and
incorporate activities into undergraduate and graduate classes in river
mechanics and sediment transport. Improvements made to the computer model will
be incorporated into freely-available software package so that findings from
this study can be applied to other settings for a wide range of scientific
questions.

A two-dimensional morphodynamic model will be used to explore how river channel
width variations, hydrograph shapes, and changes in sediment supply influence
equilibrium patterns of topography and bed-surface sorting. Model results will
guide mobile-bed, mixed-grain-size experiments conducted in a variable-width
flume. Experimental runs under constant discharge and repeat hydrographs will
provide insight on the effects of unsteady flow on riffle-pool dynamics, and
experimental runs with decreased and increased sediment supply will investigate
how riffles and pools might be affected by dam installation or dam removal. The
laboratory-scale simulations and experiments will be complemented with data
collected from a riffle-pool sequence on the Elwha River, Washington, USA, where
an ongoing dam removal project has created a natural experiment in which the
river is subject to a greatly increased sediment supply.