* 1425530
* Collaborative Research:  An Experimental Determination of the Activity of H2O in Natural Melts at Undersaturated Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Ghiorso, OFM Research
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 46,068.00

One of the most influential chemical components found in magmatic systems on
Earth is H2O (water). It affects both the physical and chemical behavior of
magmas by changing their density, viscosity, and the minerals that crystallize
from them during cooling. Due to its large change in volume as magmas erupt, H2O
also strongly influences how explosive and hazardous a volcano may be. It also
plays a large role in the formation of magma-related ore deposits by interacting
with other important ore-forming elements such as S, Cl, and F. Despite its
critical role, the chemical behavior of H2O in magmas at concentrations below
saturation (i.e. where H2O is dissolved in the silicate melt portion of the
magma, but no fluid/vapor phase is present), or where a fluid/vapor phase is
present but not composed of pure H2O (i.e. is mixed with another volatile
component such as CO2), is relatively unconstrained by laboratory experiments.
This knowledge deficit creates a significant gap in the current understanding of
magmatic behavior, and hampers the modeling of important physical
characteristics such as magma density and viscosity, as well as an understanding
of the overall chemical evolution of a magma body. The experimental work of this
project will address this need by directly measuring the chemical activity of
H2O in magmas at these conditions. This study includes support for one
undergraduate student. The researchers also plan to share splits of the
calibration&lt;br/&gt;glasses developed as part of this project with the
National Rock and Ore Collection at the Smithsonian. From there, they will be
made available for loan to the international research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental measurement of the chemical activity of
H2O in magmas at undersaturated conditions will be accomplished by synthesizing
hydrous melts from natural rock compositions at high pressure and temperature.
These melts will equilibrate at P-T-XH2O conditions above their liquidus using a
double capsule method with a known oxygen fugacity buffer in the outer capsule.
After coming to equilibrium, the melts will be rapidly quenched to a glass. By
measuring the oxidation state of iron in the resulting glass using both X-ray
Absorption Near Edge Structure spectroscopy (XANES) and wet chemistry, the
oxygen fugacity of the melt will be known, and the activity of H2O in the melt
can be calculated from the oxygen fugacity difference between melt and the
experimental oxygen buffer. By varying the initial concentration of H2O added to
the melt (and pressure and temperature), the activity-concentration relations
for a given magma composition will be determined. This data will then be used to
develop descriptive thermodynamic equations, which in turn will be used to
improve existing comprehensive phase equilibria models (i.e. MELTS) at
H2O-undersaturated conditions.