* 1425893
* Collaborative Research:  Catalyzing Early Career Partnerships to Promote Discipline-Based Education Research in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* John Taber, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2016
* USD 73,801.00

This award will support a 2-day workshop for 40 participants to catalyze
relationships between early career disciplinary researchers in the earth,
atmospheric, ocean, and polar sciences and discipline-based education
researchers (DBERs) in the geosciences. These relationships are critical for two
reasons: (1) to address the foundational research needed on how people learn
geoscience content and develop into expert geoscientists and (2) to facilitate
early career geoscientists in enhancing the broader impacts of their research.
The workshop will be convened to grow mutually beneficial research
collaborations amongst early career investigators that will build upon the
extant literature. This workshop will promote networking amongst geoscience
investigators and DBERs to broaden perspectives, develop connections, and
nurture a community of future leaders for the geoscience community. The
participants at this workshop will establish professional relationships that are
likely to inform research and educational practices for the community at large.
Moreover, it is expected that through these interactions the teaching practices
of both groups would be better informed and training of future geoscientists
will be well informed by research results. The workshop will take place in the
Washington DC area in August 2014.