* 1425324
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Temporal Framing Effects on Decisions about Income Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jeffrey Niederdeppe, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/2015
* USD 9,750.00

This research focuses on messages addressing the growing income inequality in
America. Economists and policy advocates commonly describe income inequality as
something that has already occurred (i.e., in the past, the rich got richer)
when monitoring growing income inequality and arguing for reform. In order to
emphasize the severity of this phenomenon, economists and policy advocates also
often emphasize how income inequality has occurred over an extended period of
time (i.e., in the long-term, the rich have gotten richer for the past three
decades ). On its face, highlighting past instances of seeming exploitation that
unfolded over a long period of time intuitively appears to be more persuasive.
However, recent work in the psychology of human judgment and decision-making
hints otherwise; that framing income inequality in terms of its future
consequences (the rich will get richer) and rapid changes (in a few short years)
holds greater potential to increase concern and support for policies and actions
to address it. This project systematically tests how alternate temporal frames
to communicate income inequality, including temporal direction and temporal
duration, influence judgments and decisions about whether or not to support
efforts to reduce income inequality. In two randomized experiments using a
general population sample of U.S. adults we will compare the impact of messages
projecting future income inequality rather than documenting the past (temporal
direction), and those that describe the phenomenon as occurring quickly (short-
term) or over an extended period of time (long-term), in shaping support for
redistributive policies aimed to reduce income inequality. We further examine a
variety of potential cognitive and affective mechanisms responsible for these
hypothesized effects.

In two randomized experiments using a general population sample of U.S. adults,
we will examine the role of temporal frames in human judgment and decision-
making with respect to a timely social issue of income inequality. This research
first seeks to better understand how considering retrospectively-framed versus
prospectively-framed income inequality brings about disparate judgments on the
controllability of the situation, negative emotional response, and fairness
judgments, thereby drawing differential support for social policy. This research
also examines how income inequality framed in a shorter (slow) vs. longer (fast)
duration influences policy support via causal attribution of affluence (wealth).
The research addresses theoretical and empirical gaps in our understanding of
temporal framing while extending previously-reported framing effects in policy
support. It contributes to the literature on income inequality by examining a
contextual influence and specifically the process and effects of temporal
framing of income inequality. Theoretically, it will illuminate the mechanisms
of temporal framing effects on social judgments and decisions by examining the
relevant cognitive and affective psychological mechanisms.