* 1425256
* US-Mexico Planning Visits and Pilot Project on the Social-Ecology of Leptospirosis in an Urban-Rural Gradient
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Claudia Munoz-Zanzi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 03/31/2016
* USD 74,999.00

Leptospirosis, an infection of importance for animal and public health, is
caused by Leptospira bacteria that can be transmitted from animals to humans. It
is responsible for reportedly one million human cases worldwide each year and,
an undetermined, but potentially high deleterious impact on animal productivity.
Environmental factors, poor living conditions, and occupations leading to
contact with animals are among the determinants of infection. The proposed
project will bring together investigators from the U.S. and Mexico to identify
critical research questions on the combined influence of social, cultural, and
ecological factors on Leptospira transmission and to develop follow-on
innovative research investigations. The project and new collaborations will also
represent the initial step of a larger, coordinated regional effort on
leptospirosis research in Central America. Broader impacts include cross-
training of U.S. and Mexican researchers, training opportunities for U.S.
students, and assisting local community leaders and public/animal health
authorities with disease control efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms
involved in the transmission of leptospirosis and the ecological and
sociological factors that affect the likelihood of human and animal infection
are poorly understood. A major factor is the lack of truly integrated and multi-
disciplinary research. In Mexico, as in many other developing countries,
leptospirosis is an under-studied disease. The main objectives of this project
are to: 1) formally bring together a new multi-disciplinary team of U.S. and
Mexican experts in the areas of epidemiology, ecology, mathematical modeling,
environmental risk assessment, program assessment, and anthropology 2) generate
follow-on research based on the evaluation of existing data and the main gaps
and needs in the current knowledge of leptospirosis drivers and impact; and 3)
summarize the status of leptospirosis in people, animals, and the environment,
as well as social, demographic and ecological conditions, in the study areas of
south-east Mexico city and Yucatan. The objectives will be accomplished through
a series of visits by the U.S. researchers and students to plan, coordinate, and
execute the project. This initial project will produce novel information on
leptospirosis in Mexico and prepare the research team for further investigations
on the ecological and sociological elements that influence human and animal
infection and in a rural-urban gradient.