* 1425337
* CHS: Small: Non-visual Access to Graphical Information Using a Vibro-Audio Display
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Nicholas Giudice, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 530,573.00

Vision impairment is estimated by the World Health Organization as effecting 12
million people in the United States and as many as 285 million people worldwide,
and these numbers are projected to double by 2030 due to the aging of our
population. Lack of access to non-textual material such as graphs and maps is a
major impediment for the blind, because the ability to apprehend and accurately
interpret such information is critical for success in the classroom and in the
workplace, as well as for independent travel. The inability to exploit this
information helps explain why only about 11% of blind or low-vision persons have
a bachelor's degree, why only 25% of blind people are employed, and why almost
70% of blind individuals do not navigate independently outside of their home. A
major step toward improving these numbers, as well as the overall quality of
life for members of the blind and low-vision community, would be to solve the
longstanding challenge of affording low-cost and effective access to key
graphical material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's goal in this project is to
develop and evaluate a highly intuitive tool for doing just that. To this end,
he will explore a multimodal combination of vibro-tactile, audio, and
kinesthetic cues that can be generated by modern touchscreen tablets (especially
smartphones), to convey useful visual information in real-time. Benefits of this
approach include portability, affordability, and flexibility of use for multiple
critical and common applications such as those enumerated above. The PI argues
that considering these design factors from the outset, in conjunction with
principled empirical investigations to evaluate and enhance information
perceptibility interleaved with frequent prototype testing and iterative
refinement, with tight involvement of members of the target population in all
phases of the research, will ensure that project outcomes significantly reduce
the graphical information gap between blind persons and their sighted peers. The
research will make important contributions to our understanding of how blind and
low-vision individuals process non-visual information, which is essential for
rendering perceptually salient multimodal graphics, and will also help establish
best practices both for rendering these graphics using a vibro-audio interface
implemented on touchscreen enabled devices, as well as for similar future
specialized interface development efforts.