* 1425141
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Change, Moral Decision-Making, and Resource Allocation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Norbert Ross, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2015
* USD 25,011.00

Increasingly, local communities are challenged by the need to manage scarce
natural resources and ecosystem services for the common good. Social scientists
have found that when management authority remains at the local level, it is
often less expensive and more effective than policies established from the top
down. However, as communities become larger and technologies become more
complicated, local management may be replaced by programs and policies emanating
from higher levels. This raises the question of what it is that makes local
control successful. With the guidance of Dr. Norbert O. Ross, Vanderbilt
University doctoral student, Werner Hertzog, will undertake research to answer
this question. Findings will contribute to our theoretical understanding of the
relationship between culture, economic behavior, and institutions. This, in
turn, can help government and private organizations design resource management
systems that build on existing ones, saving money and preserving local
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in a Tzotzil-Maya
municipality of southern Mexico. This site was chosen because the region has
undergone drastic changes over the past five decades. Furthermore, modernization
has affected Tzotzil villages unevenly, which allows investigators to compare
communities differing in degree of access to markets and modern infrastructure
within a single ecological setting and ethno-linguistic group. Pilot studies
have revealed systematic differences between more traditional (rural) and more
modern (urban) Tzotzil villages with respect to notions of fairness regulating
resource allocation. These data suggest that modernization in these communities
is tied to the emergence of new cultural models of justice and society, findings
which are in line with results from related research documenting the cognitive
effects of social change within the area. Therefore, the researcher will explore
the dynamics and effects of cultural models and moral values in regulating
economic and adaptive systems in cognition, social organization, and behavior.
He will use a mixed methods approach combining: (1) detailed observational
methods to document the processes through which communities and households make
resource allocation decisions; and (2) economic and behavioral experiments to
index moral preferences in how people solve hypothetical problems of resource
allocation. By focusing on social change the research contributes to our
understanding of how modernization affects traditional systems of knowledge and
of how culture and moral notions affect resource management practices.