* 1425491
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Thermal History of Crustal Magma Storage Through Crystal Records and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2018
* USD 218,292.00

The processes involved in formation and storage of magma within the Earth's
upper crust are of fundamental importance to understanding volcanoes and
volcanic hazards. Previous NSF-supported research by two of the PIs showed that
at Mount Hood, Oregon, only a small fraction (most likely less than 1%) of the
total time that magma is stored underground is spent at high enough temperatures
that would allow magma to be easily mobilized and erupted. Partial data sets for
other volcanoes suggest that these conditions are widespread, but this remains
to be tested. This new project will address the questions of whether magmas in
general are subject to similar storage conditions as those seen at Mount Hood,
and what are the fundamental controls on the processes of magma storage
underneath volcanoes. The project will address these questions using geochemical
measurements of crystals that grew beneath the surface and will provide
information on the duration and temperature of magma storage. These results will
be combined with advanced computer models of magma chambers to explore the
interplay of magma addition, heat loss and changes in magma composition. In
addition to contributions to the science of volcanology and geochemistry, the
work will have impacts in understanding volcanic hazards - in particular, the
percentage of time that different magma bodies spend in an eruptible state (and,
critically, the processes that control that percentage of time) will provide
insight into the hazard represented by different volcanoes and will also provide
a better context to interpret the results of seismic imaging or other remote-
sensing applications. This project will contribute to training the next-
generation STEM workforce by providing support for a postdoctoral researcher and
three graduate students, one at each institution. At OSU and at UCD
undergraduates will also take part in the research.

This project will integrate observational data with numerical modeling for
selected volcanic systems, to address the broader question: "What are the
thermal and physical conditions of magma storage in the Earth's crust, and what
are the primary controls on those conditions?" This project will build on our
results for Mount Hood and on existing partial data sets by exploring two high-
priority specific questions that pertain to the maturation of magmatic systems:
1) What is the role of volume of the shallow reservoir? How do magma storage
conditions vary over erupted volumes of <1 to >10 km3? and 2) What is the role
of composition? Is there a difference between the thermal history of magma
storage in dacitic and rhyolitic systems? The results of this project will
provide some of the first observational data on the thermal histories of magma
storage, and the numerical modeling will allow us to put these results into a
generalizable thermodynamic framework. These results will provide a critical,
observation-based understanding of the physical conditions of magma storage,
which in turn will provide a better understanding of magma reservoir processes.
Ultimately we will build a framework in which to understand various aspects of
crystal records such as the interpretation of mineral thermobarometry, textural
information, and time scales captured by mineral zonation. The results of this
project will have broad implications within the field of igneous
petrology/geochemistry by providing a conceptual framework for the processes
that operate within magma reservoirs - and crucially, the time scales relevant
to the different processes.