* 1425485
* EAGER: The NSF Role in the Development of the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Douglas Van Houweling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds research on the development of the Internet from science to
technology to commercialization. The Internet is frequently cited as an
outstanding example of successful technology transfer from the research
community to the worldwide marketplace, but relatively little research has been
done on the actual process through which that translation occurred. This
research will focus on the period from 1980 until 1996 during which a
partnership among universities, industry and the Federal government supported
projects such as CSNET and NSFNET that laid the foundation for the global
Internet. As a result, this research will augment our knowledge regarding the
conditions under which information technology innovation can successfully be
transferred to the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the early development of
Internet protocols and their implementation in the ARPANET has been treated
exhaustively in the literature, the further development and broad adoption of
Internet technology and its transition to commercial reality is not well
understood. Starting with the state of Internet technology in 1980 and moving
through the CSNET, BITNET and NSFNET projects, the investigators study the key
developments that led to the establishment of the first commercial Internet
providers in the 1990s. The work will be based primarily on original sources
including a large number of interviews with the key participants and documents
from the period. Both investigators, Douglas Van Houweling and Lawrence
Landweber, played leadership roles and have the contacts and background to
deliver a full account of the key deliberations and decisions over this sixteen-
year period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The development and
adoption of Internet technology is one of the most significant events in our
history. While scholars have analyzed the technology of the Internet and the
story of its invention, very little work has been devoted to the key role played
by the partnership among universities, corporations and the Federal government
in supporting the development required to scale that technology and demonstrate
its potential to serve a national, then global, community. Equally important,
little study has been devoted to the translation of the Internet into commercial
success. Further, there has been scant coverage of the impact of the social,
economic, and policy environments that accompanied this development.
Comprehensive coverage of the period from 1980 until 1996 will remedy this
critical gap in understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The total
federal funding supporting the development and deployment of the Internet
through 1996 was less than $250 million. In 2010, the Internet industry
contributed more than $600 billion to the economy of the United States. By any
measure, this is an extraordinary return on investment. Experience in global
Internet-based activity has positioned the nation for additional growth if we
are able to understand how to stimulate and support the translation of research
to disruptive innovation and how that innovation can be sustained. A
comprehensive study of the key period of transition from the Internet as a
research innovation into an Internet industry should inform science policy
decisions that can drive the nation?s future. The researchers intend to publish
the results in articles and monographs. In addition, they will make arrangements
for long-term hosting and website access to the digitized and transcribed
interviews and other source documents. As a result the study will provide a
resource for more extensive scholarship and decision-making regarding the
continued development and governance of the Internet itself.