* 1425883
* Collaborative Research: The Policy Geography of Environmental Risk
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Christopher Reenock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 114,499.00

Scholars of U.S. environmental policy have long recognized that subnational
institutions can influence policy implementation, but there has been virtually
no attention given to the specific role of sub-state pollution control agencies?
regional offices in carrying out federal laws. This is a major oversight that
may substantially affect our understanding of how political, economic, and
administrative factors influence the government?s management of environmental
risks. In this project, the PIs will use a new approach to examine how
overlapping administrative, political and environmental problem boundaries shape
the distribution of policy outputs and outcomes. The PIs term this approach
policy geography, and argue that it can induce governance challenges in the form
of delegation problems, coordination dilemmas and inequitable policy delivery,
each of which has important implications for the management of environmental
risks. Using newly-collected, fine-grained institutional data, the PIs will
utilize GIS software to map out each of the 50 state?s regional office policy
geography for implementation of both the Clean Air Act (CAA) and the Clean Water
Act (CWA) for 2002-2012. The PIs will then combine this information with
facility-level data on policy outputs (government inspections and enforcement
actions) and policy outcomes (compliance and pollution risks) to test
theoretically informed hypotheses on political control, policy coordination and
environmental justice. These tests will be conducted using hierarchical linear
models to account for the nested structure of the data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will benefit ongoing policy efforts to manage
environmental risks. The results of this research will inform our understanding
of the origins of environmental risk patterns, and enhance our capacity to
evaluate policy prescriptions aimed at mitigating unfavorable or uneven risk
levels across society. In this sense, the proposal speaks to the core tenants of
the NSF?s mission to ?promote the health, prosperity and welfare of its
citizens.? The risks presented to the public from pollution remain important and
substantial. For example, over 150 million Americans currently live in areas
that are not meeting air quality standards for at least one major air
pollutant), and more than 40,000 bodies of water are deemed ?impaired? for
failing to meet their use requirements. The CAA and the CWA are the primary
safeguards against the risks from air and water pollution, and understanding
their implementation is critical to assure the effectiveness and fairness of
pollution control across society. By examining the effects of different
institutional arrangements on policy outcomes, the PIs can identify
opportunities for re-configurations that will yield improved environmental
governance.