* 1425598
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Essays on Migrant Self-Selection and Productivity.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Joel Mokyr, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 46,464.00

Are immigrants an asset or a burden to the receiving economy? Does emigration
deprive source populations of the most skilled and educated portions of their
labor force, or does it provide otherwise-unavailable opportunities to the most
deprived? A first step in answering these broad and fundamental questions of the
economics of migration is to study the nature and determinants of the
productivity of migrants in their place of origin and in their destination. This
project focuses on three specific questions in this vein. First, are migrants
positively or negatively self-selected from within their populations of origin
on the basis of productivity? That is, are migrants generally more or less
productive than stayers? Second, how is such self-selection affected by the
state of the economy in the sending and receiving countries? Finally, are
locality-of-origin-specific characteristics of migrants more powerful predictors
of outcomes and productivity in the receiving labor market than are migrants'
idiosyncratic characteristics? That is, does ability compensate for a poor
background?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions are studied with the aid of a
novel data set to be constructed by the PI. This data set will consist of the
personal characteristics of Italian passengers arriving in the Port of New York
between 1907 and 1925, as reported on the passenger manifests stored at Ellis
Island. Individuals in these manifests will also be linked to decennial US
Census manuscripts in order to recover information on their post-migration labor
market outcomes, as well as the labor market outcomes of their US-born children.
Three features of this data set allow the PI to improve on the shortcomings of
prior studies. First, an anthropometric measure, average stature, is used to
quantify migrant productivity. This measure is known to be a very good proxy on
average for many variables that are strongly correlated with individual labor
productivity (e.g., health, skill, and education), and is not subject to many of
the problems that accompany the use of common measures of productivity, such as
literacy and occupation. Second, the data enable the identification of migrants'
specific place of origin within Italy, and thus their matching with and
comparison to highly disaggregated stature data from Italy. It is therefore
possible to compare migrants directly to their local population of origin. Such
disaggregation is rarely possible with any other measure or in any other time
period of study, even on the national level. Finally, these data make it
possible&lt;br/&gt;to observe both the post-migration and pre-migration
characteristics of migrants, enabling a comprehensive study of migrant
assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of historical migration has several
advantages over the study of modern migration. Migrant self-selection in modern
contexts is masked by a number of legal barriers that prevent the migration of
certain types of migrants. Data on modern migrants are therefore not
representative of the entire population that would choose to migrate in the
absence of legal barriers. Moreover, historical data are not subject to the
confidentiality restrictions that constrain research with modern data, making
the creation of the proposed dataset - particularly the combination of migration
and census records - possible. The study of historical migration can therefore
equip researchers with a better understanding of the forces driving the
composition of migratory flows and the labor market outcomes of migrants in the
receiving country. Results from this research can therefore provide valuable
insights to policy makers that would be unattainable through the use of modern
data alone.