* 1425989
* Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Robert Key, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* David Sutherland
* 08/31/2021
* USD 22,386,623.00

Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM) project
seeks to drive a transformative shift in our understanding of the crucial role
of the Southern Ocean in taking up anthropogenic carbon and heat, and
resupplying nutrients from the abyss to the surface. An observational program
will generate vast amounts of new biogeochemical data that will provide a
greatly improved view of the dynamics and ecosystem responses of the Southern
Ocean. A modeling component will apply these observations to enhancing
understanding of the current ocean, reducing uncertainty in projections of
future carbon and nutrient cycles and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because it
serves as the primary gateway through which the intermediate, deep, and bottom
waters of the ocean interact with the surface layers and thus the atmosphere,
the Southern Ocean has a profound influence on the oceanic uptake of
anthropogenic carbon and heat as well as nutrient resupply from the abyss to the
surface. Yet it is the least observed and understood region of the world ocean.
The oceanographic community is on the cusp of two major advances that have the
potential to transform understanding of the Southern Ocean. The first is the
development of new biogeochemical sensors mounted on autonomous profiling floats
that allow sampling of ocean biogeochemistry and acidification in 3-dimensional
space with a temporal resolution of five to ten days. The SOCCOM float program
proposed will increase the average number of biogeochemical profiles measured
per month in the Southern Ocean by ~10-30x. The second is that the climate
modeling community now has the computational resources and physical
understanding to develop fully coupled climate models that can represent crucial
mesoscale processes in the Southern Ocean, as well as corresponding models that
assimilate observations to produce a state estimate. Together with the
observations, this new generation of models provides the tools to vastly improve
understanding of Southern Ocean processes and the ability to quantitatively
assess uptake of anthropogenic carbon and heat, as well as nutrient resupply,
both today and into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to take advantage
of the above technological and modeling breakthroughs, SOCCOM will implement the
following research programs:&lt;br/&gt;* Theme 1: Observations. Scripps
Institution of Oceanography will lead a field program to expand the number of
Southern Ocean autonomous profiling floats and equip them with sensors to
measure pH, nitrate, and oxygen. The University of Washington and Monterey Bay
Aquarium Research Institute will design, build, and oversee deployment of the
floats. Scripps will also develop a mesoscale eddying Southern Ocean state
estimate that assimilates physical and biogeochemical data into the MIT ocean
general circulation model.&lt;br/&gt;* Theme 2: Modeling. University of Arizona
and Princeton University, together with NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL), will use SOCCOM observations to develop data/model assessment
metrics and next-generation model analysis and evaluation, with the goal of
improving process level understanding and reducing the uncertainty in
projections of our future climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by Climate Central,
an independent, non-profit journalism and research organization that promotes
understanding of climate science, SOCCOM will collaborate with educators and
media professionals to inform policymakers and the public about the challenges
of climate change and its impacts on marine life in the context of the Southern
Ocean. In addition, the integrated team of SOCCOM scientists and educators
will:&lt;br/&gt;* communicate data and results of the SOCCOM efforts quickly to
the public through established data networks, publications, broadcast media, and
a public portal;&lt;br/&gt;* train a new generation of diverse ocean scientists,
including undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows
versed in field techniques, data calibration, modeling, and communication of
research to non-scientists;&lt;br/&gt;* transfer new sensor technology and
related software to autonomous instrument providers and manufacturers to ensure
that they become widely useable.