* 1425938
* 30th Conference on Mathematical Geophysics: Support for young US scientists
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Ilya Zaliapin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides funds to help support meeting costs and travel expenses of
approximately 20 US students, post docs and young scientists for the
International Conference on Mathematical Geophysics to be held in Merida,
Yucatan, Mexico during 2-6 June of 2014. The funding priority will be given to
under-represented groups (women and minorities). The Conference on Mathematical
Geophysics (CMG) is sponsored by the Committee on Mathematical Geophysics of the
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics. The conference website can be
found at http://eventos.iingen.unam.mx/IUGG2014/.

This conference brings together applied mathematicians, computational
scientists, engineers, and researchers from geophysics, physical oceanography,
material sciences, and atmospheric and climate dynamics, to discuss advances and
challenges of the present understanding of the Earth sciences. This year's
program provides a strong emphasis on Applied Mathematics and Computational
Geophysics, in combination with more traditional for CMG topics of Seismicity,
Oceanography, and Climate. The meeting will make a particular emphasis on the
advances in computational methods of geosciences and mathematical and numerical
methods of enhanced oil recovery. This meeting provides a unique multi-
disciplinary forum for the exchange of ideas and techniques across the
disciplinary boundaries in the Earth sciences. It allows interactions among
Earth scientists from disciplines that do not normally communicate, such as oil
engineers, physical oceanographers and geophysicists.