* 1425059
* Natural Trap Cave Revisited: Ancient DNA, Climate and the Megafaunal Extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Julie Meachen, Des Moines University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 471,448.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The end of the ice age (about 11,000 years ago)
was a time of radical change in North America. Many species of large mammals
went extinct, along with their habitats. Climate played a major role in this
extinction event and current climate change continues to affect and alter the
world today. This project will analyze ancient DNA from ice age animals from
Natural Trap Cave, Wyoming to examine how these past climate changes relate to
genetic variability and extinction. This research will lead to a better overall
understanding of how climate change is related to population structure, changes
in genetic variation, and ultimately extinction, which may have potential
effects on how biologists think about and mitigate the current human-caused
climate change occurring today. This project will also provide many
opportunities for scientific engagement and outreach to both the general public
and in classroom settings. The intriguing nature of the excavations and ultimate
findings make this expedition a perfect opportunity to bring science to the
general public through print and television media. Additionally, this is an
excellent opportunity to give high school students real time experience on how
field science is performed. Via remote participation on the web, this project
will give students the opportunity to participate in the experience of what it
is like to excavate a fossil site, live out in the field, and unearth bones of
gigantic, long-dead beasts, but in a safe, virtual
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The end-Pleistocene
was a time of radical change in North America. Many species of large mammals
went extinct, along with the loss of a variety of associated ecosystems. Climate
played a major role in this extinction event and current climate change
continues to affect and alter ecosystems today. This project will re-open
Natural Trap Cave in northern Wyoming to investigate paleoecological responses
to climate change and how this relates to the megafaunal extinction events at
the end of the Pleistocene. The permanently cold and moist conditions at NTC
have preserved a large collection of megafaunal bones which still contain
ancient DNA (aDNA) and collagen molecules. This rare resource is optimal to
perform population-level analyses of genetic variation in the critical phases
before, during, and after the end-Pleistocene extinction events. Key questions
investigated in this project include: 1) Was the Pleistocene extinction event
preceded by, or concurrent with a large loss of genetic diversity? 2) Are
morphological changes at the Pleistocene/Holocene boundary the product of
adaptation, or immigration? 3) Are major shifts in morphological and genetic
variation correlated with climate change? Using aDNA, AMS radiocarbon dates,
stable isotope analyses, morphological analyses, and previous data from NTC this
project will investigate changes in climatic conditions and how they correlate
with genetic diversity and morphological change. This research will lead to a
better understanding of how climate change drives extinction and may reveal
correlations between climate change, metapopulation structure and changes in
genetic and morphological variation.