* 1425737
* US-Australia Collaborative Research: Research Planning and proof-of-concept study of macrophage-scaffold interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Kara Spiller, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 45,000.00

In the United States, 6 million bone fractures occur annually, and 5-10% of
these fractures fail to heal adequately due to bone loss, failed fixation,
infection, and inadequate vascularization. The use of biomaterials that can
promote bone regeneration by taking advantage of the body?s own natural healing
ability would bypass all of the problems associated with autografts and
allografts. The key challenge in developing orthopedic implants for the repair
and regeneration of large bone defects in load-bearing applications is to strike
the right balance between material properties, implant architecture and
bioactivity to satisfy the functional and regenerative requirements of bone
tissue. Dr. Hala Zreiqat and Dr. Roohani-Esfahani at the University of Sydney in
Australia have made major advances towards achieving this goal through the
development of a new multi-component ceramic that can mimic bone in porosity
(80-95%), pore diameter (300-500um) and, uniquely, mechanical strength. These
scaffolds caused extensive new bone formation with complete bridging of
critically sized radial defects in rabbits. However, implantation of
biomaterials into injured bone affects the behavior of the cells of the
inflammatory response, especially macrophages, with resulting effects on new
bone regeneration. The main research focus of this proposal is how the behavior
of macrophages dictates tissue regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
importance of macrophages and the inflammatory response for the repair of all
tissues, the results of this work are broadly applicable for engineering of any
tissue. In addition, this project will promote cross-cultural exchange between
American and Australian engineering students and faculty. Three of the five
participants in this project are women engineers.