* 1426800
* Dissertation Research in Economics: Trade and Demography in British India
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Timothy Guinnane, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 06/30/2016
* USD 22,788.00

An enduring debate in South Asian economic history concerns the consequences of
two centuries of British rule on economic performance and social welfare.
Measurement has been a contentious issue: wages, prices, and agricultural yields
have been used and criticized by scholars. However, population indicators which
are known to have a major influence on economic activity have not featured
prominently in this debate. In other preindustrial societies, we know that birth
and death rates varied systematically with economic shocks, so we expect to
learn more about how an economy like the British Indian economy developed
through these demographic parameters. In particular, this proposal revisits the
question of the impact major infrastructure provision, i.e., of the rollout of
railroads on the welfare of ordinary people as an illustration of this
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will collect and analyze demographic
data from British Indian censuses, vital statistics, and economic data from
colonial statistical serials from the 1870s through the 1920s. The first
contribution of the project will consist of the construction of a new general-
use demographic dataset of annual births and deaths at the district level,
providing a new and more disaggregated description of the demographic history of
South Asia than currently exists. The second contribution is a more thorough
understanding of the dynamic interplay between demography and economic factors
in this period, such as the causes of the mortality decline and the efficacy of
public health expenditures. Finally, this research will employ these data to
examine whether or how opening up to trade and the arrival of the railroads
affected population growth. Given that theories of trade and Malthusian
demography in conjunction imply that gains from trade should be reflected in
higher fertility and/or lower mortality, this research will explore
theoretically and test empirically a mechanism that could explain how opening up
to trade may fail to improve per-capita welfare.