* 1426752
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Minimally Invasive Robotic Non-Destructive Evaluation and Rehabilitation for Bridge Decks (Bridge-MINDER)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Dezhen Song, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Bridges are critical components of modern transportation infrastructure. Bridges
deteriorate over time as a result of material aging, excessive use and
overloading, environmental conditions, inadequate maintenance, and deficiencies
in inspection and evaluation. Building on the recent advances in robotics and
automation technologies, the objective of this project is to develop a novel
Minimally Invasive robotic Non-Destructive Evaluation and Rehabilitation for
bridge decks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops new robotic system,
algorithms and control schemes for sustainable civil infrastructure, including
(1) development of a novel robotics-assisted in-traffic system for highly-
efficient, safety-guaranteed bridge deck inspection and diagnosis; (2)
development of a new robotic rehabilitation system for delivering fast, cost-
effective, minimally invasive repair and maintenance for bridge decks; (3) a
human-in-the-loop robotic coordination for minimally traffic interference; and
(4) experimental platforms and field performance evaluation for the proposed
system. The project also provides insights to advance real time scene
understanding, multiple robot coordination, and human-robot collaboration in
complex robotic systems. If successful, this project can drastically reduce
bridge maintenance cost and mitigate negative impact caused by closing the
bridge traffic flow under traditional bridge inspection and repair. The project
outcomes, including source code, datasets, and publications, are to be shared
among research community and the general public. The project also includes a
number of integrated research and education programs to attract students from
underrepresented groups into engineering and involve students into robotics
research.