* 1426695
* In-situ X-ray Tomography and Chemical Tracer Experiments Examining Hydrothermal Alteration of Peridotite:  Pore Scale Studies with Implications for Water-Rock Interaction Models
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Martin Saar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2019
* USD 470,000.00

The porosity and permeability of rocks is impacted heavily by reactions between
minerals and through-going fluids. The resulting dissolution of minerals that
are unstable at the temperature, pressure, and chemical conditions at which the
fluids and rocks are interacting and the precipitation of more stable mineral
species in the pores, fractures, and grain boundaries between minerals controls
where and how much porosity a rock has and how easily fluids can flow through
it. This research uses novel, flow-through, hydrothermal, reactor vessels where
changes in the porosity and permeability of rocks and the precipitation and
dissolution of minerals can be observed and measured in real time. Results of
these experiments will be analyzed using a mathematical technique (i.e.,
Lattice-Boltzmann approach) that provides a better simulation of the fine-scale
processes than mathematical techniques presently used in water-rock interaction
studies that depend solely on continuum conditions. Intact cores of classic
seafloor peridotites, rocks that commonly host or are the source of sulfide-
rich, hydrothermal deposits on the seafloor, will be used in the experiments;
and alteration of the original mineralogy will be tracked using the stable
isotopes of Ca, Mg, and Si, which will document reactions and reaction rates of
carbonate and silicate minerals. Broader impacts of the work include improving
infrastructure for science by developing new experimental and mathematical
methods to advance studies of water-rock interaction and how the porosity and
permeability of geological materials change as rocks and sediments react with
waters flowing through them. The research has significant potential applications
in improving our understanding of the behavior of carbon sequestration
reservoirs, the migration of pollutants, and the conditions of nuclear waste
disposal. The project also involves undergraduate students from the National
Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates (NSF-REU) program in
cutting-edge science; trains a graduate student and a postdoc; and helps to
develop and verify theoretical and model simulations use to predict the chemical
and physical property evolution of natural rocks and
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on understanding the
hydrolysis and carbonation of mantle peridotite by through-going aqueous fluids,
an important process affecting the geochemical and geophysical properties of the
ocean crust at mid-ocean ridges and in subduction zones. Reactions will be
examined using coupled experimental, analytical, and theoretical approaches that
emphasize the time series monitoring of the chemical and physical evolution of
peridotite-fluid systems using a novel flow-through hydrothermal reactor and
transparent reaction cells that are coupled to an X-ray Computed Tomography
instrument that allows changes in mineral dissolution and precipitation
processes to be examined in real time and in high resolution. This allows direct
investigation of changes in the 3D architecture of the rock on a fine scale
during water-rock interaction. Chemical tracers using non-traditional stable
isotopes (Si, Mg and Ca) will be used to constrain mineral dissolution and
precipitation rates and indicate changes in mineral surface area. The
experiments and their results will be modeled using a Lattice-Boltzmann
multicomponent, multiphase, fluid flow and solute transport computer code with
the results being used to develop more accurate reservoir-scale modeling
approaches using continuum-scale simulators. Goals of the research are to
investigate the feedback between fluid-mineral reactions and associated pore-
space geometry changes in peridotites that result from processes like fluid
flow, advection of chemical species, and reaction locations and reaction rates.
Samples will consist of cores of seafloor peridotite.