* 1426968
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Human-Supervised Perception and Grasping in Clutter
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2019
* USD 577,607.00

One of the basic building blocks in semi-autonomous manipulation is the ability
for a robot to grasp an object that a human operator indicates. There are many
tasks where the natural way for a human and robot to work together is for the
human to point out the approximate locations of objects to be grasped and for
the robot to generate the precise motions necessary to achieve the grasp. This
core "auto-grasp" functionality is critical to providing assistive manipulation
for the disabled and elderly, as well as for a variety of military, police,
space, or underwater applications. But implementing auto-grasp capability can be
challenging in situations where the environment is cluttered, or when it is
difficult to determine the grasp intention of the human. In this collaborative
project that combines expertise from two institutions, the PIs will tackle
situations where it is necessary for the robot to actively explore or
"interrogate" the environment in order to figure out what the human intends to
grasp and how the robot should do it. To these ends, the PIs will investigate a
modified approach to planning under uncertainty known as belief space planning.
Belief space planning is well-suited to active localization for grasping,
because it is a single framework in which the algorithm can reason about
perception-oriented and goal-orientation parts of the task. The PIs will use
belief space planning to localize graspable geometries in the environment, known
as grasp affordances, in a region indicated by the user. They will also explore
different ways in which a human can interact with the system in order to control
the grasping. The application focus of the work will be in assistive
manipulation, where a person who is elderly or disabled operates an assistive
robot arm mounted on an electric wheelchair or scooter. User studies will
determine the best methods for the target population to operate the system. The
project will contribute to the opportunities available for undergraduates and
high school students in the PIs' institutions, and it will also be integrated as
appropriate into the curricula of the courses they
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contains two key innovations that the
PIs expect will make robot grasping more robust. The first is to incorporate
ideas from belief space planning into the reach and grasp planning process.
Because belief space planning can reason about how the robot's own "state of
information" is expected to change in the future, it is capable of producing
plans that acquire task-relevant information in the course of performing a task.
The second innovation is a new approach to perception-for-grasping that
localizes grasp affordance geometries in the neighborhoods of objects of
potential interest. Not only is this grasp affordance approach helpful to the
belief space planner, but the PIs' preliminary work indicates that this approach
can be accurate and very fast (10Hz). Finally, the connection between the user
interface and uncertainty in the location of the grasp target will also be
explored, the plan being to model human behavior as an uncertain system where
hidden variables describe user intention.