* 1426428
* Price Quality in Dark Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Peter Bossaerts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2017
* USD 307,656.00

Starting with Chamberlin in the 40s, experiments with markets have made
economists pessimistic about the merits of decentralized markets, in sharp
contrast with centralized markets. The centralized continuous double auction has
emerged as the mechanism most advocated by economists to generate the beneficial
outcomes associated with competitive equilibrium. Buttressed by recent advances
in theoretical modeling of decentralized markets, our experiments have started
to paint a different picture, with decentralized markets generating outcomes
that are not much different from those of centralized markets. Here, we propose
to investigate the very dimension in which decentralized markets have been
proposed to improve upon centralized markets, namely, in providing sustained
incentives to pay for (inside) information (within the right economic setting,
of course) the theory does not claim that decentralized markets will always be
better). This contrasts with centralized markets, which theory and experiments
have argued lead to the Grossman-Stiglitz paradox (if information is costly,
prices cannot be informative). The negativity with which economists generally
depict the workings of decentralized markets has affected policy making,
certainly since the Great Financial Crisis, to the extent that such markets are
now generally shunned, or even, as in the recent European directive MiFID 2,
disallowed. Our experiments are meant to bring hard evidence to the table. They
should illustrate the possibility of evidence-based policy making in
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decentralized financial markets have
been deemed detrimental to efficient and fair pricing because of their lack of
transparency (whence the synonym "dark markets"). Recent legislation in both the
U.S. and in the E.U. is gradually forcing all trading onto centralized markets,
or multilateral trading platforms, where everyone can see, in a timely fashion,
pretty much everything that is going on (order submission, executed trades,
etc.). However, controlled experiments with financial markets have confirmed a
theoretical prediction from the 70s, which is that centralized markets fail to
provide incentives to collect information (when this is costly) and hence,
centralized markets can at best generate only noisy prices. In contrast, more
recent theoretical modeling argues that in certain settings, decentralized
markets would actually generate the right incentives, and as a result, prices
would be more accurate than in centralized markets. If this is true, the gradual
elimination of "dark markets" might not have been a good policy. We propose to
study price discovery with costly information acquisition in decentralized
markets through controlled experimentation. Our experiments would advise whether
recent financial markets regulation may have to be re-examined. While inspired
by theoretical reasoning, our recommendation will be evidence-based, and as
such, would break with the tradition in rule making in finance, which has been
almost entirely model-based.