* 1426661
* US-GERMANY workshop and joined field survey in the Arctic:  Initiating a new collaboration with the COPER group (Alfred-Wegener-Institute) through a joined field survey.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Nina Stark, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 43,445.00

a non-technical explanation &lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests travel funds for
PI Stark and an U.S. graduate student to join the upcoming COPER (Coastal
permafrost erosion, organic carbon and nutrient release to the Arctic nearshore
zone, at the Alfred-Wegener-Institute in Potsdam, Germany) field expedition to
the Southern Beaufort Sea, and conduct geotechnical in-situ profiling and
sampling of sediment for following geotechnical laboratory experiments as a
complement to the scheduled geomorphological, sedimentological, geological and
geochemical investigations of the COPER group. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed study,
collaboration and following research efforts will contribute to fill the gaps of
knowledge regarding coastal erosion in the Arctic and long-term development of
Arctic coastlines. The results will improve the assessments of impacts of
climate change on the Arctic, and the development of countermeasures to secure
environments and habitats. The gained experiences will be transferred into PI
Stark?s Coastal and Marine Geotechnics classes, and will make students aware of
the emerging field of coastal geotechnical engineering in the polar
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a technical description &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed collaborative work will widen the knowledge of geotechnical survey
strategies and erosion processes in polar coastal zones, will be applicable also
for industrial purposes or other research questions, and might pave the way for
more cost- and time-efficient geotechnical surveys in the coastal polar
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change and the resulting change of the polar
regions is one of the most challenging and recognized modern issues for
sciences, engineering, as well as society. Rapid changes in the permafrost are
certainly one of the most pressing issues, including the impact on physical and
geotechnical coastal sediment properties, and the resulting consequences for
coastal erosion. Nevertheless, the processes governing Arctic coastal erosion
are still poorly understood. One of the factors that potentially influences
coastal erosion in the Arctic, but has not been addressed in previous studies,
is the impact of changes in geotechnical properties of&lt;br/&gt;the sediments
in the nearshore zone following variations in the permafrost level. Dr. Hugues
Lantuit, chief scientist of the COPER group (Coastal permafrost erosion, organic
carbon and nutrient release to the Arctic nearshore zone, at the Alfred-Wegener-
Institute in Potsdam,&lt;br/&gt;Germany) has recognized this gap of knowledge
within the COPER studies, and initiated discussions with PI Dr. Nina Stark,
assistant professor in Civil and Environmental Engineering at Virginia Tech, who
is specialized on geotechnical field surveying in coastal zones. Lantuit will
provide infrastructure and support during the expedition, co-supervise the U.S.
graduate student, and share COPER data for survey planning and following joined
publications. The data set will secure long-term collaborations via following
testing of the samples and joined publications, and will serve as a proof-of-
concept for a larger study aiming for the geotechnical investigation of the
Arctic nearshore zone with regard to coastal erosion. The proposed work will
also allow insights into Arctic and international research for a U.S. graduate
student, and will possibly pave the way to make geotechnical investigations of
polar coastal environments one of PI Stark?s future research foci.