* 1426530
* First-Principles Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Silicate Liquids: Structure, Diffusion and Viscosity at Mantle Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bijaya Karki, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 359,999.00

Magmatic processes are considered to play important role in the chemical and
thermal evolution of the Earth. They are responsible for the origin and ongoing
formation of the oceanic and continental crust. They may have played even more
important role in the Earth?s earlier history when the accreting Earth may have
been largely or completely molten ? so called the magma ocean. Melts are also
thought to exist in the present day Earth at depths well below the shallow magma
genetic zone, including atop the transition zone and the core-mantle boundary.
These magmas and melts are essentially composed of silicate materials. To
understand the origin and stability of these deep melts, and their role in the
earliest evolution of the Earth and in the interpretation of seismic
observations, knowledge about the physical properties of silicate liquids over
relevant broad ranges of pressure, temperature, and composition is essential.
Investigation of silicate liquids at extreme conditions of the Earth?s interior
poses tremendous challenges. Here, we propose to apply a combination of first-
principles parallel computation and visualization techniques to tackle this
complex silicate liquid system. Our approach being parameter free provides the
ideal complement to the experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To further promote
our understanding of the role of silicate liquids in planetary evolution and
magmatic processes, we plan to carry out the following specific activities: 1)
Consider more compositions towards sampling natural melts (MgO-CaO-FeO-
Fe2O3-Na2O-K2O-Al2O3-TiO2-SiO2 system) with/out volatiles (H2O and CO2) to
calculate their densities, enthalpies, and structures as a function of pressure
and temperature. 2) Investigate the transport properties of silicate melts
through first-principles predictions of the self-diffusion and viscosity
coefficients. 3) Continue the study of structure and compression mechanisms of
silicate glasses as a way of gaining additional insight into the energetics
underlying liquid structure, and in order to enrich contact with the extensive
experimental literature on geologically relevant compositions in the vitreous
state. 4) Visualize/analyze the massive simulation data to gain insight into the
microscopic mechanisms of compression and transport phenomena. A unifying theme
of this proposal is thus the intensive first-principles computer simulations of
large systems that are necessary to explore realistic melt compositions, to
accurately predict key transport properties, and to successfully capture the
essence of glass structures. These results will allow us quantitatively
understand the contrasts in density, diffusivity, viscosity, and bulk
composition between molten silicates and their source regions, which control the
generation and transport of magma and partial melts. The proposed research is
essentially an exploitation of ideas and techniques of computational science to
challenging problems in the investigation of Earth materials. This synergy will
have impact on a number of fields including geochemistry, petrology, geophysics,
computational materials physics, and scientific visualization. It will train
graduate and undergraduate students, and postdoc for this multidisciplinary
experience and expertise.