* 1426408
* Workshop: Experimental Research in The Theory of Asset Pricing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Peter Bossaerts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/29/2016
* USD 21,635.00

Asset pricing theory has recently been criticized for its inability to explain
historical data from field markets. Yet its poor record does not mean that it is
scientifically invalid. Our experience (as experimentalists) is that theorists
are not aware of the scientific record of asset pricing theory (how well it
works in a controlled setting). The aim of the workshop is to sensitize
theorists to this record. It should make them aware not only of the successes
(of the theory), but also of where the theory fails (and how the failures can be
addressed). It is hoped that the workshop heralds a new era where theorists work
in closer collaboration with experimentalists. The PIs have a long track record
not only in financial markets experimentation, but also in the experimental
method in general (having contributed successfully to neuroscience), and they
have published in asset pricing theory. As such, they are uniquely positioned to
moderate the proposed dialogue between theorists and
experimentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Financial economics is rather abstract
and mathematical, and its value is difficult to ascertain from merely observing
real-world financial markets, which operate in a complex environment where many
key variables either remain unobserved or cannot be measured reliably. In the
last decade, however, tools have been developed to study financial markets in
the laboratory, where real people trade for real money. The controlled setting
is designed to emulate the theoretical context and as such has proven to be an
ideal testing ground. The workshop aims at bringing together theorists and
experimentalists in order to start a dialogue. Experimentalists are to be taught
what aspects of the theory are defining, and hence, need to be tested, and
theorists are to be encouraged to explain their models in terms of experiments
with which to gauge scientific validity, which requires theorists to understand
the experimental approach. We thereby import into finance a longstanding
tradition from the physical sciences. The goal is to move finance to an
evidence-based discipline. This will ultimately benefit financial markets policy
formulation and rule making, which until now have primarily been model-based, or
in the rare occasions where the data were available, informed only by empirical
analysis of historical data.