* 1426981
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research:   A cross-site comparison of salt marsh persistence in response to sea-level rise and feedbacks from social adaptations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Matthew Kirwan, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2020
* USD 431,612.00

Nearly half of the world's population lives within 100 km of the coast, the area
ranked as the most vulnerable to climate-driven sea-level rise (SLR). Projected
rates of accelerated SLR are expected to cause massive changes that would
transform both the ecological and social dynamics of low-lying coastal areas. It
is thus essential to improve understanding of the sustainability of coupled
coastal human-environment systems in the face of SLR. Salt marshes are
intertidal habitats that provide a buffer for coastal communities to SLR and are
also valued for many other ecosystem services, including wildlife habitat,
nutrient cycling, carbon sequestration, aesthetics, and tourism. They are highly
dynamic systems that have kept pace with changes in sea level over millennia.
However, projected rates of SLR and increased human modification of coastal
watersheds and shorelines may push marshes past a tipping point beyond which
they are lost. Developing realistic scenarios of marsh vulnerability demands an
integrated approach to understanding the feedbacks between the biophysical and
social factors that influence the persistence of marshes and their supporting
functions. This project will examine the comparative vulnerability of salt
marshes to SLR in three U.S. Atlantic coastal sites that vary with respect to
sediment supply, tidal range and human impacts. The research team will also
address how feedbacks from potential adaptations influence marsh vulnerability,
associated economic benefits and costs, and practical management decisions.
Additional broader impacts include incorporating research results into
curriculum used at local schools, an on-line cross-disciplinary graduate course,
and on-going teacher-training programs, as well as training one postdoctoral
researcher, four graduate students, and eight undergraduate researchers. This
project is supported as part of the National Science Foundation's Coastal
Science, Engineering, and Education for Sustainability program - Coastal
SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the long-term data,
experiments and modeling tools at three Atlantic Coast Long-Term Ecological
Research sites (in MA, VA, GA), and addresses the broad interdisciplinary
question "How will feedbacks between marsh response to SLR and human adaptation
responses to potential marsh loss affect the overall sustainability of the
combined socio-ecological systems?" The goals of the project are to understand:
1) how marsh vulnerability to current and projected SLR, with and without
adaptation actions, compares across biogeographic provinces and a range of
biophysical and social drivers; and 2) which marsh protection actions local
stakeholder groups favor, and the broader sustainability and economic value
implications of feasible adaptation options. The biophysical research uses
historical trends, "point" and spatial models to determine threshold and long-
term responses of marshes to SLR. Social responses to marsh vulnerability are
integrated with biophysical models through future scenario planning with
stakeholders, economic valuation of marsh adaptation options, and focus groups
that place the combined project results within a concrete policy planning
context to assess how marshes fit into the larger view of coastal socio-
ecological sustainability. This integrated approach at multiple sites along
gradients of both environmental and human drivers will allow for general
conclusions to be made about human-natural system interactions and
sustainability that can be broadly applicable to other coastal systems.