* 1426945
* NRI: Information-Theoretic Trajectory Optimization for Motion Planning and Control with Applications to Space Proximity Operations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 708,000.00

Robotic operations in space are indispensable for many missions both in Earth
orbit and beyond. Satellite servicing and refueling, space station resupply with
consumables, removal of space debris, spacecraft structural integrity
inspection, crew assistance, as well as support for deep space missions to Mars
and other planets and comets, all require the assistance of highly accurate,
reliable and autonomous (or semi-autonomous) space robots. To date, most robotic
operations in space are performed in a closely supervised mode by a human
operator. This limits both the flexibility and the type of missions that can be
performed (for example, the time for light to travel to and from Mars takes
about 15 minutes, making "real-time" remote control impossible). This research
aims at developing the necessary theory and algorithms to be able to utilize
active exploration using robust, reliable sensing and planning of a free-flying
space robots in the vicinity of another body, in order to perform proximity
operations (including autonomous rendezvous and docking in space). One of the
challenges in these types of problems is the uncertainty in understanding the
surroundings in order to plan suitable control actions. In order to handle these
challenges we utilize novel tools and methodologies from the field of stochastic
optimal control along with new advances describing the spacecraft attitude
dynamics and kinematics of spacecraft in orbit. In order to ensure that the
algorithms we develop perform in real-life as expected, the theoretical results
will be experimentally validated on a high-fidelity 5-dof spacecraft simulator
facility. This work will have an immediate impact on the US capabilities to
perform monitoring and servicing of satellites in space routinely, by advancing
the state-of-the-art in perception and path-planning of orbiting spacecraft in
the vicinity of another body, man-made or natural. Although the emphasis of this
work is primarily on space robotic applications, the same techniques can be used
in all similar problems where an intelligent agent needs to navigate
autonomously in an uncertain and dynamic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research tackles a fundamental problem in autonomous/robotic systems,
namely, the integrated sensing and planning under uncertainty. The current
paradigm in the literature utilizes perceptual cues (especially those based
solely on visual information) essentially as surrogates of full-state feedback
estimators, thus enforcing an artificial separation of perception and control
action. This dichotomy between sensory data acquisition/processing, and
control/actuation strategies - deeply rooted in the community from its wide
applicability to the stabilization of linear systems subject to additive noise
(?separation principle?) - is unsuitable for this problem, where information
gathering (perception/sensing) is tightly coupled with motion (control). To
overcome the aforementioned limitations, in this work it is proposed to use
tools from stochastic optimal control in order to extract actionable information
from raw sensory inputs. A key ingredient of the proposed approach is to keep
track of the first and second order statistics of the estimation error and treat
them as the state, so that control actions depend on both of them. The result is
a new, computationally more efficient, methodology to maximize information
gathering during the exploration phase and to optimize over distributions of
trajectories during the execution phase.