* 1426282
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics - Dissertation Enhancement Project:The Geography of Innovation: Patents in Early America
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Robert Margo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2016
* USD 7,367.00

This project explores the relationship between urbanization and innovation in
nineteenth-century America as measured by number of patents issued. The PIs will
compile and use a text-based dataset of patents linked to maps using Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) techniques. The project contributes to the literature
on innovation by examining the geographical spread and conceptual
interconnectedness of innovations. Examining these relationships in the history
of innovation and economic geography will help isolate the underlying factors
that spur technological development.

The movement of people, goods, and information among places increased
dramatically over the nineteenth century, particularly within the United States.
The project examines the hypothesis that the "transportation revolution"
facilitated innovative activity, and this will be revealed through rates of
patenting and also textural similarities in patents originating in different
places. The project maps the relationship between patents and population for all
counties in the US from 1790 to 1900, not just populous or innovative locations.
The PIs geo-locate (matching with latitude and longitude coordinates) patents
issued in the US before 1836 by merging their town and county information with a
database of historical town names from the AniMap 3.0.2 County Boundary
Historical Atlas. The project links the text, created from pictures of the
documents using optical character recognition, with the location of post-1836
patents.

By using textual analysis, this project will contribute to our understanding of
otherwise unobservable aspects of innovation. It will search for linguistic
relationships within a full-text database of all patents issued between
1838-1870 and 1880-1897 to explore the generation and spread of interrelated
ideas. Linking this searchable, full-text patent data with transportation and
population data through GIS will give a mapping that allows a clearer and more
sophisticated understanding of innovative agglomerations. A large class of
economic models has assumed that technological change is related to the spread
of ideas through combination of urban density and large populations. It is clear
that large, dense cities are more innovative than other places, but size and
density are not su;fficient to induce technological improvements. The PIs study
the hypothesis that increasing market access leads to an acceleration of
innovation through the spread of transportation infrastructure, as well as the
alternate hypothesis that increased communication led to increasing innovation
outside of the major urban areas.

Finding the direction of causality among infrastructure, market access, and
innovation will help solve outstanding questions in economic history about the
development process of the United States. The results of this study may be used
to assist in modeling an otherwise di;fficult feature of endogenous growth. This
analysis will help disentangle these factors by establishing the chronology of
the historical process of innovation, and by measuring the magnitude and timing
of the effects of the contributing factors. The dataset assembled here can also
be used to address related issues, in the study of historical innovation;
industrial and urban agglomerations; the spatial relationship between innovation
and economic growth; and to answer industry-specific questions informed by both
economic geography and the economics of innovation.