* 1426654
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: School Quality and Occupational Mobility in US Economic History
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Micheal Moody, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 07/31/2015
* USD 16,045.00

The project proposes to build new datasets to study how school quality and
accessibility interacted with occupational and geographic mobility in the early
twentieth-century U.S. The context for the study entails both the "high school
movement" and the transition from farming to service and manufacturing
activities. Both movements were important events in the economic development of
the United States, but their interplay at the household and individual-level is
not very well documented. In particular, the responses of families to the high
school movement and the implications of those responses for the children's long-
run outcomes and for regional economic development are just starting to come
into better focus. The proposed project will develop new micro-level evidence to
better understand these issues in the South, a relatively poor region at the
time, which subsequently narrowed the gaps in education and economic development
relative to the rest of the U.S. The project seeks to answer the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) How did variation in high-school access and high-school
quality affect the future earnings and occupational choice of southern students?
2) How did the expansion of southern high schools affect migration patterns?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main activity under the grant entails collecting a
highly detailed dataset from recently discovered records in the Tennessee State
Archives. High school principals were required to fill out detailed reports on
their schools. Above and beyond common indicators such as the student-teacher
ratio and length of the school year, these reports contain information on the
faculty's education and the subjects that were taught at the school; information
on school construction and the types of classrooms (e.g., labs); information on
the library (if one existed); and information about the age and progression of
students through grades. Taken together, this information allows a much richer
characterization of school quality than normally available to researchers. There
are sizable differences in high schools across locations in Tennessee in the
mid-1920s, even after controlling for observable economic and demographic
characteristics of the locations. Consequently, children from observationally
similar backgrounds faced quite different schooling environments, especially
when looking beyond the 8th grade level. This variation provides a basis for
studying how people responded to the changing educational environment and for
studying the long-run implications for those students as observed later in life
at the time of the 1940 Census.