* 1426749
* Collaborative Research: Damage Defects and Diffusion of Noble Gases in Minerals: He in Zircon as a Model System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Reiners, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2017
* USD 163,636.00

The noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon) play a central
role in understanding a wide variety of Earth and planetary processes, from
tracing the origins of meteorites, to the differentiation of Earth's mantle, to
dating the timing and rates of geologic processes. However, while we can now
measure noble gases in minerals very precisely, our understanding of how they
are incorporated into, migrate through, and are lost from minerals is simplistic
and likely wrong in important ways. This work will use a series of novel
experiments to understand the behavior of one noble gas, helium, in one mineral,
zircon, to build a general understanding of noble gas behavior in other
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to measure distinct isotopes of helium
in zircon specimens with differing amounts and types of crystal defects and
crystallographic orientations (as well as the widespread utility of the
radiogenic He radioisotopic dating system) make this an ideal model system for
this work. The project will focus on radiogenic 4He, as well as 3He and 4He
implanted or generated in situ in zircons with varying amounts of radiation
damage from both heavy nuclide recoil and light ion or neutron damage, and will
also examine the effects of damage defect annealing on He behavior. These
experiments will distinguish between the effects of damage defects as traps,
tortuosity enhancers, and fast-paths at various levels of pro- and retrograde
accumulation.