* 1426967
* Eliciting the Type Space in Extensive-Form Game Forms
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Paul Healy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 202,960.00

Game theory provides predictions of how individuals behave in strategic settings
(`games'). It has an enormous range of applicability, from competition between
firms to the evolution of a population of microorganisms. But its predictions
stem from very strong assumptions on peoples' beliefs, preferences, and
rationality. Recent laboratory evidence has shown that the standard predictions
are often inaccurate, and several new theories have been proposed as
replacements for the standard theory. But almost all existing data comes only
from looking at the strategies chosen. The principal investigator proposes to
dig deeper by eliciting information about how people think when playing these
games. By gaining a better understanding of the underlying thought processes,
more accurate game-theoretic models can be built. In addition to this research,
the principal investigator will invite high school students to campus
(particularly from under-privileged areas) to learn about economics,
experiments, and campus life in general.

In the centipede game, there is a pot of money and two players alternatively
choose to `pass' or `take'. If they pass, the pot grows and the other player
gets to pass or take. If they take, then they take a large fraction of the pot,
the other player gets a small fraction, and the game ends. If nobody takes after
't' periods, they split the large pot equally. Backwards induction arguments
predict that rational, selfish players will take at every node. But what should
a player believe about her opponent if she observes him pass? Should she
continue to believe in rationality, as prescribed by the backwards induction
argument, or should she now admit the possibility that her opponent is
irrational? Different assumptions lead to vastly different predictions about how
the game will unfold. Past experiments are not especially insightful in
answering these questions because they only observe players' actions. The
principal investigator will run experiments in which beliefs about preferences
and rationality are elicited during the game as well. This additional data will
help to understand how beliefs about rationality evolve, and to develop new,
more accurate predictions of how people behave in general sequential-move
strategic settings.