* 1426885
* Collaborative Proposal: Memory-based account of cue generation and predictive inference
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Rickey Thomas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2018
* USD 218,750.00

Research in decision-making has increasingly focused on the use of heuristics,
or short cuts, to describe judgment and decision-making, such as recent work on
rationality and fast-and-frugal heuristics. The central purpose of research on
fast-and-frugal heuristics is to characterize the various strategies that people
employ across a variety of decision tasks, with the goal of understanding the
interplay between task structure and strategy use. At the same time, other work
in judgment and decision-making has begun exploring the interrelationship
between basic-level cognitive processes such as attention and memory and higher-
level processes involved in decision-making. For example, recent work
illustrates that theoretical models based on long-term memory and working-memory
are important for understanding judgment and decision making in a variety of
real-world domains, such as medical diagnosis and intelligence analysis. The
overarching goal of the present research is to integrate the fast-and-frugal
heuristics approach with a judgment model based on basic memory theory. The
researchers' goal is to address, both empirically and theoretically, how basic
memory processes such as long-term memory and working memory both enable and
constrain the use of fast-and-frugal heuristics. The resulting theoretical and
empirical research will advance fundamental theory broadly in the area of
judgment and decision making.

Research on fast-and-frugal heuristics has been amongst the most influential and
widely cited work within the area of judgment and decision-making over the past
few decades. However, despite the proliferation of research on fast-and-frugal
heuristics, aspects of the framework remain somewhat ill-defined. In particular,
while the framework relies extensively on constructs from the area of memory,
relatively little theoretical and empirical work has pursued this aspect of
heuristic functioning. Yet, this is an important component of most real-world
judgment and choice tasks, as the input to the decision process often relies
upon the output of memory. The proposed work aims to address this gap in the
literature by systematically investigating the role of memory in cue-based
inference tasks where heuristics such as Take-the-best are assumed to operate.
In addition to the project's contribution to the empirical literature, this work
will break new ground on theoretical models of decision-making by merging fast-
and-frugal heuristics with a memory-processes model of hypothesis generation and
judgment. The proposed experiments will provide a detailed analysis of the
underlying memory processes that both enable and constrain memory-based
inference. The knowledge gained from this research has the potential to impact
decision making in applied contexts such as risk communication and medicine,
where heuristic rules are implemented as decision aids.