* 1426252
* Risk, Ambiguity and Dynamic Choice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Faruk Gul, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 380,526.00

This project studies two different problems in decision making under
uncertainty. The first deals with the resolution of uncertainty over time. The
choices that individuals make reflect not only their concern for the uncertain
ultimate outcome but also their interest in how this uncertainty will resolve
over time. We develop a new model of preference for temporal resolution of
uncertainty that is simpler than existing models, closer to many standard
dynamic models of economics and finance and, therefore, requires less data on
individuals' beliefs about the future. Our second projects deals with ambiguity;
that is, situations in which individuals find it difficult to quantify the
uncertainty they are confronting. We propose a framework in which decision
makers distinguish between unambiguous and ambiguous events and use the former
to calibrate the latter. Thus, each unambiguous event, A, is calibrated by two
events, the least likely unambiguous event more likely than A and the most
likely unambiguous event less likely than A. Our goal is to develop a subjective
(i.e., preference-based) theory of uncertainty that permits ambiguity perception
and yet is amenable to suitably modified versions of probability theory and
statistics. Models of temporal resolution of uncertainty and models of ambiguity
both have many applications in macroeconomics and finance. Both of these lines
of inquiry are limited by difficulties in developing and testing models. Our
simpler models should facilitate these applications and make it easier to
identify their parameters and find the relevant empirical
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our model of temporal resolution of uncertainty
differs from the Kreps and Porteus' model by allowing for preference for early
resolution without requiring sensitivity to higher order information that does
not affect fundamentals; it is analogous to standard dynamic models of choice
without preference for timing of resolution. In such models, the decision maker
derives utility each period from her possibly random consumption in that period.
In our model, the decision maker derives utility only from her beliefs about
what she will ultimately consume, not from her beliefs about how her beliefs
will evolve. This part of the research has the following goals: (i) provide an
axiomatic foundation of risk consumption preferences. (ii) Develop and analyze
appropriate measures of preference for early/late resolution of uncertainty.
(iii) Investigate the implications of risk consumption preferences in various
applications. Our model of calibrated ambiguity offers a new notion ambiguity
perception (which we call qualitative uncertainty relations). Our main result
establishes an inner probability representation for qualitative uncertainty
analogous to the Dempster-Shafer theory. To be able to distinguish ambiguity
perception from ambiguity attitude, we allow the qualitative uncertainty
relation to be incomplete. This incompleteness reflects the fact that when there
is ambiguity, a decision maker's perception of ambiguity by itself, is not
sufficient to determine her ranking of bets. The goal of this research is to
provide a representation theorem for qualitative uncertainty relations and use
it to study updating, inference and the relationships among existing models of
ambiguity and evidence.