* 1426756
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Granular Mechanics to Enable Robotic Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 180,163.00

We need robots to extend our reach into dirty and dangerous environments. To do
so, mobile robots must be able to locomote in messy unstructured terrains.
Conventional mobile robots have not begun to display the multi-functionality of
organisms that inhabit natural terrains. This is because mobile robots have been
created in, and their models mainly validated on, clean hard laboratory floors,
whereas biological organisms have evolved to contend with heterogeneous, dirty
and unpredictable environments. One important example of such real world complex
terrain, often overlooked by our community despite its ubiquity, involves loose
granular materials commonly found in deserts, disaster sites, containers, and
caves. Therefore creation of the next level of mobility to traverse dirty
environments requires simultaneous advances in both robotics and physics,
particularly regarding the interactions associated with desired behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is built on a foundation of geometric
mechanics, granular physics of intrusion and biological inspiration from desert-
dwelling snakes. We use geometric mechanics, a field that applies principles
from differential geometry to problems in classical mechanics, to design gaits
for biologically inspired robots. We bring the benefits of the geometric tools
to bear on granular environments: in even these mathematically "messy" systems,
we can begin to efficiently analyze gaits. The key concept in this effort is
that systems with complicated, nonlinear low-level physics often exhibit much
"cleaner" high-level motion, often approximated by a kinematic relationship.
Development of such high-level motion controllers will be aided by our ability
to discover basic biological principles of locomotion in granular media. We will
therefore develop computationally efficient analysis tools for granular
materials and will develop techniques to study the locomotion of systems on the
surface of granular media.