* 1426811
* Conference series on Network Science in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Myrna Wooders, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2018
* USD 106,476.00

Networks are crucial in understanding economic outcomes. Multiple key economic
questions require a network analysis. Whether an individual purchases one
commodity or another may depend on from whom he seeks advice about prices and
product qualities. The care given to a patient in a hospital and how much it
costs can depend on the network connections of the hospital and of the
physician. Understanding how networks form, how they are used and their
structure in diverse situations is important to almost all aspects of the social
sciences. To understand the fundamental properties of networked societies and
economies, those that may hold in diverse situations, it is crucial to develop a
deeper understanding of network theory from multiple
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks Conferences is for a series of four
conferences to take place over four years. Network theory and application have
reached the point where such a series is needed to advance research in the area,
to disseminate work in progress, to enable promising research to find a critical
audience and to obtain valuable feedback, to provide new researchers to the area
and graduate students a source of exposure to some of the cutting-edge, new and
path-breaking research on networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each conference in the
series will have a theme but all papers submitted relevant to the general focus
of the conference series will be considered. Key economic issues of interest
include networked markets, contagion and diffusion, homophily, segregation and
discrimination, networks in economic development, and inequality. Cooperative
and non-cooperative game theoretic approaches as well as decision-theoretic
approaches will be relevant. There are also related theoretical and econometric
issues of developing new models and statistical techniques for estimating
networked interactions, which may also be treated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within
the context of networked models there will be presentations of research on labor
markets, risk-sharing networks, financial networks, market design, experimental
and field research with emphasis on testing the predictions of network theory,
and estimation of networked models. The organizers will invite speakers doing
related research from other disciplines, including computer science and
sociology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While networks have been a central area of study
in sociology, they have only emerged as an important -- and now rapidly growing
-- part of economics over roughly the last decade. This has been accompanied by
astonishing growth of research on networks in computing science, statistical
physics, and engineering. The conference series will provide opportunities for
stimulating cross-disciplinary interactions. &lt;br/&gt;The annual conferences
would also serve expose current PhD students and young researchers to cutting
edge research in networks. Besides inviting some of the most promising PhD
students that can be identified to the conference, the conference series will
maintain a website to inform others about the program and its contents. Most
important, the conference series can help bring together scholars, especially
those who might be somewhat isolated, and enable them to reach a critical mass
to provide each other with feedback over time on ongoing projects.