* 1426193
* Remote Controlled Drug Delivery Material: Bio Catalytic Mechanisms of Drug Release Triggered by Magnetic Field
* MPS,DMR
* 12/05/2013,08/31/2017
* Sergiy Minko, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 364,800.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1309469 PI: Minko, Sergiy ORG: Clarkson University

Title: Remote Controlled Drug Delivery Material: Biocatalytic Mechanisms of Drug
Release Triggered by a Magnetic Field

Technical: The goal of the proposed research is to develop fundamental and
practical approaches for novel non-invasive methods of target-specific drug
delivery systems that explore biocatalytic mechanisms of drug release triggered
by a magnetic field. Building on the previous work of the research team in the
field of directed assembly of nanoparticles, this project aims at the design of
magnetic nanoparticle carriers of conjugated enzymes and model drugs. The
specific design of the particle shell will provide conservation of the enzymes
and drugs in the physiological environment if no magnetic field is applied. The
drug and the enzyme initially screened by the particle shell become activated
only if the magnetic field is turned on, and remain active after the magnetic
field is turned off. A magnetic field pulse will result in the formation of
particle aggregates when the enzyme and the drug are in a close contact and the
drug is released due to enzymatic cleavage of the chemical bond that binds the
drug to the particle. The proposed research plan involves the synthesis,
functionalization, and characterization of the magnetic nanoparticles that carry
conjugated enzymes and drug molecules. It includes study of the self-assembly of
these particles and the related biocatalytic activity of the assemblies in a
magnetic field in an in vitro environment that mimics extracellular and
intracellular biological environments and in living cells. To accomplish this
goal, the research team will design the particle shell using hydrophilic
polymers (polymer brushes) with non-fouling properties. The enzymes and drugs
will be embedded into and bound to the polymer shell. The composition of the
shell and molecular characteristics of the polymer brush will be optimized to
balance the steric repulsive forces exerted by the polymer brushes and
attractive dipole-dipole interactions induced in the magnetic field.

Non-Technical: The proposed project will design a novel, robust, non-invasive,
selective, and remotely controlled drug delivery system platform that can be
further developed toward delivery systems for anticancer drugs, anti-
inflammatories, and contrast agents as well as for tissue engineering and
biosensor applications. This work will further improve magnetic drug targeting,
one of the most attractive non-invasive methods for target-specific drug
delivery, wherein therapeutic medicines are directed remotely to a diseased
tissue. The proposed approach should reduce the side effects associated with the
non-specific uptake of cytotoxic drugs by healthy tissue and simultaneously
allow monitoring of the transport and distribution of drug carriers to and
around the diseased tissue using the contrast properties of the magnetic
carrier. The research program will contribute to both the education and growth
of national leadership in advanced science and technology. These impacts will be
realized by training the next generation of professionals using the
interdisciplinary environment of the research team and discussing project-
related topics and developments in the Biomaterials course taught by the PI.
Attracting high school and undergraduate students to scientific and professional
careers is a key element of the planned outreach. Significant efforts will be
directed toward increasing the number of students, especially from
underrepresented groups, who pursue advanced degrees in science and engineering.
The outreach components of the project will be realized through publications,
presentations at conferences, inventions, publication in local and national
media, and seminars and meetings with potential industrial partners, high school
students, and local community members.