* 1426721
* Police Professionalism and Changes in Police Protocols
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Earl, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 279,775.00

Prior research has examined organizational change in policing protocols when
police are confronted with public protests. This research has found that police
forces rapidly moved from endorsing a model for protest policing that relied on
force to stop protests (referred to as "escalated force") to a new model that
was based on de-escalating conflict through negotiation (referred to as
"negotiated management"). However, this existing work does not adequately: (1)
explain how this new alternative developed, (2) examine whether other
alternative models developed and competed for adherents; (3) analyze how factors
internal to policing, such as police professionalism, affected this process of
selection and change; and (4) problematize how organizations are affected by
legal mandates. These are critical oversights because major organizational
theories have long been able to explain the diffusion of new policies but have
not been able to explain where those new policies come from.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on work from science and technology
studies to develop a new perspective on how alternative innovations are created
and compete for implementation. Specific hypotheses anticipate: multiple
competing alternatives; that alternatives that were consistent with specific
elements of police professionalism were more successful competitors; and that
the courts did not directly dictate how police forces changed. Data are drawn
from quantitative and qualitative content coding of historical police journals
and other documents. Analyses map alternatives and their characteristics and
track the prevalence of themes identified by the qualitative coding. Findings
will advance scholastic understanding of how policing changes over time and how
organizations innovate and change. Broader impacts include public distribution
of research findings through radio and other media, undergraduate and graduate
student training, and scientific gains in understanding organizational change.