* 1426785
* Collaborative Research: International Buyer-Seller Matches
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Yi Xu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2017
* USD 136,093.00

International trade is the outcome of ongoing interaction between individual
buyers and sellers. Official statistics have historically revealed only the
aggregate trade flows that their activity generates. Quite naturally, trade
theory sought to model these aggregates with little attention to the role of
individual interactions, which were hidden from view. A limitation is that
research was unable to delve into the underlying reasons for such phenomena as
the decline of trade with distance or the sluggish response of trade to changes
in international prices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research exploits newly
available data on individual international transactions, from the United States,
Colombia, and China, to study the trading relationships among individual
exporters and importers. The project has four components. The first is the
construction of panel datasets linking domestic buyers and foreign sellers
through their international transactions. Each commercial shipment generates a
customs record that reveals the identity of both the importing and exporting
firm. In addition, the United States, Colombia and China all collect extensive
firm- or plant-level panel data on their domestic producers. By merging
China-U.S. shipments and Colombia-U.S. shipments with these producer-level
surveys, the researchers on this project will create large panel data sets that
follow importer-exporter relationships through time, with information on the
current state of both parties to each transaction. These data sets will permit
very detailed analyses of a wide range of issues concerning trade dynamics and
firm-level performance. They will be made available through the Census Bureau to
all researchers with the proper security clearance, and they will provide the
basis for further analysis within the remainder of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next component of the project will examine the quality
of trade statistics generated from the shipments data. Inconsistency between
exports reported by one country and the corresponding imports reported by
another has plagued the analysis of international trade. For example, what
Colombia reports exporting to the United States in 2007 differs by 8 percent
from what the United States reports importing from Colombia. These datasets
provide a tool to diagnose the discrepancies. Combined, the shipment records of
the exporting and importing country reveal, for example, whether discrepancies
arise in the aggregate statistics because they are based on different sets of
shipments or different valuations placed on the same shipments. This component
of the research should prove useful to the construction of trade statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third component of the project will describe buyer-
seller interactions. These datasets connect firms to each other through their
trading relationships. Network theory, which provides various metrics for
describing the potentially very complex connections among members of a network,
is a natural means of interpreting these connections. The metrics thus provide
insight, for example, into the extent to which a single widely-connected buyer
or seller contributes to international trade. The matched datasets will allow
the observation of the propensity with which different types of firms form links
with each other. Copula theory provides a natural means of describing the
matching behavior of different types of firms. Preliminary evidence suggests,
for example, little tendency for large firms and small firms to differ in the
extent to which they match with other large or small firms. In terms of size, in
other words, matching is neither positively nor negatively assortative. This
component of the research provides insight, for example, into the vulnerability
of trade to the potential collapse of a single entity and the extent to which
growth in trade is the consequence of new trading relationships or expansion of
trade within existing ones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final component of the
project will use the data to guide the design of economic models of
international trade. Recognizing the discrete nature of individual transactions
and the behavior of individual firms involved requires a radical reformulation
of international trade theory. The dynamics of network formation can be
described in terms of a paired set of generation-recombination processes. A
generic model that is fairly devoid of specific assumptions about behavior can
thus be applied to examine features that a wide class of economic models must
satisfy to explain basic features of the data. The research will then turn to
specific formulations of firm behavior that connect trading relationships to
other decisions, such as hiring and investment. This component of the research
should prove useful to the development of a measurement-based dynamic theory of
international trade that reflects the interaction of individual firms.