* 1426840
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Robotics 2.0 for Disaster Response and Relief Operations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

The project develops and tests novel compressive sensing and sensor locating
techniques that are adaptable to a myriad of different mobile robot designs
while operable on today's wireless communication infrastructures. Unique in-situ
laboratory and field experiments provide tangible results to scientists and
other stakeholders that can be leveraged to advance these systems into future
real-world hazard management scenarios. The research team develops new
technological approaches that results in mobilizing more intelligent, automated
"eyes and ears on the ground." Outreach efforts include: (i) integration of the
activities with practitioners; (ii) Seminars/webcasts to audiences like
environmental engineers and first responders; (iii) Annual technology day camps
to attract middle-schoolers from under-represented groups to engineering; (iv)
Demonstrations to local K-12 institutions; (v) Inclusion of the project themes
to the regular curricula; and (vi) International
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces Robotics 2.0; a
framework that targets autonomous robots that are co-workers and co-protectors,
adapting to and working with humans. The research team develops a Cyber-Control
Network (CCN) to allow multiple fixed and mobile robotic environmental sensing
and measurements to adapt quickly to the changing environment by dynamically
linking sub-networks of actuation, sensing, and control together. The design of
such CCN ControlWare, and compressive sensing architectures, could be adapted to
other large-scale problems beyond disaster response, mitigation, and management,
such as power grid monitoring and reconfiguration, or regional urban traffic
operations to respond to traffic congestion and incidents. The robotic sensing
platforms do not require a-priori knowledge of the hazardous and dynamically
changing environments they are monitoring. The Robotics 2.0 framework allows to
swiftly respond, to prepare, and to manage various types of disasters.