* 1426440
* Organ Exchange for Kidneys, Livers, and Lungs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* M. Utku Unver, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 280,247.00

Kidney Exchange emerged as an exciting application of market design in the last
decade. The purpose of this project is two-fold: First, it aims to increase
welfare gains from kidney exchanges via a number of policies that are designed
to expand kidney-exchange pools by attracting highly sought after patient-donor
pairs such as pairs with blood-type O donors. The second purpose of this project
is extending the tools introduced for kidney exchanges to other solid organs
such as livers and lungs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the
following four aspects of organ allocation. (1) Welfare and equity consequences
of organ allocation policies and incentivizing compatible pairs to participate
in kidney exchange: A new incentive scheme that relies on incentivizing
participation of compatible pairs in exchange via insurance for the patient for
a second future renal failure will be proposed. A new dynamic organ allocation
model will be introduced. Welfare and equity analysis of this scheme will be
conducted and compared with welfare and equity outcomes of live donation and
live donor organ exchange. The potential role of such an incentive scheme to
strengthen the national kidney exchange system will be presented. (2)
Desensitization protocols and kidney exchange: One of the transplantation
modalities involves desensitizing patients with antibody removing medication. In
the absence of kidney exchange these protocols increase the number of
transplants by removing a barrier to direct donation. A model on the impact of
desensitization in the presence of kidney exchange will be introduced and
analyzed. It will be shown that while blood-type desensitization increases the
total number of kidney transplants, tissue-type desensitization reduces the
total number of kidney transplants. (3) Blood sub-typing and kidney exchange:
Blood-type A has two main sub-types, A1 and A2. In contrast to type A1 kidneys,
type A2 kidneys can be donated to most type B or O patients. Since 2013, type A2
deceased donor kidneys are prioritized for type B patients under the UNOS
deceased donor allocation system. A kidney exchange model that includes sub-
types of blood-type A will be introduced and analyzed. It will be shown that
while allowing type A2 kidneys to be donated to type O patients increases the
total number of transplants, allowing type A2 kidneys to be donated to type B
patients decreases this number. (4) Liver/Lung Exchange: Living donor
transplants are carried out both for livers and lungs, where a lobe of these
organs from a donor is transplanted to the patient. In addition to blood-type
compatibility, size-compatibility is also essential for a successful transplant
for both organs. Furthermore, live donor lung transplantation requires two
donors for each patient where each donor donates a lung lobe to the patient.
Live donor lung exchange will be proposed as a new lung transplantation
modality. Models of liver exchange and lung exchange will be introduced and
analyzed. Welfare gains of these organ exchanges will be simulated.