* 1426703
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Efficient Algorithms for Contact-Aware State Estimation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Kaess, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This project addresses the difficult theoretical, computational, and applied
challenges required to exploit a deep mathematical relationship between recent
advances in machine perception/estimation algorithms and recent advances in
algorithms for planning/controlling systems undergoing frictional contact. It
explores the immediate applications of these algorithms to perception, robotic
object manipulation and parts assembly, and humanoid robots performing complex,
multi-contact, whole-body maneuvers. In order to showcase the generality of
approach, and simultaneously reach out to the important under-represented
minority population, the research team employs a new hands-on short-course
curriculum in which students apply the proposed algorithms to predict the
outcome of games using visual tracking. The course is being developed in
partnership with the MIT Office of Minority Education
(OME).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together expertise in
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), robot manipulation, robotic
automation, legged robots, and optimization and nonlinear control, leading to a
cross-fertilization of ideas and techniques. The research team exploits sparsity
in the complementarity formulations of contact in Lagrangian dynamics. The
project explores a new algebraic approach to nonlinear estimator design. The
project produces new theorems, new algorithms, and experimental results on real
robots. The project also represents a new partnership with our industrial
collaborator, ABB Robotics. The developed algorithms facilitate a broad range of
new applications in which perception and control systems monitor and manipulate
physical interactions with the world. From palm-sized smart devices to
environmental monitoring, sensors are becoming ubiquitous; to reach their full
potential these sensor networks must be able to reason about contact - the basic
building block of physical interaction.