* 1426933
* Detection and Impact of Industrial Subsidies: the Case of World Shipbuilding
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Myrto Kalouptsidi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2016
* USD 244,944.00

Government subsidies to industries have been prevalent throughout economic
history and in several countries have steered industrialization and growth. An
important and open question is what is their impact on production allocation
across countries, industry prices, costs and surplus. A significant challenge in
this task is that government subsidies to industries are notoriously difficult
to detect. Indeed, partly because WTO agreements prohibit direct and in-kind
subsidies other than infrastructure, the existence and magnitude of such
subsidies is often unknown.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research offers two
contributions to the effort of assessing the consequences of subsidies. First,
it provides a model-based empirical strategy to detect the presence and gauge
the magnitude of government subsidies. Second, it quantifies the impact of these
subsidies on industrial evolution.&lt;br/&gt; The PI applies this strategy to
the world shipbuilding industry, a prototypical example of an industry in which
subsidies are believed to play a prominent role. Shipbuilding in the 2000's is a
particularly interesting case because a striking reallocation of production took
place: in a single year (2006), China doubled its market share from 25% to 50%,
leaving Japan, S. Korea and Europe trailing behind. In 2006, China launched a
capital subsidization plan; these capital subsidies are known, observed and not
prohibited. However, many asserted that China's rapid rise was also driven by
government production subsidies, which are not known, unobserved and prohibited;
here the PI disentangles the contributing factors (e.g. differentiated products,
inherent cost differences, and most importantly, capital and production
subsidies).&lt;br/&gt; The proposal will develop and estimate a model of the
shipbuilding industry, providing one of the first empirical analysis in
industrial organization looking at dynamic agents on both the demand and the
supply side. A large number of shipyards offer durable, differentiated ships.
Their production decisions are subject to a dynamic feedback because of time to
build: shipyards accumulate backlogs, which affect their future ability to
accept new ship orders. Production is also subject to an aggregate stochastic
cost shock, summarized in the price of steel, a key production input. Every
period a large number of identical potential shipowners decide to enter the
freight market by buying a new ship from world shipyards. Demand for new ships
is driven by demand for international sea transport, which is uncertain and
volatile. As ships are long-lived investments for shipowners, demand for new
ships is dynamic.&lt;br/&gt; The model primitive of interest is the cost
function of potentially subsidized firms. As in many industries, however, costs
of production are not observed. The PI?s strategy amounts to estimating costs
from demand variation, as is common in empirical industrial organization, but in
a framework of dynamic demand and supply. The estimation strategy first uses new
and used ship prices to estimate the willingness to pay for a new ship and then
inserts it into the dynamic optimization problem of shipbuilders.&lt;br/&gt; The
first objective of the empirical analysis is to detect and measure changes in
costs that are consistent with subsidies. &lt;br/&gt; The second objective of
the empirical analysis it to use the estimated model to quantify the impact of
China's subsidies on ship prices, production reallocation across countries, as
well as industry costs and shipper surplus. The PI asks the question whether
this impact varies by different types of subsidies (capital or production
subsidies).