* 1426802
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Salinization of the Coastal Plain through Saltwater Intrusion - Landscapes in Transition along the Leading Edge of Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Justin Wright, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2020
* USD 427,463.00

Ocean waters are infiltrating and influencing freshwater-dependent coastal
landscapes due to a combination of human and natural factors. By the end of this
century, lower-lying parts of the outer edge of the Southern U.S. coastal plain
will be largely inundated by saltwater due to gradual sea level rise. The
salinization of surface waters and adjacent lands may lead to significant
reductions in crop and timber yields in managed ecosystems, significant declines
in ecosystem carbon sequestration in unmanaged ecosystems, and degradation of
coastal water quality due to extraction of soil nutrients by seasalts. This
project will enhance understanding of the coupled human and natural processes
influencing salinization of surface waters and adjacent lands. Investigators
will build and engage a coalition of expert stakeholders, including members of
state and local governments, regional planning groups, landowners and advocacy
organizations. Partnerships with stakeholders will help investigators define the
current status of coastal ecosystems, identify critical knowledge gaps, share
new research findings, and develop and explore future land use and climate
scenarios. This project will yield outcomes with predictive value in coastal
systems that are easily understood by stakeholders while representing complex
interactions between climate, hydrology, land use, and ecological processes and
identify pathways by which outcomes could be used to enhance coastal
sustainability. Together, these activities will help guide sustainable
management of this region and similarly affected regions over the next several
decades to centuries. Additional broader impacts include training four Ph.D.
students in interdisciplinary research that spans natural and social sciences,
engaging undergraduate students in mentored research experiences, and broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences by supporting early
career investigators and working to recruit students from underrepresented
groups. This project is supported as part of the National Science Foundation's
Coastal Science, Engineering, and Education for Sustainability program - Coastal
SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on saltwater intrusion, the
landward movement of salinity from the coast onto the coastal plain. A team of
investigators representing four disciplines (hydrology, biogeochemistry,
community ecology, regional planning) will integrate social, hydrological,
climate and ecological data into model scenarios to examine not only how human
decisions affect ecosystems but also how information about those ecological
impacts in turn affect human decisions. This project will facilitate
development, validation and refinement of a saltwater intrusion vulnerability
index (SIVI) for the Albemarle-Pamlico peninsula of North Carolina that accounts
for physical environmental processes influencing the movement of water and
solutes across the landscape as well as the extensive networks of canals,
ditches, roads and pump stations that fundamentally alter the flow of water
across the region. The index will be used, along with extensive and repeated
ground-based surveys of surface water, soil and vegetation conditions across a
range of vulnerable landscapes within the region, to better understand
ecological impacts of saltwater intrusion. Through workshops and surveys for
landowners, managers and other stakeholders in the region, the project will
reveal the likely impact of land-use decisions on saltwater intrusion under
scenarios of climate change.