* 1426642
* Some Implications of Scarcity Thinking
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2022
* Eldar Shafir, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2022
* USD 813,966.00

The proposed research explores the psychological mindset that arises in contexts
of scarcity. Previous research has documented the greater focus and precision
that emerge under scarcity, as well as the accompanying costs that are incurred
as those who focus on scarcity neglect things in the periphery. The present
studies investigate several additional yet central aspects of this scarcity
mindset. We extend earlier work on how scarcity captures attention and
encourages tradeoff-thinking, thereby yielding greater consistency in decision-
making. Among other things, we explore persistent shifts of attention, and
investigate how a focus on tradeoffs can make people highly effective budgeters
with respect to the resource that's currently scarce, but much less effective
regarding competing and future resources. We probe how resource inequality can
exacerbate the attention drawn to scarcity, and we explore whether increased
tradeoff thinking, by capturing attention, can actually undermine subjective
well-being and the ability to savor real-time experiences. A second line of
studies addresses not whether scarcity improves or harms decision-making;
instead, it looks at how a scarcity mindset changes the texture of everyday
thinking and experience along various qualitative and affective dimensions. It
investigates what kinds of thoughts or concepts are most accessible when we
inhabit scarcity, how our thinking changes as a result, and how, under scarcity,
people end up organizing the world into different categories. It also explores
why scarcity-related thoughts might prove more cognitively taxing than the
everyday worries that plague individuals who are not laboring under scarcity.
The proposed studies range from surveys and laboratory experiments to field
studies, and explore the differences between poorer and richer participants both
in naturally occurring settings, as well as in controlled experimental settings
where participants are randomly assigned to scarcity (limited budgets) versus
plenty (larger budgets), before their reasoning and decision-making are
assessed. The research provides a new and different perspective on decision-
making in contexts of scarcity in general, and of poverty in particular. It
focuses on how scarcity mindsets can change the texture of everyday thinking and
experience, and derives several novel predictions, both for theory and for
practice. It has profound implications for the debate about the causal
connections between poverty and behavior, and for how we might interpret various
policy failures. Scarcity is an inherent feature of the world, yet the
psychology of scarcity only arises in specific circumstances. This has important
implications for the study of cognition, decision-making, and well-being, and it
can have profound repercussions for how behavioral economics and the social
sciences understand contexts of scarcity, and for potential solutions to
problems of public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides a new and
different perspective on fundamental problems surrounding decision-making
behaviors in contexts of scarcity in general, and of poverty in particular. It
focuses on how scarcity mindsets can change the texture of everyday thinking and
experience, and derives several novel predictions, both for theory and for
practice. Previous research explored the greater focus and precision that emerge
under scarcity, as well as the accompanying costs that are incurred as those who
focus on scarcity neglect things in the periphery. We extend earlier work on how
scarcity captures attention and encourages tradeoff-thinking, thereby yielding
greater consistency in decision-making and judgment. Among other things, we
explore the resulting attentional shifts, and we investigate how the attention
devoted to such tradeoffs can make people good budgeters with respect to the
resource that is scarce, but less effective budgeters on competing resources. We
probe how resource inequality can exacerbate the attention drawn to scarcity,
and we explore whether increased tradeoff thinking, by capturing attention, can
actually undermine subjective well-being and the ability to savor real-time
experiences. We also investigate the kinds of thoughts or concepts are most
accessible when we face scarcity, how activated semantic networks change as a
result, and how, under scarcity, people end up organizing the world into
different categories. We also ask why scarcity-related thoughts might be more
cognitively taxing than the everyday worries that plague individuals who are not
laboring under scarcity. This research has profound implications for the debate
about the causal connections between poverty and behavior, and for how we ought
to interpret failure in circumstances of poverty, and of scarcity more
generally. Scarcity is an inherent feature of the world around us, yet the
psychology of scarcity only arises in specific circumstances. This has important
implications for the study of cognition, decision-making, and well-being, among
other things, we predict that certain errors and inconsistencies typically
observed in situations of abundance will dramatically diminish under scarcity.
We also expect the nature of certain affective experiences to differ in scarcity
contexts. This can have profound implications for how behavioral economics and
the social sciences understand experiences in scarcity contexts, and for ensuing
applications to policy challenges.