* 1426566
* Diversity and Transportation in School Choice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Tayfun Sonmez, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 302,880.00

This award funds theoretical and empirical research on school assignment
mechanisms found in many US cities. School choice programs aspire to weaken the
link between the housing market and access to good schools. Given existing
evidence that, all else equal, students prefer to attend schools close to home,
choice systems struggle to avoid scenarios where neighborhoods with good schools
fill up only with students who live nearby, shutting out those who live in other
parts of town. Opening up schools to pupils throughout the district, however,
requires that the district to absorb transportation costs, spending funds which
may otherwise be used to educate children. The projects outlined here are
unified by their focus on ways to resolve conflicts between increasing access,
ensuring diversity, and assigning students close to home.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One strategy districts use to adjudicate claims between
those from inside and outside the neighborhood is to apply a neighborhood
priority for only a fraction of school seats. The PIs develop theoretical
results on matching algorithms with slot-specific priority structures to cover
this scenario. They also investigate whether mechanisms with richer message
spaces, such as allowing students to be considered for schools either with or
without busing, would accommodate a reduction in transportation costs. Finally,
another important aspect of these choice plans involves developing the set of
schools an applicant may rank. For instance, it may be possible to define choice
menus in a flexible way so that students have options close to home and each
student also has access to high quality schools. A plan with these features was
recently adopted in Boston in 2013 based on our earlier work. Another project
examines whether flexible choice menus provide a satisfactory compromise using
data from the new choice system. The research will compare the newly submitted
choices under the new choice menus to earlier forecasts in a genuine out-of-
sample validation that will inform the strengths and limitations of
counterfactual analysis based on structural demand models.