* 1426168
* Information-Constrained Dynamic Models of Choice Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Woodford, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2017
* USD 217,005.00

This project will explore models of the cognitive processes underlying human
choice behavior in economic contexts. The models to be explored allow for
departures from fully-informed optimal choice. Rather than positing that
behavior is simply "irrational," they will explain departures from optimal
decision-making as resulting from the (generally pre-conscious) use of choice
algorithms that are well-suited to mostly achieving decision makers' objectives.
The choice algoritms also would not require greater information-processing
capacity. If successful, the research will have broad implications for the
development of economic theory by showing how research findings in other
disciplines, such as psychology, vision science and neuroscience, can be
integrated into economic analysis. It should also have broad implications for
the design of economic policies, if accurate perception of the incentives of
policies changes individuals' behavior.

The project will explore the ability of the proposed theory to explain anomalies
of economic choice in a variety of contexts. Applications to be considered
include processing errors as a source of randomness in observed choices; delays
in the adjustment of behavior to changing market conditions and differential
degrees of delay in the response to differing types of news; excess volatility
of asset prices as a result of inattentiveness on the part of some traders to
current market conditions; "focusing illusions" in which certain attributes of
alternatives are disproportionately influential in determining choice; context
effects in consumer choice, such as those that allow manipulation of purchasing
behavior by the addition of additional alternatives to the set with which
consumers are presented; and aspects of choice with regard to risky outcomes
that are inconsistent with the theory of expected utility maximization.

The approach to be pursued differs from previous treatments of these aspects of
behavior by seeking a more unified explanation for them, and providing
functional explanations for such patterns of behavior rather than merely
documenting "biases." The theory to be explored imposes additional constraints
on the theory of "rational inattention" (Sims, 2003, 2010). Particular attention
will be given to the dynamic processes of decision-making as a result of
accumulation of successive pieces of evidence, each of which is only slightly
informative as to best course of action, and to the optimal selection of
attention to different aspects of the choice situation in the course of such a
dynamic process. The constraints on information processing that are proposed are
ones that are common features of descriptive (non-normative) models of cognitive
processes involved in both perceptual judgments and value-based decisionmaking.
The empirical observations on which these are based include not only the
frequencies with which particular choices or judgments are made in particular
decision problems, but other measurements that provide evidence about the
cognitive processes giving rise to these choices, such as reaction times and
measures of neural activation. The proposed research will compare the
predictions of normative models based on information constraints with
experimental evidence of the kind used to test descriptive models of decision
making.