* 1426834
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Genomics and Computational Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 627,035.00

This REU Site award to the University of Georgia (UGA) located in Athens, GA,
and Clark Atlanta University (CAU), in Atlanta, GA, will support the training of
10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2014- 2018. This 14-year old
program, begun as a partnership between UGA and CAU, focuses on genomics,
computational biology, and epigenetics -- and their integration in the new area
of systems biology. Participants are expected to do full-time lab research as
well as participate in seminars and various workshops, such as the responsible
conduct of science, systems biology, molecular genetics research, career
opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school application
process. REU participants have access to a rich array of individual mentor's
facilities as well as many interdepartmental laboratories and centers with core
facilities for mass spectrometry, microarray analysis, next generation
sequencing, nuclear magnetic resonance, etc. Mentors are drawn from a variety of
departments including Genetics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Computer
Science, Physics and Astronomy, Plant Biology, and Plant Pathology. The
program's recruitment effort is through http://www.genetics.uga.edu/FGCB and
visits to the Atlanta University Center of Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse
College, and Spellman College as well as Fort Valley State University.
Participants are selected based on academic record, research performance, and
potential for outstanding research in genomics, computational biology, and
epigenetics by a committee of faculty mentors from UGA and CAU. Student
participants are tracked to determine their continued interest in their academic
field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research
experience. Success of the program will be assessed by various means, including
use of the REU common assessment (SALG URSSA).

This site is designed to increase participation of under-represented groups in
graduate study in the biological, physical, and mathematical sciences. It is
expected that at least 50 students, many from underrepresented groups and from
colleges with limited opportunities for research, will be trained over the 5
years of the program.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.genetics.uga.edu/FGCB , or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Jonathan Arnold at arnold@uga.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. David Logan at
dlogan@cau.edu).