* 1426997
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Changes in actual and perceived coastal flood risks due to river management strategies
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Doug Edmonds, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 232,616.00

The most populated cities in the world are located on deltaic coastal
floodplains because of their rich fertile soils and plentiful natural resources.
River deltas are disappearing at increasing rates due to human-caused changes to
sediment supply and river flow, gradual sinking of land, and rising sea level,
threatening the sustainability of human settlements on coastal river deltas.
River management projects, including those designed to promote navigation and
reduce flooding, have in some cases accelerated land loss and increased the
threat of hurricane flooding. This project will explore the relationships among
human river management, sediment supply, wetland building capacity, coastal
flood risk, and human perception of flood risk. Testing the connections between
river management, wetland loss, and flood risks will improve prediction of
future coastal system states and produce guidelines for how to sustainably
manage sediment supply and maintain human settlement in coastal areas. Other
broader impact activities will include graduate and undergraduate education,
application to public policy, and public and K-12 outreach. These are all
unified through the general recognition in Louisiana (like many other deltaic
coasts) that the science of deltaic restoration has strong and direct impacts on
local welfare and economies. This project is supported as part of the National
Science Foundation's Coastal Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability program - Coastal SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the co-evolution of deltaic landscapes and human system response by
focusing on changes in coastal flood risks due to human manipulations of
sediment delivery. Three experimental coastal basins in the central Mississippi
River Deltaic Plain with distinct histories of sediment delivery by rivers and
wetland loss responses will be investigated. An interdisciplinary team of
researchers will combine field studies and modeling approaches to characterize:
1) feedbacks between human river management strategies that reduce sediment
delivery and corresponding landscape degradation and 2) causal links between
landscape degradation resulting from reduced sediment delivery, increased flood
risks from hurricane storm surges, and human responses to perceived flood risks.
The team will explore historical and future outcomes of river management
strategies, including reorganization of human settlement in coastal areas using
computer simulations incorporating how sediment supply builds land and human
response to flood risks. Testing these system interactions in a modeling
framework will produce foundational knowledge that can inform management
decisions and promote sustainable human settlements on deltaic landscapes.