* 1426819
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Effects of restoration and redevelopment on nitrogen dynamics in an urban coastal watershed
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* J Grove, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 529,378.00

Excess nitrogen associated with urbanization is a critical threat to the
sustainability of coastal systems across the globe. More than half of the
estuaries in the United States show some level of impairment due to excess
nitrogen. Concerns about nitrogen have intensified with the development of plans
to achieve nutrient reductions required for compliance with new regulations.
This project will resolve critical uncertainties related to the effects of urban
stream and watershed restoration efforts on nitrogen dynamics. Human social and
economic factors that affect the implementation of these efforts will also be
addressed. The combined environmental, social and economic insights from this
project have the potential to transform assessments and management of urban
coastal sustainability across the globe. The research will build on ongoing
relationships with environmental managers in Baltimore City and County in the
areas of water quality and sustainability. Researchers will engage
representatives from city, county and state government agencies; non-
governmental organizations such as the Parks &amp; People Foundation and Blue
Water Baltimore; and local community groups through face-to-face interviews,
webinars, and research summaries. The research team will also initiate a citizen
science effort where residents collect data on pests and garbage associated with
restoration efforts, and will determine whether participation as a citizen
scientist increases knowledge of and enthusiasm for restoration practices. This
effort will directly address concerns that many Baltimore residents have
expressed about crime, pest production, and garbage associated with restoration
activities. Additional broader impacts include training graduate and
undergraduate students in sustainability science. This project is supported as
part of the National Science Foundation's Coastal Science, Engineering, and
Education for Sustainability program - Coastal SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the complex interactions between biophysical and social
science factors that underlie the effects of urbanization on coastal
sustainability. Building on the coupled socio-ecological research of the
National Science Foundation funded Baltimore urban Long-Term Ecological Research
(LTER) project, the Baltimore Ecosystem Study, the work will address the
following questions: How efficient are stream restoration and installation of
green infrastructure in reducing nitrogen delivery to the coast? Are these
effects easily overwhelmed by degradation of fundamental sanitary
infrastructure? Do coastal residents of different socio-economic status and
distance to the coast know and care about the ecological integrity of receiving
waters? Can citizen science efforts increase resident knowledge and interest in
coastal water quality? A team of ecologists, engineers, geographers,
sociologists and economists will evaluate the nitrogen benefits and public
support for a series of old and new stream restoration projects in the Baltimore
area and determine if the nitrogen benefits of these restorations and other
green infrastructure interventions are significant and visible in watershed-
scale nitrogen mass balances. The group will assess the willingness of
stakeholders to adopt these interventions in neighborhoods varying in socio-
economic status and distance to the coast and carry out economic and policy
analyses of stream and watershed restoration efforts. This information will be
used to identify areas within the urban to exurban complex where social and
biophysical factors converge to create opportunities for restoration and
revitalization.