* 1426560
* Theoretical and Experimental Research on Voting and Bargaining Games
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Thomas Palfrey, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 291,546.00

This award is for research on several fundamental open questions about
interactive strategic behavior in political economy. The approach combines
traditional economic modeling, mathematical tools of game theory, and laboratory
experiments to study voting behavior and bargaining behavior. In the last few
decades, research by theoretical and experimental economists has made tremendous
progress in understanding the basic equilibrium forces that underlie behavior in
very complex interactive environments. On the theoretical side, detailed
mathematical models have been developed to help understand and explain the
diverse and subtle factors that affect voter turnout, political polarization,
committee decision making, multilateral bargaining, and related phenomena in the
realm of political economy. By augmenting traditional economic analysis with the
formal theoretical framework of game theory, many new and important insights
have emerged. These insights not only help us understand these very complex
phenomena, but also provide guidance for how to improve bargaining protocols,
voting methods, and collective decision making institutions. On the experimental
side, controlled laboratory environments with human subject participants are
created as realistic parallels of the situations being modeled theoretically.
This allows sharp tests of the hypotheses generated by the theory, and at the
same time provides detailed micro-data to enable the measurement of key driving
behavioral variables such as risk aversion and social preferences. This in turn
feeds back to the theoretical modeling in order to fine-tune the theories to
more closely match observed behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research
to be undertaken encompasses three research areas: (1) The Dynamic Political
Economy of Public Goods; (2) Vote Trading; and (3) Income Taxation,
Redistribution, and Economic Efficiency. The research in the first area is based
on repeated bargaining models under the shadow of a voting rule. Outcomes of the
bargaining process evolve over time, with current outcomes affecting
opportunities for future bargaining agreements. We study the dynamics of public
investment and the effects of voting rules and political institutions on
economic efficiency. The second area of study investigates different voting
mechanisms that produce outcomes sensitive to preference intensity. Specifically
for this study, we are investigating the theoretical and behavioral properties
of vote trading and logrolling across issues. We aim to characterize stable vote
allocations, focusing on existence, efficiency, and comparison to the majority
preference relation. The third part of the project develops equilibrium models
to compare the effects of different political institutions on income taxation,
redistribution and economic efficiency. The hypotheses generated from these
theoretical models are then investigated experimentally.