* 1426799
* NRI/Collaborative Research: Models and Instruments for Integrating Effective Human-Robot Teams into Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Julie Shah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Robots for application in collaborative manufacturing must perform manual work
side-by-side with people. Such robots offer the flexibility to work on many
different tasks and promise to transform manufacturing by improving the quality
and efficiency of manual processes in small shops and in facilitates that
manufacture highly customized products. However, in order to meet this promise,
robots must be effectively integrated into existing manufacturing teams and
practices. To enable this integration, this National Robotics Initiative (NRI)
award supports fundamental research on the methods and instruments that
manufacturing engineers will need to form effective human-robot teams based on
task requirements and worker skills. These methods will also enable robots to
adapt to changes in workflow to maximize safety and efficiency. The effective
integration of collaborative robots into manufacturing promises improvements in
many industries that have not yet benefited from robotic technology. Therefore,
results from this research will contribute to the competitiveness of U.S.
manufacturing and benefit the U.S. economy and society. The research will
involve contributions from multiple disciplines, including robotics, human
factors, computer science, and manufacturing, and by academic and industry
collaborators. These collaborations will help the dissemination of research
results into manufacturing organizations and the integration of research into
undergraduate and graduate curriculum in engineering.

Advancements in robotics promise the use of collaborative robots that perform
interdependent work with people in order to improve quality, efficiency, and
safety in industrial manufacturing. However, integrating collaborative robots
into these processes and ensuring their efficient operation pose significant
research challenges, including the optimal allocation of work based on task
requirements and constraints, the formation of human-robot teams, and the
dynamic adaptation of teamwork to workflow changes. This research will address
these research challenges, enabling the seamless integration of collaborative
robots into these processes and achieving efficient and safe collaboration
between human and robot workers. The research team will create novel methods for
optimal allocation of tasks to human and robot workers based on task constraints
and worker skills, design new tools that utilize these methods to facilitate
workflow design for human-robot teams, and develop novel mechanisms that enable
robots to more efficiently and safely collaborate with human workers in the
planned manufacturing operations. These methods and instruments will be
validated in real-world manufacturing operations and disseminated through
industry workshops, engineering curricula, and a public outreach program.