* 1426760
* MRI: Acquisition of a TXRF spectrometer for Research in Chemistry, Biology, and Geology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Richard April, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 102,740.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Roger Rowlett from Colgate University and colleagues Richard April, Catherine
Cardelus and Randall Fuller will acquire a TXRF (total reflection X-ray
fluorescence) spectrometer. In general, in a TXRF spectrometer, X-rays are
directed to the surface of a material in a process that excites atoms in the top
layers thus generating fluorescence. The measurement of the fluorescence in a
detector provides information on the material composition. The technique is very
sensitive and allows quantification of minute amounts of materials with minimal
sample manipulation allowing characterization of complex, heterogeneous
matrices. The instrumentation will be used in research and inquire-based
laboratories not only in Chemistry but also in Biology and
Geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will enhance research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as (a) investigatiion of beta-carbonic anhy
drase (beta-CA) to understand the mechanism of allosteric regulation in this
enzyme; (b) understanding the effects of acidic deposition on northeastern
deciduous forests of the United States; and (c) studying aluminum toxicity in
acid-stressed stream ecosystems.