* 1426980
* Financial Market Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Douglas Davis, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 124,765.00

Financial products and the markets in which they are traded have long been among
the most highly innovative of all economic interactions. However, the worldwide
financial crisis of 2008 and the ensuing new laws regulating financial markets,
including in particular the 2010 Dodd Frank Act, have quite justifiably
stimulated immense attention among economists, both to identify the causes of
fragility in financial institutions, and to better articulate ways to alter the
architecture of financial markets so as to improve stability without unduly
limiting the benefits of the products and services offered in these markets or
restricting innovation. An inherent problem associated with designing new
regulations is an absence of evidence regarding the effectiveness of policies
that have never been observed. In exactly these circumstances laboratory methods
can be extremely useful. This project consists of a series of three experiments
with applications to emerging issues in financial market regulation. Each
experiment represents a way to gain some insight into potential consequences of
alternative policies. Experimental results will usefully allow some insight into
potential consequences of alternative policy options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first experiment evaluates triggering mechanisms for converting contingent
capital bonds into equity. Contingent capital bonds ("CoCo's") have been
identified as an important new instrument for promoting the stability of
systemically important banks. Critical to the successful implementation of
CoCo's is an efficient conversion triggering mechanism. Our experiment focuses
on the relative performance of the two leading candidate mechanisms, a fixed
price trigger in which conversion occurs automatically after crossing a
preannounced price threshold and a discretionary regulator, who also sees price
information, but who makes decisions in light of imprecise non-price signals,
and also face biased incentives to intervene or not. The second experiment
pertains to bank runs. In many instances liquidity suspension rather than
deposit insurance is the best (or only) policy tool available for discouraging
runs on distressed banks. In such instances, bank regulators are rarely able to
simply suspend payments until asset maturation, as would be ideal. Rather, they
temporarily suspend liquidity, and then re-set contract terms for remaining
depositors. In re-setting contract terms, a banking authority must choose
whether to skew the terms of payment toward the interests of ?patient?
depositors who maintain their deposits in the bank, or toward ?impatient?
depositors with unanticipated liquidity needs. Intimately related to re-
contracting conditions are the (de)stabilizing effects of publicizing
information about depositor withdrawal behavior. Our experiment interacts re-
contracting conditions and information regimes to identify the sort of ex post
re-contracting and information scheme most likely to promote stability. The
third experiment evaluates a simple model of the interbank loan market. In the
2008 financial crisis interbank markets ?locked up,? despite active central bank
intervention, raising questions as to why the market failed and what a central
bank can do to improve the functioning of this market in times of stress. We
propose a simple experimental implementation of a model by Allen, Carletti and
Gale (2009) to both better understand the coordination problem faced by banks in
this market and to gain some insight as to when and how persistent central bank
intervention may be desirable. This experiment will also serve as a baseline
environment for evaluating alternative motivations for liquidity hoarding
proposed in recent, more complex models.