* 1426989
* NRI: Co-Robots to Engage Next Generation of Students in STEM Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michele Miller, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2018
* USD 359,652.00

Robotic technologies are increasingly present in work spaces and homes.
Maintaining investment in robotics research and education is vital to the 21st
century US economy. Robotic technologies have the potential to transform not
only the workplace and home, but also the classroom. This project by Michigan
Technological University will introduce the use of two co-robots, robots that
work cooperatively with people, as teaching tools. GUPPIE is an unmanned
underwater glider that can monitor and inspect the environment and will be used
to introduce students to the idea of robots as co-explorers in everyday life.
Neu-pulator uses the electrical signals from a person's muscle to control its
movement; without this human interaction it cannot operate. Neu-pulator will
expose students to robotic assistive technologies that can enhance the
capability of human beings, increase their mobility, and improve their general
well-being. Both co-robots are low cost and their use is applicable in
educational settings ranging from the 4th grade through graduate school. Use of
both co-robots will be integrated into hands-on classroom and summer program
activities for middle school students. These activities will also incorporate
the concepts relevant to state standards for the middle school curriculum. The
co-robot platforms are expected to utilize both right and left side thinking for
students, encourage social interactions with team partners, and make explicit
connections between engineering core concepts and the skills needed to solve
today's most pressing problems. The project will investigate the hypothesis that
application-based co-robotic activities will be of greater interest to some
girls than the more prevalent mission-based robotics competition activities.

The Next Generation Science Standards for Today's Students and Tomorrow's
Workforce provides a curricular framework for using crosscutting concepts and
disciplinary ideas in the classroom. The overall goal of this project is to
develop and evaluate the use of two co-robotic platforms in learning contexts
that are socially meaningful to students. Middle school students, particularly
underrepresented students (female students from rural, low socioeconomic areas)
will be the focus of this work. The specific objectives are to: 1) Optimize co-
robotic platform designs for teaching STEM concepts, 2) Develop educational
activities/curriculum utilizing co-robotic platforms, and 3) Investigate the co-
robotic platforms effectiveness in engaging students in STEM learning. Taking
advantage of 3D printing to make the parts for the robots will expand the range
of possible designs that students can develop and reduce the amount of time
necessary to do so. Hands-on activities using the co-robots in class, after
school, or through summer programs will integrate science and engineering
standards with core teaching concepts in the middle school curriculum. The
dissemination of training modules and effective practices online will make the
platforms accessible nationwide.

Evaluation will investigate the hypothesis that the interest and creativity of
some girls will show greater increases with application-based co-robotic
activities than with mission-based robotics competitions. Researchers will
assess the complexity and creativity of student designs. The project will also
review student work products from each robotics activity to assess student
achievement of relevant standards.