* 1426961
* NRI: Autonomous Synthesis of Haptic Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 585,217.00

This project develops algorithms that enable a robot to physically explore its
environment using touch and to construct a language that it can use to describe
that environment. The steps include exploring an environment while actively
seeking information and then detecting potential elements of a language to
describe what was touched. A secondary phase involves taking the set of language
elements and compressing the language itself so that sensing, storage, and
communication are all more efficient and more robust. The work will use a robot
equipped with a robotic arm, hand, and fingertip sensors to describe objects and
surfaces it encounters, all without any information about the objects provided
beforehand. The importance of the work stems from the need for robots to operate
in environments where touch is the only reliable sensory source. For instance,
underwater applications often have limited visibility and dexterous manipulation
can suffer from visual occlusion due to the hand itself. This research will
enable robots to be more responsive to touch and more reliable in vision-
impoverished environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key technical tool used in
this work is ergodic control, a computational technique that finds exploration
strategies matching desired statistics. Symbol detection involves finding
definitions of dynamic sensor evolution that minimize measures of variability.
Language minimization depends on computing the entropy of a language, and
finding the minimal language that has the same level of expressiveness. These
three mathematical and algorithmic components need to be used in parallel during
language creation, and they each have to respect physical limitations on the
part of the robot (e.g., computational limitations and physical limitations).
Software will be shared through the Robot Operating System (ROS) and TREP
(physical simulation and optimal control software).&lt;br/&gt;