* 1426857
* Thermochronology and Geochemistry of Lower Crustal Xenoliths, Central Mongolia:  Formation and Evolution of the Deep Crust in an Intracontinental Setting
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Peter Zeitler, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 82,872.00

One thing we do not yet understand about Earth is why and how high elevations
can form far from the boundaries of the tectonic plates. Within one such region
of anomalous topography, young lavas from Tariat. Mongolia carry in them rare
samples of the lower crust in the form of what are called ?xenoliths?. These
xenoliths can help answer questions about how changes in the lower crust might
in turn control surface topography. The formation and destruction of high
topography can serve as a control on the evolution of ecosystems and
biodiversity, and can alter climate patterns. In particular, understanding when
high topography formed in Mongolia has significant ramifications for
understanding northern-hemisphere paleoclimate evolution because high-elevation
regions in central Mongolia are currently important for the nucleation of
northern-Pacific storms.

To understand the timing, formation and thermal evolution of the lower
continental crust in central Mongolia this multidisciplinary project of Tariat,
lower-crustal xenoliths will use thermobarometry, geochronology,
thermochronology, and major-element, trace-element, and isotope geochemistry.
Thermobarometry will be used to constrain the equilibration temperatures
pressures of the xenoliths. Abundant zircon observed in the samples will be
dated by U-Pb laser ablation ICP-MS and ID-TIMS to determine the timing of
lower-crustal formation and any metamorphism. To the extent that the Hangay
region is supported by a crustal root, constraining the age of the root will
help place constraints on the timing of rock uplift and, by inference and by
modeling, surface uplift. Whole-rock major- and trace-element geochemistry as
well as Sr, Nd, Hf, and Pb isotope analyses will help constrain what processes
formed the lower-crust. The post-orogenic, long term thermal evolution of the
lower crust will be assessed using U-Pb analyses of a number of trace phases
likely to be present in these samples, including monazite and apatite. Together
with ongoing studies of Mongolian geodynamics, this work, which is part of a
Ph.D. dissertation, will determine the timing and evolution of the high
topography in central Mongolia, and more broadly, advance our knowledge about
geodynamic processes that can produce high topography in continental interiors.