* 1426823
* Advertising, Search and Matching:  Econometric Models and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ali Hortacsu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2017
* USD 278,433.00

This award funds research on the role of information in driving consumer
choices, with special attention to retail banking and electricity
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional economic models of consumer
behavior typically assume that consumers are fully informed about their
alternatives. However, the observation of persistent price dispersion in many
product markets suggests that significant search and switching frictions are
present in many markets. Such frictions may impede forces of competition from
achieving efficient outcomes, and understanding the relevance and magnitude of
these frictions is key to assessing the necessity and impact of regulatory
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fully understand and quantify the role
played by these frictions, we need detailed information on consumer choices, and
especially the choice-making process. Therefore, the research project utilizes
detailed data on individual consumers' choices, incorporates explicit models of
search/switching costs and allows for limited information about alternatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With its 14 trillion dollars of assets, about 7,000 banks
and more than 80,000 bank branches, the U.S. retail banking sector is an
extremely important portion of the retail economy as well as the financial
system. Understanding how consumers decide on their retail banking provider and
whether they face search and switching frictions is a crucial input into
unpacking the drivers of competition and innovation in this important sector of
the economy. The project on retail banking utilizes a unique data set with
information on the entire purchase funnel of consumers' shopping process: (1)
awareness, (2) consideration, and, finally, (3) purchase. The data set is among
the first to provide detailed data on all stages of the purchase funnel, as well
as being the first of its kind to study retail banking, a very important sector
of the economy that has not been frequently scrutinized through the lens of
modern empirical industrial organization. The data set is also complemented with
information on advertising and product characteristics to estimate a very
detailed model of shopping and decision-making at the individual consumer level.
The data and the model allows the researchers to assess (1) what the magnitude
of search and switching costs are that rationalize consumer behavior, and (2)
whether advertising is primarily effective in increasing awareness or driving
choice conditional on awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also develop
similar empirical methods to study consumer choices in deregulated retail
electricity markets, which are in operation in 24 states. Insights from this
study as well as the utilization of the empirical methods developed here in
other electricity market contexts can aid market monitors and regulators to
devise policies to further the competitiveness and efficiency of these markets.
The project will utilize very detailed subscriber level data from Texas'
residential electricity choice program. The research team will develop an
econometric model that allows for search and switching based choice frictions.
The model will be used to assess whether such choice frictions can explain the
evolution of market shares and prices of the incumbent providers vs. entrants,
and how interventions such as informational campaigns to reduce search/switching
costs may affect market structure and consumer welfare.