* 1426003
* Collaborative Research: Policy Analysis by Revealed Preference: With an Application to Food Security
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Sandip Sukhtankar, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,202.00

Governments around the world spend large shares of their budgets on the public
provision of private goods. Understanding the tradeoffs between redistribution
in cash and in kind is thus central to government policy. For example,
redistributing in-kind may potentially reduce choice and thus lower recipients'
welfare, but may increase taxpayers' welfare if they have paternalistic
preferences and care more about preventing hunger than about the other
aspirations of the poor.

The PIs propose a rigorous experimental study to estimate (i) beneficiary
preferences over equally-valued cash and in-kind transfers, (ii) the relative
impact on nutrition of cash and in-kind transfers, and (iii) beneficiary
valuation of in-kind benefits. This design allows one to measure both
beneficiary preferences (using the take up rate) as well as the causal impact of
cash vs. kind benefits on nutrition (using the random assignment of the offer to
estimate both intent-to-treat and treatment-on-treated effects on nutrition).
Further, the PIs offer additional randomly selected households the option to
exchange their in-kind benefits for an experimentally varied cash transfer,
which allows to estimate the demand for the status quo at various prices and to
quantify the consumer surplus (or loss) beneficiaries obtain from in-kind
benefits relative to cash transfers.

Methodologically, the PIs integrate in one design the two paradigms that have
dominated modern policy evaluation, one based on impacts, the other based on
revealed preferences. In addition, by measuring take-up at randomly varied
prices, the PIs are among the first to estimate individual-level beneficiary
valuations of publicly-provided private goods using experimental data.

The revealed preference approach is unique in enabling one to understand and
accommodate heterogeneity of beneficiary preferences over cash and in-kind
benefits, thereby reducing the political and ethical risks of policy
experimentation in a critical area such as food security for the poor