* 1426705
* Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in Ceramics, July 20-25, 2014 at Holyoke College, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Monika Backhaus, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Ceramics Gordon Conference on challenges in
transport and reactivity gathers a diverse group of speakers, discussion
leaders, professionals, doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers for one
week (July 20-15th, 2014) at Mount Holyoke College, MA, in an interactive
environment where an interdisciplinary understanding is being built; and new
ideas are shared, generated and dispersed across the community. The fraction of
doctoral students, postdoctoral associates, early career faculty and
underrepresented group (URG) members (incl. minorities and women) attendees is
significant, beneficial interactions with experienced scientists in the field
are anticipated. Extended poster sessions and a special student introductory
reception fertilize these exchanges. Students are trained via lectures, poster
discussion and mentoring in the latest scientific achievements in the field.
They are exposed to different modeling approaches and the latest measurement
techniques, including in situ and in-operando tools and are starting
collaborative efforts to further explore knowledge and tools. As a long term
benefit of the conference, scientific progress in the field is accelerated by
interdisciplinary, faster innovation and collaboration. As well, a more suitable
workforce is created that benefits both the economy and society in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The conference is structured in
nine sessions that address defects, transport and reactivity in constrained
ceramics or electrochemical devices, correlation between structure and transport
at grain boundaries, interfaces and surfaces, behavior of ceramics under large,
complex or mixed driving forces, catalytic activity of oxides, charge transfer
and transport processes in oxide and non-oxide ceramics, ceramic
thermoelectrics, exchange processes in fuel cells, batteries and capacitors,
hydrogen-conduction in ceramics. Several presentations focus on in situ studies
by spectroscopy, tomography and strain measurements. Different modeling
approaches ranging from ab initio to phase field modeling and including
different length scales are integrated into the sessions.