* 1426772
* ABR: Studies of Partial Melting of the Mantle and Deep Earth Volatile Cycles
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Jed Mosenfelder, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2019
* USD 354,755.00

In this Accomplishment Based Renewal, two projects will be executed that both
relate to the chemical dynamics of melting in Earth's interior. One project aims
to understand the relationship between molten sulfides and carbon in the mantle.
A significant portion of Earth's carbon may be dissolved in molten sulfide in
the mantle, and so it may play an important role in cycling of carbon between
different Earth reservoirs. It may also play an important role in the origin of
diamonds, as well as affect but geophysical properties of the mantle. The second
project investigates the relationship between magma formation and the oxidation
state of Fe in Earth's mantle. Subtle differences in the proportions of oxidized
(Fe3+) and reduced (Fe2+) iron in Earth's mantle could have profound effects on
melting behavior. For example, mantle enriched in Fe3+ may melt more readily,
thereby affecting the relationship between mantle temperature and the volume of
volcanic material erupted at mid-ocean ridges or oceanic islands such as Hawaii.
More oxidized mantle also initiates melting at greater depth, which determines
how the mantle and crust change composition through time and the masses of
volatiles such as H2O, CO2, and sulfur that are liberated from the mantle during
volcanic activity. This also influences geophysical properties, including the
mantle's resistance to convection, and how both seismic waves and electric
currents propagate through Earth's interior. Finally, inferences about the
oxidation state of Earth's interior based on compositions of volcanic rocks
require knowledge of the melting behavior of Fe3+ during melting. Experimental
studies will be conducted to improve understanding of both of these
topics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data indicates that the melting point
of sulfide is diminished significantly by the presence of carbon, and new
experiments will be conducted to explore how this relationship changes with
pressure and sulfide composition, as well as to determine the C solubility in
sulfide melts. The experiments will take into account the changing activity of
metal that occurs with increasing pressure in the mantle, and in particular how
the ratio of metal to sulfide changes. Experiments will be conducted with piston
cylinder and multianvil devices up to 18 GPa and will be analyzed by electron
microprobe and SIMS. Investigation of the behavior of Fe3+ during partial
melting of the mantle will focus on the behavior in pyroxene, as this is the
chief reservoir of oxidized iron in the mantle and there are few previous
measurements. Experiments and X-ray spectroscopy will determine the partitioning
of Fe3+ between pyroxene and silicate melt during partial melting to quantify
the relationship between melting and mantle oxidation state. Additional
experiments will explore the relationship between oxidation state of peridotite
and partial melting behavior.