* 1426700
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research:   Adaptations of fish and fishing communities to rapid climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Eli Fenichel, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,514.00

Climate change presents a profound challenge to the sustainability of coastal
systems. Most research has overlooked the important coupling between human
responses to climate effects and the cumulative impacts of these responses on
ecosystems. Fisheries are a prime example of this feedback: climate changes
cause shifts in species distributions and abundances, and fisheries adapt to
these shifts. However, changes in the location and intensity of fishing also
have major ecosystem impacts. This project's goal is to understand how climate
and fishing interact to affect the long-term sustainability of marine
populations and the ecosystem services they support. In addition, the project
will explore how to design fisheries management and other institutions that are
robust to climate-driven shifts in species distributions. The project focuses on
fisheries for summer flounder and hake on the northeast U.S. continental shelf,
which target some of the most rapidly shifting species in North America. By
focusing on factors affecting the adaptation of fish, fisheries, fishing
communities, and management institutions to the impacts of climate change, this
project will have direct application to coastal sustainability. The project
involves close collaboration with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and researchers will conduct regular presentations for and
maintain frequent dialogue with the Mid-Atlantic and New England Fisheries
Management Councils in charge of the summer flounder and hake fisheries. To
enhance undergraduate education, project participants will design a new online
laboratory investigation to explore the impacts of climate change on fisheries,
complete with visualization tools that allow students to explore inquiry-driven
problems and that highlight the benefits of teaching with authentic data. This
project is supported as part of the National Science Foundation's Coastal
Science, Engineering, and Education for Sustainability program - Coastal
SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address three questions: 1) How do
the interacting impacts of fishing and climate change affect the persistence,
abundance, and distribution of marine fishes? 2) How do fishers and fishing
communities adapt to species range shifts and related changes in abundance? and
3) Which institutions create incentives that sustain or maximize the value of
natural capital and comprehensive social wealth in the face of rapid climate
change? An interdisciplinary team of scientists will use dynamic range and
statistical models with four decades of geo-referenced data on fisheries catch
and fish biogeography to determine how fish populations are affected by the
cumulative impacts of fishing, climate, and changing species interactions. The
group will then use comprehensive information on changes in fisher behavior to
understand how fishers respond to changes in species distribution and abundance.
Interviews will explore the social, regulatory, and economic factors that shape
these strategies. Finally, a bioeconomic model for summer flounder and hake
fisheries will examine how spatial distribution of regulatory authority, social
feedbacks within human communities, and uncertainty affect society's ability to
maintain natural and social capital.