* 1427039
* Hazard Manager Stereotypes as Influences on Trust, Confidence and Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Branden Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2018
* USD 240,048.00

Organizations managing hazards must be trusted enough by citizens to gain policy
support and compliance with recommendations for personal protective behavior,
yet both trust and distrust are hard to change. Institutional stereotypes may
contribute to this resistance to change. This project will use focus groups and
a survey to identify stereotypical attributes of three institutional types at
both general (government, business, nonprofits) and specific (government agency,
corporation, advocacy groups) levels, including both common stereotypes (e.g.,
government red tape; business profit-chasing; nonprofit sentimentality) and
rarer potential attributes (e.g., whether the institution values respect for
authority, or purity and sanctity, in addition to reducing harm). These
responses will be compared to attributes of specific national organizations
(e.g., Food and Drug Administration [FDA]) in these three categories in varied
hazard domains (e.g., food safety, nuclear power). This will allow for seeing
whether organizations rated as being ?typical? of their category have the same
perceived attributes as when they are rated as more abstract entities (such as
"government" or "corporation"). A subsequent experiment will assess how much
stereotypes affect trust, confidence, and cooperation when a specific
organization (e.g., FDA) is managing a hazard, and a citizen has situation-
specific information-not just stereotypes-to help determine whether the
organization is trustworthy. Experiments will then test alternative messages
based on either stereotype manipulation or other factors affecting trust (e.g.,
feeling that you share salient values with the organization; feelings that the
hazardous activity or process is "good" or "bad")to see if the messages affect
cooperation in real cases (e.g., donations to specific advocacy groups;
purchases of radon test kits in a specific state).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stereotypes of institutions may be at least partly
responsible for perseverance of (dis)trust, yet this potential causal link has
not been tested; we do not even know whether these stereotypes are relatively
simple or complex, or whether they vary across people, institutional categories,
or topical domains (e.g., food safety versus radon). The practical implications
of this research should be to help government, business, and nonprofit managers
understand how much influence their actions will have on citizens' and
consumers' views of how they will or do manage hazards. If stereotypes beyond
the control of managers dominate trust judgments and cooperation, then managers
can abandon attempts to build trust and focus on convincing people that it is in
their own best interest to perform a specific behavior (e.g., test for radon)
regardless of whether they trust the institution. If the experiments show
instead that situation-specific information about the organization swamps any
effects of its institutional stereotype, then managers will know to emphasize
their specific situation in order to improve how the organization is perceived
or how much cooperation (e.g., adoption of recommendations for self-
preservation, purchases, or donations) it gets from the public. Mapping of how
organizations are positioned relative to others in their institutional category
(e.g., one corporation versus another), or to extra-category organizations in
their topic domain (i.e., potential allies or enemies), could be used by
organizations to evaluate where they might need to strengthen their reputations.
Given the value of distrust in a democracy depends upon citizens being well-
informed about institutions, this map if posted in publicly accessible forums
(online or offline) could help citizens evaluate organizations with which they
must deal, raising personal efficacy and (potentially) institutional
responsiveness to citizen demands.