* 1427470
* MRI:   Acquisition of an ICP-MS for novel undergraduate research and project-based student learning
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Betsy Kleba, Westminster College of Salt Lake City
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 245,306.00

This award funds the acquisition of geochemical instrumentation that will be
used by faculty members across four departments (chemistry, biology, geology,
environmental science) at Westminster College to substantially expand
undergraduate opportunities to conduct novel research on topics that are
currently beyond in-house instrumental capabilities. This research will be
highly interdisciplinary, collaborative, integrate research with education, and
involve the biogeochemical cycling of elements in natural systems, including the
Great Salt Lake. The researchers will develop new curriculum and lab activities
around the new instrument in multiple courses that will provide students with
hands-on experience in the use of modern instruments and mass spectrometry.
These unique labs will use real world applications to infuse education with the
excitement of discovery and move students beyond simply following a list of
protocols to measure metal concentrations, and will focus on interdisciplinary
approaches and the development of critical thinking and problem solving skills.
The instrumentation will improve the researchers' ability to use project-based
learning for training in courses across multiple disciplines, create new
opportunities for research collaborations and cooperation on interdisciplinary
research with partners at other educational, public, and private institutions in
the region that lack this instrumentation, provide one of the cornerstones and
core facilities of a new geology department at Westminster, and support and
expand outreach that promotes science and environmental education of K-12
students and actively links researchers with public outreach. Some of these
effective and proven activities at Westminster are coordinated through the Great
Salt Lake Institute, which facilitates collaborations between undergraduate
researchers and faculty at Westminster with several K-12 schools and their
teachers and students to conduct research projects that involve the Great Salt
Lake. With these outreach activities, this instrumentation will support ongoing
efforts to improve student retention in STEM disciplines, especially women and
students from diverse backgrounds. Among others, the McNair Scholars program, a
federally funded effort to increase the number of students from underrepresented
groups who go on to graduate school and will increasingly recruit and target
students in STEM disciplines. The new instrument will enrich their classroom
experience by introducing more inquiry-based labs and incorporating research as
a learning tool early in the curriculum. The instrumentation will also expand
undergraduate research opportunities for these students outside the classroom to
further integrate research into their education and training.
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds the acquisition of a quadrupole
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) for simultaneously
measuring concentrations of a wide range of trace metals and other elements at
the parts per billion and parts per trillion levels typically required for
environmental research. A hydride generator sample introduction system that
couples directly to the ICP-MS will allow for the analysis of the elements
Selenium, Arsenic, Tin, and Mercury in high salinity matrices, such as in the
Great Salt Lake, which is the focus of research by multiple faculty and their
students at Westminster.