* 1427772
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next-Generation Sequencer for a Shared Genomics Core Facility at San Francisco State University and the California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jonathon Stillman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 414,418.00

An award is made to San Francisco State University, a public minority-serving
institution, and the California Academy of Sciences (CAS), a museum specializing
in biodiversity and evolution research, to acquire an Illumina MiSeq Benchtop
Sequencer in order to develop capability for next generation sequencing (NGS) at
both institutions. The MiSeq system is an accessible and cost-effective
sequencing platform that will be utilized by students, researchers, and faculty
members to train students and broaden the research scope of scientists at the
awarded institutions. The MiSeq Sequencer will be housed in the Department of
Biology at SF State and will complement existing equipment in a shared molecular
core facility. The instrument will enable NGS-based research projects by more
than 25 research groups at SF State (and the associated Romberg Tiburon Center),
CAS and San Jose State University. Access to the MiSeq will enable student and
faculty researchers to expand the methodology employed in their research to
address questions including how organisms adapt to changing environments,
determining the mechanisms of adaptation by natural selection to long-term
environmental change, and identifying critical mechanisms of disease
pathogenicity. The MiSeq will be the cornerstone of institutional efforts to
expand biodiversity, informatics and genomics training for students and faculty
at SF State and is critical to the Department of Biology's core mission of
broadening participation in science by traditionally underrepresented groups
enabling them to conduct research on state-of the art instrumentation. As part
of these goals, the instrument and the data it produces will be incorporated
into SF State graduate and undergraduate courses and training experiences. In
partnership with the Academy, a new museum exhibit will be created showcasing
the use of genomic and sequence data by researchers at both institutions to
explore questions of biodiversity, climate change and evolution. This exhibit
will capitalize on the public outreach infrastructure of the Academy and will
directly involve SF State students presenting their own research using the
requested instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
described research aims is to transform research and training at SFSU and CAS to
carry out state-of-the-art genomic research. Over the last two years SF State
and CAS have reached a critical mass of scientists, post-docs and graduate
students with cutting edge questions and bioinformatics expertise to utilize
high-throughput genomics technology in their research. These researchers fall
into three overlapping research areas: Microbial and disease genomics,
Comparative, evolutionary and population genomics, and Ecological and
conservation genomics. Specific research applications include the following: 1)
Discovery and assembly of small microbial genomes, 2) Transcriptome and RNA
sequencing, 3) Microbial metagenomics, 4) PCR amplicon sequencing, 5) Reduced-
representation library sequencing and 6) Low-coverage whole-genome sequencing.
Availability of NGS technology will allow CAS to create a new exhibit showcasing
the use of genomic data to explore questions of biodiversity, climate change and
evolution at a nationally-recognized natural history museum and outreach center
(with more than 1 million visitors each year). Acquisition of this
instrumentation will allow the diverse student body at SFSU and CAS to acquire
the knowledge, skills and experience to be top candidates for careers in the
biological sciences and in the competitive and expanding field of genomics. By
combining training and outreach with state-of-the-art science enabled with the
Illumina MiSeq, this award will have a broad impact on biodiversity research and
sustainability science in the San Francisco area and beyond.