* 1427414
* The Arithmetic of Compassion: Confronting the Challenge of Pseudoinefficacy in Charitable Giving
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2017
* USD 449,998.00

In a great many situations where we are asked to aid persons whose lives are
endangered, we are not able to help everyone. What do we then do? Research has
shown that people often feel less good about helping those they can help and
they help less when their attention is drawn to those who cannot be helped. The
demotivation exhibited by these people may be a form of pseudoinefficacy that is
nonrational. We should not be deterred from helping whomever we can because
there are others we are not able to help. This research aims to provide a better
understanding of the cognitive and emotional underpinnings of pseudoinefficacy
and test strategies to combat it. Specifically, the research team examines
pseudoinefficacy in the context of decisions about whether to aid people whose
lives are endangered. Laboratory experiments and online surveys illuminate the
interplay between the scope and framing of the humanitarian need, the type of
thinking it stimulates, and the distinct emotional responses associated with
such thinking and with pseudoinefficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of
this project comes from the fact that, domestically and internationally,
millions of people struggle to survive in the face of poverty, disease, food
insufficiency, natural disasters, and human malevolence. Those individuals and
governments fortunate to have the ability and desire to help those in need are
inundated with requests for vital aid. Many do respond. Humanitarian aid
provided by individuals, NGOs, and governments, though large in some sense, is
but a fraction of what is needed and what could be provided. For those in a
position to help, decisions are strongly motivated by perceived efficacy.
Inefficacy, real or perceived, shrivels response, even among those who have the
desire and the means to protect and improve lives. It is tragic, indeed, when
efficacy goes unrecognized and vital aid that could be provided is withheld due
to the illusion of ineffectiveness that the research teams has labelled
"pseudoinefficacy." This research projecct explores and documents the root
psychological causes of pseudoinefficacy and develops ways to mitigate its
harmful consequences. Although the proposed studies are set in the context of
humanitarian aid, the problem of pseudoinefficacy is central to a wide range of
important personal and societal decisions motivated by perceived efficacy, such
as actions to mitigate climate change or other threats to human health and the
environment.