* 1427626
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Electron Microprobe for Major and Trace Element Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kevin Mahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 899,307.00

This award will provide funds to acquire a modern Electron Microprobe. Electron
microprobe analysis is a technique for the chemical quantification of sub-micron
volumes of solid material, a basic requirement across the full range of natural
and engineering sciences. The new instrument will maximize spatial and
analytical precision (to 200-700 nanometers and 1-10 parts per million levels).
A core regional facility is envisioned to enable cutting-edge science, new
discovery opportunities, and to complement the teaching missions of institutions
throughout the Rocky Mountain region. The facility will support dissertations
and theses for graduate and undergraduate students, and a variety of training
opportunities will be offered including a new course on analytical techniques
and one-day workshops on using the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of the chemical compositions and
fine spatial heterogeneities in natural materials (e.g. rocks, minerals,
fossils, soil) is crucial for understanding formation processes and material
properties, whereas engineered synthetic materials require characterization for
technology design and quality control. Minor and trace element compositions can
enable determination of the origin of a variety of natural Earth. These data can
help determine the processes associated with the formation of strategic ore
deposits, and to understand processes affecting potential microbial life forms
on the deep seafloor and in other planetary environments. Minor and trace
element variation can dramatically alter the properties of metals, ceramics,
carbides and other synthetic materials. Newly developed techniques allow
electron microprobe analysis of thin films for both layer thickness and
composition.