* 1427329
* NRI: Dexterous Manipulation Attained Using Task-Specific Admittance Realized with Variable Impedance Actuation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Joseph Schimmels, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2018
* USD 749,981.00

This project establishes a sound engineering framework for designing next-
generation robots and intelligent robotic devices that can be used to perform
difficult manipulation tasks quickly and reliably. The framework is useful both
for traditional robots already installed in manufacturing plants and future
"soft robots" that will make human-robot collaboration safe. The focus is on
constrained manipulation problems such as assembly and repair tasks, many of
which are dull, difficult, and dangerous. The results will allow robots to be
more effectively used in a wide range of domains such as service, healthcare,
space exploration, and manufacturing.

The project yields a means to simultaneously control both a robot's position and
its elastic behavior using kinematically redundant arms driven by actuators with
controllable stiffness. It will be demonstrated that proper design of the robot
path plan and admittance plan will ensure that constraints imposed by
manipulation tasks are accommodated and high-level task objectives are reliably
satisfied despite uncertainies (e.g., the door is opened, the assembly is
completed properly). The four planned major outcomes of this research program
are: 1) general procedures for selecting the optimal manipulation plan
(identifying the optimal motion and admittance plans) using numerical procedures
to ensure that the specified manipulation task progresses quickly,
appropriately, and reliably despite uncertainties, 2) procedures for realizing a
specified admittance plan involving the use of a redundant serial manipulator
with variable impedance actuation (a series elastic actuator with controllable
stiffness) at each joint, 3) a demonstration of improved robot dexterity in
constrained manipulation tasks using redundant serial manipulators with variable
impedance actuation to verify the manipulation plan selection methods and
validate the overall manipulation approach, and 4) a library of constrained
generic task categories with associated optimal manipulation plans.