* 1427007
* Meeting: The Third Symposium on Urbanization and Stream Ecology (SUSE3)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Seth Wenger, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,116.00

Human societies rely on many services provided by healthy freshwater ecosystems,
including improved water quality, productive fisheries, aesthetic amenities and
flood management, amongst others. In urban and suburban areas, these services
are often impaired due to contamination, channel alteration and other human
impacts. The causes and consequences of these impairments are not well known,
particularly in the context of feedbacks on ecosystem function. The Third
Symposium on Urbanization and Stream Ecology will bring together ecologists and
other scientists from around the world to advance our basic understanding of
urban streams, and develop approaches to apply this understanding to improving
management of freshwater resources. This third meeting (SUSE3) focuses on
improving our mechanistic understanding of impacts of urbanization on streams,
and in particular how these mechanisms vary around the globe due to differences
in climate, civil infrastructure, historical land use, and natural ecosystem
characteristics. Participants will report on recent research and take part in a
series of targeted discussions aimed at synthesizing this knowledge and guiding
future research. An improved mechanistic understanding will help managers and
communities identify the most effective and economically efficient methods for
restoring and protecting stream ecosystems. To facilitate the translation of
scientific research into management action, the organizers will establish a web-
based platform to communicate the research results of this symposium and future
urban stream studies. The SUSE3 meeting will also include a training session
devoted to scientific communication to improve the ability of scientists to
communicate with broad audiences. The goal is to increase the rate of
dissemination of scientific information and enhance pathways of communication
between researchers and urban stream managers, policy makers and the general
public, thereby improving the ecological condition of urban freshwater
ecosystems and ensuring that they continue to provide services valued by
society.