* 1427808
* US-Singapore Workshop: Collaborative Research: Understand the World by Analyzing Many Video Streams
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 11/30/2015
* USD 17,985.00

NSF CNIC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US-Singapore Workshop: Collaborative Research:
Understand the World by Analyzing Many Video
Streams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many thousands of network cameras
provide near real-time view of the world. Valuable scientific information could
be extracted by analyzing the large amounts of data. However, most of the data
are never analyzed or archived. Analysis programs must be able to retrieve data
from distributed sources, manage network accesses, schedule computation
resources, allocate storage space, analyze the data, store the results, and
present the results in formats that are easy to comprehend. Although the data
are available, analyses today are limited due to the lack of a software
framework to write and execute computer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To harvest the knowledge from the
data, the researchers from six universities are creating a system that can
analyze the vast amount of visual data. The team will organize a workshop in
December 2014 in Singapore. In this workshop, the team will share the
information of the projects currently been conducted independently in the six
universities. The researchers will present and demonstrate their projects,
discuss and develop a plan for collaboration. The team includes Yung-Hsiang Lu
(lead, Purdue University), Ketan Mayer-Patel (University of North Carolina),
Cong Liu (University of Texas Dallas), Wei Tsang Ooi (National University of
Singapore), Jason Gu (Singapore University of Technology and Design), Yonggang
Wen (Nanyang Technological University).