* 1427231
* Demand Analysis for Matching Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nikhil Agarwal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,613.00

The assignment of students to various schools in their district can have
important implications for student achievement and student welfare. A large body
of theoretical work in Economics studies the design of matching markets. Several
school districts including New York, Chicago, Boston, Cambridge, Denver and New
Orleans employ mechanisms in which students rank schooling options and a
computerized algorithm matches students to schools. A similar mechanism is used
to assign medical residents to residency training positions. The design and
their implementation is based on theoretical insights for which Alvin E. Roth
and Loyd Shapley were awarded the Nobel Prize in 2012. However, the empirical
study of these markets is lagging. An important barrier to progress is
methodological since most mechanisms still in use today do not make it safe for
agents to report their true preferences. This fact may have important
implications on student welfare, and fairness. The primary goal of the proposed
research is to develop new methods for estimating preference models using data
from matching markets, and apply them to analyze policy relevant questions that
have been thus far theoretically and empirically intractable.

The proposed research will develop a new method for estimating a discrete choice
model using reported preferences from an assignment mechanism where participants
do not have the incentive to report their preferences truthfully. Previous
research estimating preferences has largely been limited to settings where
particular institutional/theoretical features support treating reported
preferences as truthful or specific details of the mechanism provide partial
information on preferences. Our baseline approach analyzes information that is
revealed by assuming that the observed reports are optimal. We then analyze
relaxations of this strong form of rationality to study what can be learned
under weaker assumptions on agents' sophistication. The methodological analysis
involves studying large sample properties of a two-step estimator, extending
techniques from the literature on demand models to study non-parametric
identification of the model, and comparing computational methods for
implementing the estimator. As an application, the proposed research will study
the elementary school admissions system in Cambridge, MA that uses a variant of
the (old) Boston mechanism, which is susceptible to manipulation. Subsequently,
we plan to compare preference estimates under varying assumptions on the
sophistication to assess their sensitivity to economic assumptions.