* 1427778
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Robert Johnson, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,940.00

MRI: Acquisition of a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program provides
Murray State University with a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer (DMA), thus enhancing
a rapidly expanding research and educational initiative in polymer and materials
science. The DMA is primarily used to determine the strength and elasticity of
polymer films and fibers as well as other plastics and materials. Acquisition of
this state-of-the-art instrumentation supports a number of multi-disciplinary
and collaborative research and education efforts across the Jesse D. Jones
College of Science, Engineering and Technology and expands industrial outreach
activities in the region. The instrumentation directly impacts research teams
within the college, where an understanding of the fundamental mechanical
properties of novel plastics and materials advances applications in energy
storage, electronic devices and liquid crystalline technologies. The integration
of a practical instrument component and "hands-on" training into lecture and
laboratory courses for undergraduate and graduate (Masters) students within the
college further improves an already growing curriculum in polymer and materials
science. Since Murray State is a comprehensive university in rural, far-western
Kentucky, many undergraduates are first-generation college students, thus access
to this instrumentation is extremely rare and provides a tremendous advantage in
gaining meaningful employment or in acceptance into pre-professional school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The Department of Chemistry at Murray State
University (MSU) will acquire a TA Q800 Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer (DMA),
complete with humidifier and low temperature capabilities, for the mechanical
testing of polymer films, fibers and liquid crystalline materials. The DMA
instrumentation immediately enhances the research programs of the three PIs, all
of whom have been very active in the promotion and publication of their
research. Since 2010, the PIs have collectively mentored 27 students (20
undergraduate, 7 Masters) and published 14 peer-reviewed papers (12 with student
co-authors). Specific projects that benefit from this instrumentation include
(a) ionic-liquid containing polyester networks for use in electroactive devices
(PI Miller), (b) ionic-liquid containing polyurethanes for microfluidic devices
and ion selective electrodes (co-PI Johnson) and (c) liquid crystalline
materials (co-PI Allenbaugh). In order to enhance these projects, the standard
film/fiber tension kits as well as the humidity and submersion features are used
to test the mechanical strength of novel materials developed in the laboratory
under a controlled environment, while liquid crystalline materials are tested
using the parallel plate and/or shear sandwich accessories. Dissemination of the
results from these experiments is made in the form of peer-reviewed publications
as well as undergraduate student presentations at local, regional and national
conferences. Various lecture and laboratory classes, ranging from Polymer
Chemistry and Materials Science to Instrumental Analysis, are also enhanced
through the integration of this instrumentation and hands-on training. Beyond
teaching and research, the DMA instrumentation allows MSU to establish
collaborative efforts with regional companies such as Ashland and Estron
Chemical, Inc. that aid in the development of commercial products in
applications ranging from paints and coatings to construction materials.