* 1427834
* US-Kazakhstan workshop and pilot study - Pesticide occurrence and ecological effects in the Syr Darya River Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Alan Kolok, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,751.00

a non-technical explanation &lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate whether
advanced environmental assessment tools can be used in a remote and ecologically
stressed agricultural watershed. A new international collaboration will be
formed through a project designed to evaluate suitability and geographic
transferability of current strategies for measuring occurrence and ecological
effects of non-point source contamination. The project will train U.S. graduate
students and future Kazakh scientists and engineers in methods for studying
contaminants and effects and also will advance environmental science by
developing a geographically-neutral framework for assessment of non-point source
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;This workshop and pilot project will help build a
framework useful in Kazakhstan and other developing countries promoting
agricultural development while maintaining or improving environmental quality.
Graduate students will have a chance to work together and will gain valuable
international experience. The outcomes of this workshop and pilot project will
benefit Kazakhstan and other developing countries thus improving international
environmental security. The workshop and pilot project will enhance educational
modules of existing graduate courses taught by project investigators. An
interactive website will compare water monitoring activities and outcomes of the
workshop and pilot project with efforts from Nebraska Watershed Network whose
mission is to involve students and local stakeholders in projects that focus on
the environmental stewardship of freshwater
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a technical
description&lt;br/&gt;While developing countries move toward modern agricultural
practices, they often do not have the infrastructure to monitor and evaluate
impacts to water quality. Ecological degradation can accelerate to levels
impacting agricultural productivity and environmental security. This workshop
and pilot project will permit investigators to identify research questions
related to water and sediment quality and ecological effects of nonpoint source
contaminants that will help sustain productivity, while maintaining
environmental quality. Few watersheds have sustained the degree of ecological
and chemical impact in the Syr Darya river basin. Close study using state-of-
the-art tools to study occurrence and effects of currently- and historically-
used agrichemicals will help better evaluate and minimize future impacts.
Moreover, initial results from this study will help form a framework for the
assessment of the occurrence and ecological impacts of nonpoint source
contaminants in Kazakhstan and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;A team from the U.S. will build
on their current research in the fields of environmental chemistry and
bioavailability to improve our understanding of chemistry and ecological effects
of organic contaminants in aquatic environments. Objectives are to: 1) Hold an
international workshop to present and compare approaches for measuring and
predicting the ecological effects of biologically active contaminants in the Syr
Darya river basin; and 2) Using a pilot project approach, develop a framework
for measuring occurrence and ecological impacts of nonpoint source contamination
in a remote ecosystem in Kazakhstan. Project participants in Kazakhstan are
affiliated with al-Farabi Kazakh National University in Almaty, KZ and include
Mukhambetkali Burkitbayev, Bolat Uralbekov, Omirzha Taukebayev and Nadir S.
Mamylov.