* 1427519
* International Workshop on Multiscale Mechanobiology; Hong Kong; May 15-18, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Xiang-Dong Guo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2016
* USD 99,960.00

The purpose of this award is to support international travel for distinguished
invited speakers, including young investigators and investigators from
underrepresented groups from the US, to attend the Inaugural International
Workshop on Multiscale Mechanobiology (IWMM) to be held in Hong Kong, May 15-18,
2014. Mechanical modulation of cell, tissue and organ functions has been long
recognized as an important basic science issue and has generated global interest
in the field of mechanobiology. One of the challenges in the field of
mechanobiology is the inherent nature of multi-disciplinary and multiscale
hierarchies. Therefore, biologists, engineers, physical scientists, and
clinicians must come together and develop new approaches and future vision for
mechanobiology. In addition, the spatial and temporal scales in mechanobiology
must be bridged via modern biology, quantitative molecular imaging, and large-
scale computation. The objectives of this IWMM: (1) bring together top leaders
in the US, Asia, and Europe/Middle East in the relevant fields of biology,
engineering, physical sciences, and medicine to exchange cutting edge research
in multiscale mechanobiology; (2) expose young investigators including junior
faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students to advanced research in
multiscale mechanobiology; and (3) develop blueprints for the future of
multiscale mechanobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several transformative broader
impacts will be realized by this inaugural IWMM. The exchanges, brainstorming,
and breakout sessions will be captured in a whitepaper forming the blueprint of
multiscale mechanobiology for publication in primer journals and rapid open
access disseminations. In addition, an edited book on Multiscale Mechanobiology
will be compiled at the end of the Workshop for publication. Finally, the
Workshop will include young investigators and prepare them for the future and
opportunities of multiscale mechanobiology. Young investigators will be
intimately involved in the Workshop, providing a unique experience to observe
how the future of mechanobiology will be shaped collectively.