* 1427259
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Morphologic, Socioeconomic, and Engineering Sustainability of Massively Anthropic Coastal Deltas: the Compelling Case of the Huanghe Delta
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Gail Kineke, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 465,541.00

Owing to their extraordinary natural resources and ecosystem services, river-
delta coastlines host hundreds of millions of people worldwide. However, the
sustainability of society on delta landscapes is uncertain, due to significant
human influences including: 1) reduction of sediment - the life sustaining
resource for any delta system - as a result of damming and leveeing of river
channels, 2) disrupting natural sediment dispersal and deposition patterns
within and along river-delta coastlines, 3) accelerated sinking of low-lying
deltaic landscapes due to sub-surface water and fossil fuel extraction, and 4)
sea-level rise, which threatens to drown deltaic landscapes. The overarching
goal of this project is to evaluate river-delta sustainability by merging
science that examines physical aspects of delta growth with socio-economic
decisions. This research will provide guidance for the sustainable use of
vulnerable delta resources, while promoting best engineering practices that
protect society and infrastructure from disasters including river flooding,
ocean storms, and sea-level rise. Additional broader impacts include training
future scholars for the interdisciplinary field of coastal sustainability,
creating an internet-based interface to promote global-citizen awareness in
coastal sustainability, and developing teaching modules with complementary
workshops intended for high-school courses on coastal science and sustainability
for underrepresented groups in Houston and Los Angeles. This project is
supported as part of the National Science Foundation's Coastal Science,
Engineering, and Education for Sustainability program - Coastal
SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The crucial resource in building sustainable deltaic
coastlines is sediment, and the key control on sediment delivery is river
channel avulsions, relatively rapid displacements of river channels and the
formation of new river channels. A multi-investigator, cross disciplinary team
of researchers will address the following questions of fundamental importance to
river-delta coastal sustainability: What are the socioeconomic consequences of
altering river channel pathways on a highly utilized delta? Are current delta
land loss mitigation strategies sustainable over long-range (decades to
centuries) timescales? Can the location of significant future flooding events be
predicted? These questions will be addressed using the Huanghe (Yellow River)
delta, China as a case study. The Huanghe delta is a compelling region because
it is one of the most dynamic and heavily urbanized coastal landscapes in the
world. Lessons learned from the Huanghe delta will be exportable to evaluate the
sustainability of delta coastlines worldwide. This project will build predictive
models for coastal sustainability by bringing together the mechanics of avulsion
on deltas, associated channel-shoreline interaction, socio-economic response to
natural and engineered avulsions, and the resulting coupled human-natural system
dynamics. U.S. researchers in cooperation with Chinese colleagues will create a
template for multi-disciplinary coastal sustainability research to help guide
future governance and decision making that integrates human-delta dynamics,
societal objectives and uncertainty, hazard and land use engineering, coastal
morphodynamics, and educational outreach. This project will evaluate whether
massively anthropic coastal landscapes can be managed using engineered avulsions
to minimize coastal erosion in the face of reduced sediment supply and rising
sea level.