* 1427708
* US-Sweden Planning Visit: Laser/Waterjet Processing of Cubic and Wurtzite Boron Nitride to Exceed the Hardness of Diamond
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Pranav Shrotriya, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2017
* USD 16,937.00

This project will initiate a new international collaboration between researchers
at Iowa State University, USA and Lund University, Sweden to design micro-
structured materials that are harder than diamond and also more chemically
stable. Such materials are likely to have numerous industrial applications,
especially in machining tools.

Single and polycrystalline diamonds are the hardest known materials; however, at
high temperatures, diamond loses its chemical inertness and thermal stability.
In contrast, cubic boron nitride (cBN) has exceptional chemical and thermal
stability but has much lower hardness. Increasing the hardness of BN to the
level of diamond is expected to allow BN materials to outperform diamond-based
tool materials in corrosive and high temperature environments. The development
and cost-effective processing of ultra-hard synthetic BN has the potential to
revolutionize the manufacturing industry because of the superior chemical and
thermal stability of BN materials compared to current state-of-art diamond
tools. For example, ultra-precision machining of hardened steel dies and molds
using the hardest BN tool could produce optical quality surfaces and ultra-fine
tolerances, allowing expensive polishing operations to be eliminated while
improving form accuracy.

This planning visit will explore the effects of a novel laser/waterjet process
on two phase cubic boron nitride/wurtzite boron nitride materials (cBN/wBN) to
determine if the treatment leads to BN that exceeds the hardness of diamond. The
laser/waterjet process was developed at Iowa State University in collaboration
with researchers at Lund University who are leading experts in synthesis and
characterization of cubic/wurtzite Boron Nitride. The planning visit is expected
to initiate work on a number of different research directions, including
designing processing conditions that result in desired microstructures for
hardness enhancement, understanding the effects of laser heating and waterjet
quenching on microstructures in cBN/wBN, assessing the influence of ultra-hard
BN tool materials on high speed machining of ferrous alloys, and determining how
the BN microstructures influence the chemical and mechanical properties of
cBN/wBN. Overall this collaborative research effort will enable greater
understanding of structure-property correlations in ultra-hard materials.

The grant will support a planning visit by the PI, Shrotriya, and a US graduate
student. The graduate student will spend approximately a month in Sweden
performing proof of concept research that is likely to result in developing
larger research proposals to the NSF division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation in the Engineering directorate as well as the Division
of Materials Research in the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate.