* 1427926
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffractometer for Nanotechnology and Energy Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ratna Naik, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 266,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Judy Westrick from Wayne State University and colleagues Stephanie Brock, Ratna
Naik, Eranda Nikolla and Charles Winter will acquire an X-ray diffractometer for
the study of powdered samples. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. A
powder diffractometer also allows compositional analysis. The studies described
here will impact a number of areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part
of teaching as well as research and research training of chemistry, physics and
engineering and materials science students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) understanding structure-function-size relationships in nanoscale
transition metal phosphides and arsenides with magnetic and catalytic
functionality; (b) preparing solid-state devices with applications in energy and
the environment; (c) studying the effect of size on the phase-transformation
temperature of MnAs; (d) developing and growing of thin films; (e) developing
heterogeneous catalysts for biomass conversion and electrocatalysts; (f)
studying heterogeneous catalyst for biomass conversion; (g) developing
multifunctional electrodes for Li-air batteries; (h) establishing applications
of in-situ XRD for battery materials characterization; and (i) investigating
lattice deformations at multiferroic transitions.