* 1427621
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tandem MS for Plant Cellular &amp; Subcellular Metabolic Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Toni Kutchan, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/28/2018
* USD 457,388.00

An award is made to the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center to purchase a
tandem mass spectrometer for plant cellular and subcellular metabolic studies.
The investment in mass spectrometry technology and method development at the
Danforth Center benefits integrated studies of plant metabolism and provides
guiding protocols for the greater scientific community. The projects supported
by this new instrumentation aim to increase productivity of food and biofuel
crops through a detailed understanding of how plants turn energy provided by the
sun to biomass and how plants sense and respond to their environment and attack
by pathogens. As part of the development of new technologies, PI Bradley Evans
and Co-PI Doug Allen will perform a special study with young investigators from
Harris-Stowe State University to probe the new instrument's capability to
analyze difficult samples. This will add to the educational outreach taking
place at the Danforth Center. Currently, the training of tomorrow's scientists
occurs through an active NSF-REU program, recruitment of high school students
that work in Danforth Center laboratories for classroom credit, participation in
a regional program for high school students - STARS (Students and Teachers As
Research Scientists), workshops for teachers and an interactive middle- and high
school mentoring program that connects our scientists with nearby schools. These
programs are essential to core Danforth Center mission goals to strengthen the
plant science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal is to improve
plant productivity that: i) proficiently feeds a growing world population, ii)
provides sustainable feed-stock alternatives to petroleum and iii) supplies
useful bioactive compounds; all designed to improve quality of life. Advanced
tandem mass spectrometry instrumentation is needed to investigate metabolites
present at very low and dynamic levels and segregated to specific cells and
organelles. A major impediment to understanding biochemical function in plants
is our incomplete characterization of metabolism. Plant metabolism is a very
dynamic process and operates in tiny compartments and low amounts of material.
Thus it is the fine architecture and dynamic metabolic events throughout plant
life that define function, fitness, agricultural yield and allow plants to
respond to changing environments and stresses. These activities are, however,
not quantitatively understood and incomplete metabolic characterization prevents
elucidation of biochemical pathways and gene and protein functions, thereby
precluding successful applications in biotechnology. Sensitive mass
spectrometers that are capable of analyzing minute concentrations have the
potential to transform understanding in many aspects of plant function. Research
efforts on NSF-funded and other projects at the Donald Danforth Plant Science
Center and surrounding community are advancing science through methods
development on scantly present metabolites and will be greatly extended by this
technology.