* 1427950
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer: QuantX EDXRF
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Peter Mills, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 106,541.00

Analyzing the elemental composition of materials is important throughout the
natural sciences, and has a broad range of applications in the social sciences.
For example, researchers who are interested in studying the prehistoric movement
of people around the globe analyze the elemental composition of stone tools to
determine the geological sources of the stones so that they may infer trade
patterns, long-distance voyaging, and even migration routes. Researchers at the
University of Hawai`i at Hilo have been studying Polynesian economies and
voyaging by analyzing the geological origins of stone artifacts with a non-
destructive technique called Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence (EDXRF). The
analytical equipment, however, is obsolete and needs to be replaced to continue
the ongoing project. This NSF grant supports the acquisition of a desktop Energy
Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (EDXRF) spectrometer for rapid and cost-efficient
laboratory work. Researchers also intend to expand the applications of EDXRF to
other research programs, such as rapid-tracking of changes in the composition of
lava from Kilauea Volcano's ongoing eruption (which could signal important
changes in the nature of the eruption), and the analysis of contaminants in
soils in residential, agricultural, and industrial settings. The expansion and
continuation of the EDXRF program will engage under-represented students in the
practice of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines,
especially Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander students studying anthropology,
geology and environmental sciences. It will also support graduate research,
high-school projects, and a multitude of professional collaborators. The use of
non-destructive EDXRF analyses in Oceanic settings attracts and inspires members
of descendant communities to engage in scientific fields of study, and supports
undergraduate publication and eventual placement of student trainees in graduate
programs. UH-Hilo's student body is one of the most diverse in the nation, and
30% of the students self-identify as Native Hawaiians or other Pacific
Islanders. Non-destructive EDXRF provides these students with the opportunity to
determine how their ancestors interacted with their environment and with each
other while providing them with fundamental skills in material
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the archaeological component, the proposed
research involves sampling of artifact collections from prehistoric residential
sites and quarries to clarify stone resource procurement patterns throughout
Polynesia. The approaches will involve lab analyses at UH Hilo. Continued
examination of the complex nature of the movement of lithic resources throughout
Polynesia will provide a better framework for interpreting the role of resource
inequities in Oceanic social evolution. The sustained effort will lead to more
robust diachronic models of Oceanic exchange and sociopolitical development.
Expansion of research functions to the rapid analyses of newly formed lavas from
Kilauea Volcano and to the screening of soil samples for environmental
contaminants will both contribute to a better understanding of natural and man-
made environmental hazards in the Hawaiian environment and help plan for better
and more efficient intervention methods.