* 1427420
* CNIC: US-India Collaborative Research Linking Remote Sensing, Citizen Science, and Robotics to Address Critical Environmental Problems in Data Sparse Regions
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Joshua Peschel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2015
* USD 34,565.00

Technical description &lt;br/&gt;Despite several decades of calls for improved
international data sharing and environmental observations, measurements of
critical environmental data remain unavailable in many parts of the world,
especially in developing nations due to the lack of data collection, quality
control, and bureaucratic obstacles. Reliable local environmental data are
essential for identifying environmental trends and formulating appropriate
policy responses. This proposal focuses on a synthesis of traditional and
emerging observation techniques to address data scarcity in the Arkavathy
Watershed, Karnataka as a case study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a new
international collaboration among the University of California, Berkeley (UBC),
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), and the Ashoka Trust for
Research in Ecology and Environment (ATREE), Bangalore to generate novel
environmental data collection techniques for application in data scarce regions.
It will bring together researchers with expertise in environmental science in
India, robotics and remote sensing to pilot an observation system linking field
measurements, robotics and satellite remote sensing. There will also be a
workshop at ATREE to formulate next steps including conceptualizing future
proposals for submission to Indian funding agencies and to NSF?s Geospatial
Sciences and Robotics programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposal lies in the development of data collection and
synthesis&lt;br/&gt;approaches that address fundamental environmental data gaps
within the context of developing nations. It will evaluate the feasibility of
achieving three key design goals for novel data collection systems: spatial and
temporal extension of observations, low cost reproducible measurements, and
ensuring researcher safety. It will identify key methodological challenges
associated with fusion of multiple data types for consistent interpretation of
environmental observations, as well as specific challenges associated with
independent methods. It will provide cross-fertilization of research expertise
across groups in three institutions: hydrology and remote sensing at UBC, low-
cost sensors and mobile sensor platforms at UIUC, and water sustainability,
citizen science and development projects at ATREE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
description &lt;br/&gt;By building on existing research foci held by ATREE, UIUC
and UCB, the researchers will ensure that the initial collection of pilot data
is linked to larger project goals, and to policy formation in south India. They
will work with ATREE to ensure that collected data are shared through their
project portal and the India Water Data Portal. The proposed collaborative
research will directly support two PhD students by offering them the opportunity
to develop meaningful working relationships with international partners and
contribute to their doctoral research. The proposed research will also support
the research goals of four junior faculty: three in the United States and one in
India.