* 1427027
* Dissertation Research in Economics: Long term relationships in producer markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Sebastian Heise, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2016
* USD 18,187.00

A large body of research documents that long-term relationships are an important
feature of firm-to-firm transactions. Survey evidence suggests that on average
around 80% of firms' sales go to regular customers, and these customers are
usually other firms. Nevertheless, the macroeconomic implications of long-term
relationships on firms' growth and on firms' price setting are poorly
understood. For example, long-term relationships with suppliers could be an
important determinant of firms? performance, as well as of firms' decisions to
exit and to expand. On the other hand, a firm?s desire to maintain a
relationship may constrain it from changing price, thus generating or amplifying
price rigidities. This might be an important driver behind the persistent
effects of monetary policy shocks on GDP observed in the data. &lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research uses a new dataset, the Longitudinal Foreign Trade
Transactions Database (LFTTD) from the U.S. Census Bureau. This dataset records
for every import transaction undertaken by U.S. firms the identities of the U.S.
importer and of the foreign exporter, along with the values and quantities
shipped. This feature of the data makes it possible to classify transactions as
taking place between long-term trading partners, and to examine the implications
of relationships on macro dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation comprises of two
sub-projects.&lt;br/&gt;(1) The first part of the research consists of examining
the relationship dynamics in U.S. trade. The purpose of this project is to study
why relationships are formed, how long they last, why they are broken up, and
how they evolve over the business cycle. This research seeks to shed light on
the effect supplier relationships have on the performance of U.S. importers over
the business cycle and on their decisions to exit and to expand. It will also
explain whether the collapse in trade during recessions is due to the
destruction of relationships or due to reduced trade within ongoing
relationships. &lt;br/&gt; (2) The second part of this dissertation aims at
resolving an important puzzle in monetary economics. On the one hand, VAR
evidence suggests that monetary policy shocks have persistent effects on GDP. On
the other hand, micro evidence indicates the average firm frequently changes
price, thus in principle adjusting quickly to shocks and eliminating any real
effects. Most existing research investigating this puzzle has so far ignored
producer markets (transactions between firms) as a source of price rigidities.
This project examines whether firms? desire to maintain a relationship with
their transaction partners is a plausible source of rigidity that can reconcile
the conflicting micro and macro evidence.&lt;br/&gt;Since most firm-to-firm
transactions take place in long-term relationships, it is a first-order question
to understand how relationships affect aggregate outcomes. One important
question is what drives the large, persistent differences across firms in
performance and productivity: long-run relationships with reliable suppliers
could be an important explanation. On the other hand, if producer relationships
matter for aggregate price dynamics, this could have important implications for
monetary policy. Understanding how producer prices are set and how they affect
aggregate variables will enable central bankers to better respond to economic
fluctuations.