* 1427557
* CNIC: US-Switzerland-Australia Site Visits to Advance Black Carbon Research through New International Collaborations
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Claudia Boot, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,368.00

With NSF support, prinicpal investigator Francesca Cotrufo will initiate new
collaboration with partners at the University of Zurich, Switzerland, and the
James Cook University, in Cairns, Australia, to expand and enhance Colorado
State University's Black Carbon (BC) research program. The goal is to identify
the most suitable method for large-scale, accurate quantification of BC in the
environment. Black Carbon is produced by combustion of organic matter during
fire, and is a ubiquitous component of soils. While our mechanistic
understanding of BC dynamics in soil and its movement via dissolution into
rivers and the ocean is advancing rapidly, our ability to produce large-scale
accurate estimates for the parameters used in models is still limited by the
available methods. In concert with CSU colleagues,the PI has developed the
Benzene Polycarboxylic Acid (BPCA) method for accurate quantification of BC in
soils, sediments and water and analyzed over 200 samples from these different
matrices. While abroad, the US team will add to the overall effort by working
with their counterparts to analyze these samples by two other methods: the Mid-
IR method at the University of Zurich, and the Hydrogen-Pyrolysis (Hy-Py) method
at James Cook University. Both methods have the potential to significantly
contribute to large-scale BC studies, as they are relatively inexpensive and
have high throughput. Finally, at a data-synthesis meeting in Colorado, the
U.S., Swiss and Australian partners will collectively analyze and integrate
their data for the purpose of considering next steps toward a longer-term
cooperative BC research effort. If successful, their preliminary results should
help identify an improved method for large-scale BC analyses in a range of
environmental matrices and therefore further enhance our understanding and
modelling of BC dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This catalytic partnership will
promote the education and professional development of one U.S. student and an
early career scientist from CSU, through international research visits and
engagement in multi-national collaboration. For broader impact, a teaching
module on Black Carbon in Soils and in the Global Carbon Cycle will be developed
and included in a senior level on-line class, available for registration world-
wide through the CSU On-line Plus system. Furthermore, when completed, this
module will become part of the online video lectures in the framwork of master
studies in soil science and biogeochemistry at the University of Zurich.