* 1427264
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impact of the Post-9/11 GI Bill on educational decisions and outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Sarah Turner, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2015
* USD 15,800.00

This study explores the effects of the Post-9/11 GI Bill and leverages several
features of the benefit expansion to examine three questions of general interest
in the areas of labor economics, public economics, and industrial organization.
First, what is the effect of financial aid on older students? Second, does in-
kind financial aid result in individuals choosing to enroll in more expensive
(plausibly higher quality) institutions; and, if so, does this shift result in
increased educational attainment? And, finally, what is the economic incidence
of targeted federal financial aid (i.e., do colleges adjust institutional aid to
offset the subsidy)? The study involves the creation of a unique panel of data
on all recent active duty individuals from the Department of Defense linked with
detailed post-secondary data from the state of Virginia and the National Student
Clearinghouse (NSC). This will be the first dataset of its kind in terms of the
detailed year by year information on military choices and post-military
educational decisions and outcomes. The researchers will use difference-in-
differences, triple difference, and regression discontinuity empirical
approaches to answer these questions.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to
contribute to the academic literature on the effects of financial aid on
individuals and institutions, the effect of in-kind versus conditional cash
transfers for education, and the economic incidence of targeted subsidies to
enrollment in higher education. While the literature on the enrollment effects
of financial aid on traditional students is quite developed, the effects on non-
traditional students and the effects of financial aid and school match on
attainment are open questions. This will be the first study of federal financial
aid that uses both over time and across state variation in the degree of benefit
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to specific interest in military veterans, the
analyses will contribute to a better understanding of how to tailor existing and
future financial aid programs to better achieve their goals.
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role that the Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits play in
potentially helping hundreds of thousands of veterans, the vast majority of whom
are first-generation students, go to and stay in college is critical in
evaluating the mark this GI Bill will leave sixty years after the original GI
Bill that contributed to a near doubling of college enrollment in less than a
decade, and is credited as a driving force behind the creation of the modern
middle class. Helping individuals to reenter civilian life successfully or
invest in additional skills to advance their military careers has large national
security implications. Despite the clear import of this topic there is
essentially no information available. This project makes an important step in
filling the gap.