* 1427300
* NRI: Representing and Anticipating Actions in Human-Robot Collaborative Assembly Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Henrik Christensen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 07/31/2020
* USD 849,999.00

For robots to effectively collaborate with humans on a variety of tasks, they
must go beyond responding to human actions to anticipating them. This is
especially true in the domain of collaborative assembly tasks where the robot
assists a human worker by providing tools or parts as required. In this project,
a method for formally specifying collaborative assembly tasks is being developed
that allows a robot both to understand the action of the human as well as to
determine which action the robot has to perform and when.

This project is making fundamental advances to enable task specification to be
compiled or converted into a grammar-like description of the human activity.
Given this description, a probabilistic inference method that integrates sensory
information to analyze the actions of a human and predict which actions the
human will take and when. The system learns the necessary perceptual detection
information for human actions will be learned from small amounts of training
examples of individual actions. By integrating these perceptual observations
within a structured representation of the task derived from the specification,
the robot can make effective predictions about the timing of human action and
can thus anticipate when it will need to provide assistance and of what type.
Given these probabilistic predictions the robot makes a plan of action that
optimizes a collaboration measure such as how idle time of the human or overall
task completion time. The broader impact of this project is along two
dimensions. The first is within the small to medium enterprise manufacturing and
assembly industry. Successful development of the technologies described is
critical for human-robot collaboration in a variety of structured tasks in these
domains. Second, the ability to successfully anticipate human behavior is
essential for the general integration of assistive robotics into society.