* 1427122
* NRI: Flexible Multi-Leg Robots for Safe Interaction and Surgical Dexterity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Daniel Rucker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 372,794.00

Robotic devices can allow doctors to intuitively command precise motions of
surgical tools within the body while requiring much smaller incisions and less
damage to healthy tissue than conventional surgery. Today, the use of such
surgical robots has reduced patient recovery times, trauma, and costs in an
increasing number of procedures. However, the impact of robotics in surgery
remains hindered by the limited dexterity, low strength, and relatively large
size of current robotic tools, especially for procedures which require operation
within highly confined spaces that are difficult to access. This award supports
fundamental robotics research that will improve public health by creating
smaller, stronger, and more dexterous robotic tools for minimally invasive
surgery. This will benefit broad patient populations by enabling new procedures
to be performed robotically and existing robotic procedures to be performed more
efficiently. Beyond these medical benefits, the research will also serve the
manufacturing and service industries by creating robots that can work alongside
humans with inherent safety due to their lightweight, compliant structure.
Educational activities are integrated with the research which will help broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering research through
hands-on robot design challenges for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address the primary robotics
questions of design synthesis, modeling, and control for parallel continuum
manipulators comprised of multiple flexible legs which each bend independently.
Successful completion of the project will include (1) design and construction of
two testbed system prototypes, (2) an experimentally validated, mechanics-based
modeling framework for manipulator kinematics and statics, (3) a set of design
guidelines driven by model-based analysis of workspace, dexterity, and
stiffness, and (4) a kinematic control approach demonstrated by teleoperation to
complete dexterous tasks with safe human interaction. This research will unify
two previously separate fields of robotics, namely parallel manipulators and
continuum manipulators. It will advance knowledge in both fields by realizing a
hybrid class of manipulators and providing a model-based framework for
understanding their behavior, designing them, and controlling them. The project
will also represent the first application of large-deflection Cosserat-rod
theory (which has only recently been introduced to the robotics community) to
parallel robots. By answering the fundamental robotics questions in this new
area, a body of useful knowledge and tools will be made available for
researchers to make further advances in minimally invasive robotic surgery and
human-robot interaction.