* 1427004
* NRI: Peer-to-Peer Human-Robot Coalitions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Lynne Parker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2018
* USD 521,309.00

This research aims to create large-scale teams of human and robot peers that
operate side-by-side in the same physical space, with each human and robot
performing physical actions based upon their own skills and capabilities. The
intent is to generate an interaction style that is not based on direct commands
and controls from humans to robots, but rather on the idea that robots can
implicitly infer the intent of human teammates through passive observation, and
then take appropriate actions in the current context. In this interaction,
humans perform tasks in a very natural manner, as he/she would when working with
a human teammate, thus bypassing the difficulty of cognitive overload that
occurs when humans are required to explicitly supervise the actions of several
robot team members. This research can revolutionize how humans and robots work
together in applications such as search and rescue, firefighting, security,
defense, light construction, manufacturing, home assistance, and healthcare.

This research focuses on two key challenges: (1) how robots can determine
humans' current goals, intents, and activities via sensor observation only, and
(2) how robots can respond appropriately to help humans with the ongoing task,
consistent with the inferred human intent. Input to the robot system is a set of
learned models, along with color and depth sensing. Models are learned using
novel features for human perception and representation, including Depth of
Interest features, 4-dimensional local spatio-temporal features, adaptive human-
centered features, and simplex-based orientation descriptors. Learning
techniques make use of novel maximum temporal certainty models for sequential
activity recognition, and conditional random fields for environmental
monitoring. Robot activity selection is achieved via a novel risk-aware
cognitive model. The outcome of this research will be new software methodologies
enabling robot cognition, learning, sensing, perception, and action selection
for peer-to-peer human-robot teaming.