* 1427987
* MRI: Acquisition of High Sensitivity 500 MHz NMR for the University of Oregon CAMCOR NMR Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 424,487.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Michael Haley from the University of Oregon Eugene and colleague S. Michael
Strain will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a broad band
observe multinuclear broadband cryoprobe with automated tuning. These
capabilities will be used for characterizing complex and/or low-solubility
synthetic materials ranging from compounds designed for organic electronic
applications to RNA biopolymers and "designed" nanoparticles. The spectrometer
will be placed in the Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon
(CAMCOR). In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research by
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Oregon
Eugene and will also impact outreach activities involving K-12 programs that
target schools with a predominantly minority populations as well as industrial
collaborators. The resource will be available to students and collaborators at
the University of Oregon Eugene, Oregon State University, Portland State
University, and Lane Community College.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) synthesizing Fe-phosphine complexes for use as liquid-phase
absorbents in the purification of natural gas; (b) synthesizing precision
engineered nanoparticles; (c) using indenofluorene and indenofluorenediones as
electron-accepting scaffolds for organic electronics; (d) studying nanoscale
aqueous M13 clusters and molecular probes for small molecule/ion recognition;
(e) self-assembling ligands for transition metal catalysts and chemical tools
for studying biological hydrogen sulfide; and (f) using Pt(II) reagents for RNA
biochemistry.