* 1427386
* Integrating Experiments With Observations at Oldoinyo Lengai; Insights Into Alkalic Magmatic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Craig Lundstrom, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 210,000.00

The formation and eruption of magma from the world's only carbonatite volcano,
Ol Doinyo Lengai in Tanzania, continues to amaze and perplex earth scientists.
The magma originates as mantle derived but the processes leading to its unique,
low temperature lava remain undefined. What is the process that forms it? This
project will undertake experiments and analyses of lavas from this volcano to
gain fundamental insight into the general processes by which Earth's magmas
change composition and ultimately erupt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous workers
have hypothesized that these magmas reflect an immiscibility reaction that
occurs to ultimately form two magmas, one silicate and one carbonatite. These
researchers will perform the new technique of Fe isotope ratio analyses along
with laboratory experiments at high pressure and temperature to assess this
hypothesis. Specifically, they will perform experiments to measure the Fe
isotopic fractionation factor between 2 coexisting immiscible melts.
Furthermore, they will perform thermal gradient experiments to assess the
possible role of this process on forming the compositional evolution sequence
observed in erupted rocks. The team will use new tomographic X-ray imaging
techniques to assess the melt distribution in these experiments to help
constrain observed electromagnetic signatures around Ol'doinyo Lengai. Use of
U-series disequilibria techniques will allow us to constrain the timing and
processes of magma formation with the thermal gradient experiment results used
to assess a new model for disequilibria generation. The information obtained
will help to understand the hazards associated with continental rift volcanism.