* 1427260
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Human-Centered Modeling and Control of Cooperative Manipulation with Bimanual Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2017
* USD 672,719.00

This proposal addresses modeling and control aspects of human-robot interaction
by considering constraints imposed by an individual's physiology. The project is
motivated by increasing demand for automation in unstructured environments that
require high-level cognitive processing and complex decision-making which cannot
yet be fully automated. By taking human-centric approach, data-driven
musculoskeletal models are incorporated into the robot interaction model to
account for differences of individuals.

Each cooperative activity is divided into action primitives requiring different
control strategies while estimating human intent from various sensors. The
framework is based on theory of hybrid systems that provides provable safety and
stability criteria. The outcome of this research will facilitate methodology for
safer and more reliable human-robot interaction and advance state-of-the-art in
human movement analysis and control theory. The broader impacts of this research
will be realized through new insights into understanding of human intent and
haptic cooperation applicable to general human-machine interaction. With
increasing interest in service robotics safe and reliable interaction will be
the key to successful introduction of robots in human-occupied environments. The
potential economic impact of robots engaged in services and manufacturing
alongside humans are significant due to increased productivity and reduced
costs. Another emerging area is rehabilitation and assistive robotics. The
developed data-driven musculoskeletal models will also be applicable to
quantification of physical impairments and estimation of muscular stress in
healthcare and ergonomics. This interdisciplinary research provides excellent
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to be engaged in
analytical challenges, laboratory demonstrations of theoretical results, and
experimental evaluations.