* 1427787
* CNIC: US-Belgium Engineering Planning Visit: Simplified Models for Bio-inspired Actuators
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Joshua Schultz, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 11/30/2015
* USD 53,945.00

This award for Catalyzing New International Collaborations (CNIC) supports a
project development visit to Brussels by the principal investigator, Joshua
Schultz of the University of Tulsa, and his U.S. students to initiate work with
counterparts on the control of real dynamic systems (in engineering) with the
goal of determining the most methods that quickly and easily produce a reduced-
order model for muscle-like actuators composed of modular units. The Belgian
partner, Bram Vanderborght at the Vrije Universiteit Brussels, has expertise in
variable impedance actuators that compliments the PI's in hierarchially
configured cellular actuation. Both investigators are interested in the
biologically inspired control paradigm of recruitment in which the cellular
structure and activation patterns give rise to variable impedance behavior and
complex system dynamics. Together, the researchers intend to plan analysis and
experiments to elucidate basic system dynamics principles of soft "cellular"
actuators composed of smaller modular sub-actuators. The partners will approach
this using balanced realization theory and simulation to determine how these
types of systems should be configured. Preliminary results should point to next
steps for a future series of analytical and numerical system dynamics studies
and experiments that become the focus of a follow-on NSF proposal in Sensors,
Dynamics and Control. If successful, these methods may be used to design robots
that are damage tolerant and require fewer numbers of parts to build and
maintain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new collaboration is expected to foster on-
going joint research as well as ideas for investigating compliant devices and
mechanism dynamics. The participation of U.S. graduate and undergraduate
students in the work abroad offers valuable early career international research
experience. Furthermore, the P.I. plans to integrate the principles arising from
this preliminary research into a new course at the University of Tulsa on
foundations of biologically inspired robotics, for broader impact.