* 1427654
* Center for Theoretical Biological Physics - Houston
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2022
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* James Shank
* 02/28/2022
* USD 14,100,000.00

Theoretical physics has become increasingly important in understanding complex
living systems and is positioned to play a key role in addressing phenomena and
behavior on the cellular and multicellular level. Investigations on this scale
can also lead to new fundamental theoretical physics principles and advances.
This Physics Frontiers Centers (PFC) award to the Center for Theoretical
Biological Physics - Houston (CTBP-H) will continue work begun during the past
PFC awards at the interface of theoretical physics and biology. The CTBP-H will
use information from biomolecules, self-organization in living and non-living
material, and non-equilibrium statistical physics in order to create a
theoretical biological physics framework for cells and multicellular units.
Through interactions with local medical institutions the work can impact
biomedicine. Investigations of the self-organization of small-scale matter can
impact nanoscale technology and material design. The CTBP-H will continue to
provide unique training and fostering of young scientists in biological physics.
It will support postdoctoral, graduate, and summer undergraduate research, and
also reach underrepresented groups at the University of Houston. In addition,
the CTBP-H will act as a focal point of scientific community activities, hosting
a visiting scholars program, running workshops, and coordinating student
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTBP-H will be working to find new
fundamental principles and paradigms to understand the complex behavior of
cells, as well as the coordination of cells into multicellular functional units.
The major research activities include: advancing the understanding of gene-based
information storage and utilization, developing theoretical frameworks for the
mechanical aspects of eukaryotic cells, and combining these insights to study
the self-organization of cells into multicellular biofilms and tissues. In
collaboration with local medical centers they will apply their newfound insights
from biological physics in biomedical contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Physics Frontiers Centers award is co-funded by the Physics Frontiers Centers
Program in the Division of Physics, the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods Program in the Division of Chemistry, and the Condensed
Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research within
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences within
the Directorate for Biological Sciences.