* 1427419
* NRI: Electrosense imaging for underwater telepresence and manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Alexander Makhlin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,816,000.00

Human telepresence underwater is essential for tasks such as security sweeps in
harbors and oil field servicing. Co-robotic solutions are needed, because the
risks are great for human divers, while autonomous robots do not deal well with
contingencies. A major problem is that vision works poorly in murky
environments, such as when mud is kicked up from the bottom. In this National
Robotics Initiative (NRI) project the researchers are investigating and
developing a replacement for vision -- electrosense -- used by Amazonian fish
that navigate and hunt in murky water. These "weakly electric fish" generate an
AC electric field that is perturbed by objects nearby. Electroreceptors covering
the body of the fish detect the perturbations, which the fish decodes into
information about its surroundings. The researchers are developing methods of
preprocessing electric images for human understanding, and new computed methods
for machine interpretation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research creates
electrosense hardware and practical testbeds, for navigation and for
manipulation underwater. It investigates methods and software to facilitate
human interpretation of electric images, as well as machine interpretation. In
hardware, the researchers are creating a kilopixel-scale electrosense array as
an input sensor for human interpretation of electric images, and development of
preprocessing algorithms to make human interpretation workable. The researchers
are also using sparser and non-coplanar groups of electroreceptors on a
manipulator, for control of pre-grasp and manipulation tasks. For human
interpretation, electric image preprocessing includes contour painting and
spatial high-pass filtering, as well as temporal filtering. For machine
interpretation, methods include specific recognition strategies for simple
geometric primitives, and sparse beamforming techniques for more complex
environments.