* 1427680
* Workshop: Non-volatile Memories Workshop 2014. To Be Held March 9-11, 2014, on the UCSD campus in La Jolla, California.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Paul Siegel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Advances in data storage technology have been crucial to the evolution of the
modern information age, enabling and accelerating the invention of new
information-related applications in consumer entertainment, personal and
business computing, enterprise data management, and scientific research. High-
capacity, non-volatile, solid-state drives (SSDs) are in the process of
revolutionizing this world of data storage. SSDs have a number of advantages
compared to conventional disk and tape drives, notably in shock resistance,
reduced power consumption, and faster data access. Although currently less
competitive in some storage applications with respect to cost per bit, write
latency, and product lifetime, continuing advances in SSDs based upon several
non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies are setting the stage for a revolution in
how computer systems and applications access and manipulate persistent data.
Improved flash memories - along with emerging technologies such as magnetic RAM
(MRAM), phase-change memories (PCM), spin-torque transfer memories (STTM),
resistive RAM (RRAM), and the memristor - are driving designers to rethink how
they integrate storage devices into computing systems, how operating systems
manage data, and how applications create and process information. Realizing the
full potential of NVM technologies is an exciting and important challenge with
enormous societal consequences. The proposed workshop is the fifth in the annual
series of Non-volatile Memories Workshops (NVMWs) that have been held on the
campus of the University of California, San Diego. The primary objective
continues to be the development of a "vertical" vision for research on the role
of NVM technologies in an ever-increasing number of application scenarios,
ranging from data-intensive computing systems to super high-resolution video
games. As the capabilities of NVM-based storage rapidly evolve, it is more
critical than ever that researchers at each level of the system "stack" be aware
of the needs, challenges, and opportunities associated with the other levels.
The workshop provides researchers and practitioners the opportunity to gain a
broader understanding of what is needed to accelerate the development and
adoption of NVM-based storage technologies, and to establish relationships that
will provide the basis for further advances. The workshop program includes a
half-day tutorial session, two keynote addresses, approximately 32 technical
presentations selected by an expert Program Committee, and a poster session.
Topics addressed range from new NVM device technologies, data handling
techniques, system architectures, and future NVM applications in areas such as
distributed storage networks, neuromorphic computing, high-speed data caching,
and speech recognition. Open registration for the entire workshop is intended to
encourage broad participation from academia, industry, and government. The
technical program is structured to provide a unique educational opportunity,
particularly for students and researchers who are new to the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
address fundamental problems in the science, engineering, and application of
high-performance data storage systems based upon non-volatile memories. This
includes the study of nanoscale physical phenomena that permit storage of
information; the development of coding algorithms for reliable, persistent, and
secure data storage; the analysis of system architectures for data-intensive
computing; and the conception of new paradigms for non-volatile storage of data
in a variety of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The exchange of knowledge and the generation of novel ideas
that result from the workshop will have significant impact on the computing and
data storage industries, both vitally important to the national economy. The
educational component of the workshop will benefit students and postdoctoral
researchers, as well as more senior participants. An archival website will
provide a lasting record of the workshop proceedings and a resource for the
scientific community and general public.