* 1427091
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Understanding Coupled Biological and Cultural Resilience across Coastal Pacific Island Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Ned Horning, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,204,260.00

Coastal systems are changing rapidly across the globe, resulting in the need for
human societies to adapt. Given the combination of environmental changes,
population growth, and climate impacts, projections suggest that subsistence
agriculture and coastal fisheries will fail to support the food needs of many
Pacific countries by 2030. The Solomon Islands in the Western Pacific, with
their unique cultural, agricultural, and biological diversity could constitute
models for how systems adapt to recurrent change. Although Solomon Island
communities have a long history of effectively addressing major unpredictable
environmental and social changes, traditional strategies such as reef closures
or fisheries restrictions are now faltering in many areas in response to outside
forces such as emerging markets for marine resources that were previously
unexploited by local people. This project will study the relationship among
pressures such as climate change and increasing human population size, the
health of inter-related human-natural systems, and benefits derived from these
systems such as food security, clean water, and biodiversity in order to better
inform effective management of people and the land and seascapes that support
them. The project will inform future scenarios and resource management planning
across a community-driven conservation network developed over the last decade in
partnership with the principle investigators. This project will also contribute
to recommendations for incorporating resilience thinking into policy development
for climate change adaptation, disaster risk reduction and natural resource
management in the Pacific and globally. The researchers will also engage in
innovative ways to evaluate and broaden who is participating in the research and
management process, in part by exploring technologies that embrace and use local
knowledge and cultural identity. The project will improve the ability of social
and biological scientists and of decision makers to manage community landscapes
for sustainability at local levels. Additional broader impacts include training
postdoctoral researchers and master's students from the United States and
undergraduates from the Solomon Islands. This project is supported as part of
the National Science Foundation's Coastal Science, Engineering, and Education
for Sustainability program - Coastal SEES.

Across Pacific Island human and natural communities, recent social and
ecological pressures may be changing "biocultural" states, defined by coupled
and interwoven sets of feedbacks among social, ecological, and evolutionary
processes that shape land- and seascape mosaics, communities, and resource
values. Resource use may be shifting due to underlying pressures from
demographic, market, and climate changes. Use of the term biocultural emphasizes
that resource management cannot be fully understood from social or biological
standpoints alone. This project will uncover relationships among changing
pressures, biocultural states, and socio-ecological benefits. Researchers will
use a pressure-state-benefit-response framework to describe and inform reef-to-
ridge management across Solomon Island communities in a multivariate analysis of
biocultural state and potential system resilience to ongoing or future shocks.
This project will: 1) evaluate the impact of contemporary landscape mosaic
transformation on biocultural state, as defined by indicators of local
ecological knowledge, biocultural connectivity, and governance; and 2) assess
relationships between the current biocultural state and the state of well-being,
both human (as measured by food security and access to sufficient freshwater
resources) and ecological (as measured by biodiversity values at the ecosystem
scale). Researchers will analytically relate landscape transformation,
biocultural state and well-being benefits to inform future scenario planning.
Researchers will model future shifts with an emphasis on the influence of
climate change, market forces, and resource use scenarios to understand how
components of a given biocultural state foster resilience potential. The co-
creation of empirical, culturally relevant indicators of biocultural state,
combined with participatory scenario planning, will serve as a model for
effective integration across western scientific and local knowledge. This
project represents a key advance for the broader scenario planning community by
integrating cultural, economic and ecological considerations in a spatially
explicit, transparent, and dynamic manner.