* 1427465
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Microscale Thermophoresis Instrument
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Daryl Eggers, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,511.00

Non Technical Description: This award to San Jose State University will provide
funding for purchase of a specialized instrument that detects the movement of
fluorescent molecules when introduced to a small localized temperature gradient,
a process known as thermophoresis. Because the physical properties of a molecule
change when bound to another molecule, thermophoresis experiments can be used to
measure the binding affinity of two interacting partners, as long as one of the
molecules is fluorescent or labeled with a fluorescent probe. Initial
experiments will focus on three projects by three different investigators. The
Skovran laboratory will use thermophoresis to characterize the expression and
regulation of the key enzymes that allow microorganisms to utilize methane or
methanol as a carbon source; this project could enhance metabolic engineering
efforts that aim to design microorganisms for the production of biofuels and
other desired chemicals. The Rascon laboratory will use thermophoresis to study
certain digestive enzymes from mosquitos that bind and cleave blood-meal
proteins; this project could lead to new strategies of controlling mosquito
populations that carry serious diseases like the Dengue fever pathogen. The
Eggers laboratory plans to use thermophoresis to test a new theory regarding the
role of water in binding reactions; results from this project may be
transformative for the field of biothermodynamics. Numerous undergraduate and
MS/MA students will be trained in operation of the thermophoresis instrument,
including minority students supported by other programs at SJSU.

Technical Description: The microscale thermophoresis (MST) instrument to be
purchased with this award employs a fluorescence detector with a built-in
infrared laser that heats a nanoliter-sized volume of sample at the exact same
location where fluorescence emission is monitored. The phenomenon of
thermophoresis refers to the migration of species into/out of the heated zone
due to differences in molecular size, surface chemistry, and hydration
properties. If one of two binding species is fluorescently labeled, MST may be
used to separate and measure the bound complex relative to the free reactants,
yielding an equilibrium binding constant. Initial MST experiments will focus on
three projects: (1) characterization of the key binding events that lead to
expression and regulation of methanol dehydrogenases in a model organism,
Methylobacterium extorquens; (2) the investigation of proteases from the
mosquito Aedes aegypti to test the hypothesis that enzyme expression and
activity are organized in a proteolytic cascade to optimize blood-meal protein
digestion; and (3) the study of model enzyme-inhibitor interactions to test a
new thermodynamic framework that incorporates the role of desolvation in the
governing equations for binding equilibria. The use of microscale thermophoresis
in these projects has several advantages over other binding techniques,
including low reagent consumption, an unrestricted range of operating
concentrations, quick analysis time, and the potential to analyze macromolecules
in cell lysates without prior purification.