* 1427411
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Spectrometer for Research, Undergraduate Research and Training, and Curricular Reform
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mark Shroyer, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 292,100.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Diana Cermak from Knox College and colleagues Katherine Adelsberger, Helen Hoyt
and Mark Shroyer will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. This spectrometer will
allow research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical
reactions of significant economic importance, as well as allow study of
biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research
performed by undergraduate students at Knox College, Monmouth and Illinois
Central College.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) synthesis and characterization of camphor-sulfonyl
derivatives and new phosphonates; (b) studying redox-activity of supporting
ligands; (c) characterizing inorganic iron complexes, organic reaction products
and organic ligands; (d) identifying phosphorus species and quantifying plant-
available phosphorus within soils at Knox's biological field station; (e)
studying solution phase magnetism and singlet-triplet splitting for Cu(II)
carboxylate dinuclear species; and (f) studying lignans and peptides.