* 1427947
* Catalyzing New International Collaboration: Astronomical Observations and Laboratory Studies Relevant to Comets
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Konstantinos Kalogerakis, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 34,995.00

The primary objective of this award is to provide the catalyst for a new
international collaboration between the U.S. and Japan in the field of planetary
science. Dr. Konstantinos Kalogerakis of SRI International will visit the group
of Professor Hideyo Kawakita at Kyoto Sangyo University. This collaboration will
bring together their respective backgrounds in laboratory experiments relevant
to planetary science (Kalogerakis) and astronomical observations of comets
(Kawakita). The goal of the collaboration is to plan research efforts to address
significant gaps in the understanding of comets. The synergistic aspect of this
collaboration arises from the interaction of an astronomer extensively involved
in ground- and space-based observations of comets, with an experimentalist
immersed in relevant laboratory studies and well versed in spectroscopy and gas-
phase reaction dynamics.

The planned interactions will primarily focus on two topics relevant to comets:
1) The interpretation of the varying Doppler widths of the cometary red and
green atomic oxygen line emissions, and 2) The hypothesis that prompt emission
by excited triplet CO states following photodissociation of CO2 in the extreme
ultraviolet could serve as a marker of CO2 presence in comets. An important
aspect of the proposed planning visit is to define one or more new proposals
addressing the aforementioned topics to be submitted to the U.S. National
Science Foundation?s Planetary Astronomy Program and possibly to NASA as well.
The results of the proposed collaboration as well as its future research
outcomes will benefit modelers of planetary atmospheres, theoreticians, and
optical aeronomers, and will enhance the scientific returns of past and future
space missions, as well as ground- or space-based observations of comets. The
study of photochemical processes is also important on a fundamental level
because it allows testing of relevant models and theoretical calculations and
will ultimately refine understanding of the forces responsible for chemical
transformations at the level of atoms and molecules. Just as importantly, the
proposed new collaboration will lead to research that lends itself favorably to
educational purposes. Finally, because of its very nature, the proposed planning
visit and ensuing interactions will foster international cooperation and
cultural exchanges between the U.S. and Japan and increase the international
visibility of the U.S. research enterprise.