* 1427345
* NRI: Considerate Co-robot Intelligence through Ubiquitous Human State Awareness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Weihua Sheng, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 05/31/2019
* USD 725,000.00

This project develops a new type of social intelligence for robot companions in
assisted living environments. This new intelligence allows a robot to learn a
person's daily activity and location without constantly following him or her.
Such a human-aware capability frees the robot to do its daily routine work,
while being able to attend the human more proactively and effectively. A large
population can benefit from the outcome of this project, especially the elderly
and patients who need assistance and companionship in their homes. In addition,
people in their work places can also benefit from this project, since robot co-
workers can provide routine service and emergency assistance with such human-
awareness. The proposed educational activities will raise more awareness of
robot research through curriculum enrichments in a series of undergraduate and
graduate courses. Through the outreach activities, it will stimulate prospective
and current college students to pursue degrees and careers in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop
the new theoretical/algorithmic framework and the open hardware/software
platform for this type of considerate co-robot intelligence. The proposed method
is based on ubiquitous human awareness-a robot capability of knowing a person's
activity and location in an indoor environment without using onboard sensors.
This capability is realized through wearable sensing and computing from a human-
based perspective. The major research efforts consist of four parts: co-robot 3D
semantic mapping; human activity and location inference; activity prediction and
behavioral anomaly detection; experimental evaluation using open
hardware/software platforms. A case study will be conducted to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed considerate co-robot intelligence in elderly fall
prevention, detection and intervention.