* 1427720
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Accurate-Mass Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (Q-TOF) LC/MS for Multidisciplinary Research, Research Training, and Education at Tuskegee University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Marilyn Tourne, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,800.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Marilyn Tourne and collaborators from Tuskegee University will acquire a
quadrupole, time-of-flight liquid chromatograph mass spectrometer (Q-TOF-
LC/MS). In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods
used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded
in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions
and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection
and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An
instrument with a liquid chromatograph provides additional structural
identification power by separating mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. As a primarily undergraduate institution, the faculty at this
historically black university (HBCU) embraces undergraduate research experiences
as one of the most important outcomes of their research activities. The proposed
instrument will directly impact the research experiences of a large number of
undergraduate students within the three-year project period, and many more in
years to come. The instrument will also be used in a variety of science courses,
including organic, analytical, instrumental analysis, and
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) investigating aberrant
protein-protein associations; (b) developing new methodology utilizing
transition metal nanoparticles (Pt, Co, and Ru) for production of ethanolic
biofuels; (c) identifying designed small molecules with enhanced binding to
selected targets; and (d) developing simpler identification methods for
commercially available emulsion explosives and their residues.