* 1427310
* Investigating Mantle Recycling and the Origin of the HIMU Component with Stable Thallium Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Sune Nielsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2018
* USD 250,001.00

Our planet has a concentric structure with a metallic core, a magnesio-silicate
rich mantle and a thin, highly differentiated crust. The crust is subdivided
into rigid plates that move relative to each other driven by large convection
cells in the plastically deforming mantle. This convection is the dominant
mechanism by which heat is released from the mantle, and it drives - directly or
indirectly - virtually all geologic processes related to plate tectonics. New
crust is constantly formed at mid-ocean ridges from melting uppermost mantle
materials, and it is recycled back into the mantle at subduction zones. It has,
therefore, been concluded that the Earth's mantle has to contain fragments of
ancient crust that was once at the surface, but was driven into the deep mantle
at subduction zones. There is a chance to identify domains in the mantle that
contain recycled crustal materials through the precise analysis of the chemical
and isotopic composition of volcanic rocks that are derived from melts sourced
in the mantle. The most important source of this type are volcanic ocean islands
that are located far away from plate boundaries; they erupt a magma type called
ocean island basalts. They are scattered all around the globe and are known to
exhibit large chemical and isotopic heterogeneity compared with the more
homogenous reservoir that is tapped at mid ocean ridges. Numerous studies have
focused on characterizing the nature and origin of these mantle domains, but
most of the geochemical tools employed to date are only capable of providing
ambiguous information. In this project we use a novel tracer that allows us to
determine the exact origin of the material in the mantle beneath ocean island
basalts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project we, we have identified the element
thallium and its isotopes (masses 203 and 205) as the ideal geochemical tracer
to identify recycled crust in ocean island basalts. Sediments and weathered
basalts of the oceanic crust have characteristic thallium isotopic compositions
that are distinctly different from the composition of normal mantle rocks. In
addition, these crustal materials have very high thallium concentrations
compared to the mantle, which enables us to detect even minor contamination of
the mantle with recycled crust. Our proposed detailed study of the processes
controlling deep recycling of thallium and its isotopes will include: (A)
Thallium concentrations and isotopic compositions of crustal rocks that were
once subducted and exhumed back to the surface ('eclogites'). These will be used
to unravel the transport mechanism for thallium deep inside subduction zones.
(B) Thallium isotope and concentration data for basalt samples from the Austral-
Cook islands and St. Helena will be determined. These are two important ocean-
island basalt localities, and the data will be compared to the eclogite data in
order to evaluate the connection of subducted oceanic crust and ocean island
basalts.