* 1427127
* US-Mexico Planning Visits: A New Collaboration to Develop an Ontogenetically Explicit Framework for the Multi-Functionality of Plant Defense Traits
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Kasey Barton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 11/30/2015
* USD 39,378.00

This project addresses a fundamental question in plant biology, how plants deal
with environmental stresses, by comparing differing ecological habitats of
Hawaii and Mexico. The research focuses on the ecology and physiology of prickly
poppy, genus Argemone, which is found in both regions. The project leverages
complementary expertise between U.S. and Mexican researchers and provides unique
training opportunities to U.S. students from underrepresented groups. U.S.
students and researchers will travel to Mexico to join an international
collaborative team and gain experience in plant functional trait analysis,
herbarium research, and preliminary field data collection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most defense traits in plants are multi-functional
the majority of studies have examined one or few plant traits at a time. Prickly
poppies display a suite of functional traits (e.g. prickles, latex exudation,
tough leaves) that make them a compelling case study for this research. This
broad approach to investigate multiple plant traits and their multi-
functionality within an ontogenetic context will provide a more holistic
understanding of how plants deal with environmental stresses. Furthermore this
research will uncover synergies, redundancies and developmental constraints in
plant functional traits and thereby further understanding of plant biology.