* 1427574
* US-Egypt Planning Visit and Proof-of-Concept: Building a Tree-Ring Chronology for Ancient Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Pearce Paul Creasman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 27,833.00

This planning visit, led by Pearce Paul Creasman of the University of Arizona,
will lay the foundation for a larger joint project with collaborators in Egypt
to establish tree-ring chronology (dendrochronology) of wooden archaeological
remains from ancient Egypt based on native tree species. Although
dendrochronology is widely used in archeology as well as anthropology, ecology,
climatology and geology, it has not yet been widely applied to the extensive and
well known archeology of Egypt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning visit
supported by this project will allow for the PI, two graduate students, a senior
researcher and one support staff person to visit Egypt. During this visit, Dr.
Creasman and his Egyptian collaborators (Dr. Hamada Sadek from the Faculty of
Archaeology at Fayoum University and Dr. Alhussein Hussein who is Director of
the Grand Egyptian Museum), will initiate a formal collaboration between the
University of Arizona and Fayoum University probably via a memorandum of
understanding. The team will prepare for the collection/repository space
required in Egypt, plan for analyses that will be conducted in egypt, and
collect modern samples of living native tree species for further study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically examine three native tree
types that were commonly used for wooden items and construction in ancient
Egypt: acacia (Acacia nilotica), fig (Ficus sycomorus), and tamarisk (Tamarix
sp.). Archeological wood samples may not be exported and therefore this visit
will help develop a tree ring archive at the Grand Egyptian Museum Conservation
Center (GEM-CC). This archive will allow a large dendrochronology map to be
developed by comparing and piecing together samples from the GEM collection and
will also ensure that many researchers have access to the data and materials.
The archeological conservation facility at Fayoum University will provide
expertise and equipment. The first step is to determine if any of the three
native species is suitable for dendrochronology; for that purpose the modern
samples collected from living stands during this planning visit will be exported
to the U.S. for further study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are considerable, with the greatest impact likely to be on the field of
archeology. If this proof-of-concept study indicates that native Egyptian trees
can be used to develop dendrochronology, this project will launch long-term
endeavors to precisely date all the historical periods in Egypt, potentially
with annual resolution. More valuable still, highly resolved tree-ring
chronology for Egypt will enable regional radiocarbon calibration and large-
scale climate analyses. Understanding the historical climate will allow
assessment of how flood, drought and pestilence may have affected the rise and
fall of dynasties, information that could be valuable for humans now and in the
future. The planning visit will also include two graduate students, both women,
who will base their theses on the dendrochronology assessment of two of the
modern species sampled. In addition, this project launches a new area of
research for an early career PI.