* 1427729
* US-Finland Planning Visit: Transformed Social Interaction and Telecollaboration for Collaborative Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Matthew Turk, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2017
* USD 40,791.00

Educational experiences for students that focus on online interactions are
becoming increasingly important in current educational contexts. New
technologies for video communication and technologies expand the pedagogical
contexts well beyond the typical video chat applications and have the potential
to enhance both instructor-student and peer-to-peer models of teaching. This
project is a new collaboration between researchers at the University of
California at Santa Barbara and two universities in Finland to explore the
development and use of transformed social interaction and tele-collaboration
technologies in the context of learning and education. The focus of the
collaboration is to create a new community of scholars, identify key research
questions and relevant issues, share particular expertise and experience related
to the effort and plan for a collaboration with well-articulated research
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve a series of meetings
that will catalyze the new partnership in research on collaborative learning
technologies. The researchers from the US will include two graduate and one
undergraduate student from computer science and media arts and technology and
two graduate and one undergraduate student from education. The Finnish
universities will include several students and researchers in addition to the
core faculty involved. A one-week conference in Finland will be proceeded with
sharing of information and publications among the groups. Follow-up
teleconferencing meetings will provide the opportunities to continue to refine
the outcomes and develop project descriptions of potential research projects.