* 1427809
* MRI: Development of Efficient Electric Drive Systems Through Acquisition of a Multidisciplinary Instrumentation Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Hossein Oloomi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 130,699.00

Electric vehicles (EVs) require highly efficient electric drive systems that can
minimize power loss and utilize renewable energy sources such as solar power.
This presents important engineering challenges including design and development
of converter systems, integration and implementation of electric motors, control
systems, and chargers for storing the energy in battery storage systems.
Furthermore, the thermal profile of the heat sources such as battery packs are
critical to the efficiency of the overall EV system. Implementation of the
proposed project will enhance the development of highly efficient drive systems
for the next generation electric vehicles that can use hybrid energy and solar
power with an optimized thermal profile. The acquired equipment will be used to
contribute to the realization of low cost energy efficient transportation
vehicles across the nation. The simulation models that will be developed as part
of this multidisciplinary research project will greatly facilitate the analysis
and implementation of improved methods for development of components for
electrical vehicles (EVs). The acquired equipment will facilitate teaching and
learning in several electrical and mechanical engineering courses, and play an
important role in fostering undergraduate and graduate research and enriching
senior design projects. The equipment also has the potential of being utilized
for project-based courses to enhance learning and it should facilitate training
of engineering students to help meet the demand for a skilled work force in
Northeast Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we propose
to develop high efficient drive systems for electrical hybrid vehicles that use
solar power as a supplemental energy source instead of conventional electrical
vehicle hybrid technology that uses fossil based sources with the acquired
equipment. The instrumentation platform is chosen specifically to enhance the
research activities currently conducted in the field of four quadrant converter
topologies that can operate under dynamic load conditions with variable output
current and voltage for regenerative operation. The acquired equipment will
contribute to research efforts in advanced control systems for improved
efficiency, and to investigation of thermal profiles of the physical models
associated with heat transfer and thermodynamics of the heat sources such as
lithium-ion and LiFePO4 battery packs in EVs. The project also aims to use
existing knowledge and equipment to build the first prototype electrical hybrid
vehicle and test it at Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW).
Under this project, we propose to establish solar charge stations using fixed
solar panels across the IPFW campus to charge our vehicles. These stations will
be able to provide power back to the main power grid and contribute to energy
demands of the university. The proposed project is important as it contributes
significantly to the advancement of the technology for efficient electric drive
systems using bi-directional dc-dc converters for next generation hybrid EVs
which can operate on solar energy.