* 1427469
* Distinguishing Two Dimensions of Subjective Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Gulden Ulkumen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 06/30/2019
* USD 558,000.00

The psychological meaning of uncertainty is critical in many theories across the
social and behavioral sciences. Existing theories of judgment and decision
making rarely differentiate types of uncertainty. This research suggest that
people intuitively experience uncertainty along two distinct dimensions (1)
random uncertainty which represents the degree to which an event is seen as
inherently unpredictable; and (2) knowable uncertainty which represents the
degree to which an event is seen as potentially predictable. For example,
predicting whether a fair coin will land heads on the next toss seems to reflect
purely random uncertainty, whereas determining whether a suspect is guilty or
innocent appears to reflect pure knowable uncertainty. Most judgments under
uncertainty such as forecasting the weather or the potential return on a stock
investment require individuals to evaluate events that involve both dimensions
of uncertainty. The research proposes that people make intuitive distinctions
between random and knowable uncertainty, and this has important consequences for
understanding not only for understanding behavior but also for policy making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will validate measures of random and
knowable uncertainty; develop methods to study both types of uncertainty; and
explore judgments and decisions that are affected by both types of uncertainty.
The particular types of decision studied are probability and overconfidence;
investment decisions; everyday budgeting and planning; and beliefs about social
justice and social equity. The research will lead to better understanding of the
complex decision we face in our lives and that policy makers face in their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although virtually all decision
theories treat uncertainty as a unitary construct, probability theory since its
inception has been bifurcated into models of chance events and models of belief
in events that are or will be true or false The major schools today include
Frequentists, who interpret probabilities as long run stable frequencies of
events, and Bayesians, who interpret probabilities as subjective degrees of
belief. In this project the investigators assert that this philosophical
bifurcation of uncertainty mirrors an ambivalence that resides within most
decision makers. To illustrate, compare one?s uncertainty whether a flipped coin
will land heads or tails to one?s uncertainty whether a suspect is guilty or
innocent. The former is aleatory in nature, and involves unknown outcomes that
can differ each time one runs an experiment under similar conditions. In
contrast, the latter is epistemic in nature, and arises from missing knowledge
concerning an event that is, in principle, knowable.The investigators argue
that: (i) people intuitively distinguish epistemic from aleatory
uncertainty;(ii) these dimensions are logically independent and segregable, with
most events entailing a mixture of both variants; (iii) perceptions of epistemic
and aleatory uncertainty can vary systematically across uncertainty have
important consequences for judgment and choice. Furthermore, the distinction
between epistemic and aleatory uncertainty can help to parsimoniously explain a
diverse range of existing research findings in the judgment and decision making
literature. This project explores the psychological implications of reasoning
under epistemic versus aleatory uncertainty. First, it develops three distinct
methodologies for measuring and experimentally manipulating perceptions of
uncertainty: (1) an Epistemic-Aleatory Rating Scale (EARS) reliably measures
perceptions of uncertainty as two independent dimensions. Epistemic uncertainty
is associated with a judge being ascribed credit (blame) for correct (incorrect)
predictions whereas aleatory uncertainty is associated with a judge being seen
as lucky (unlucky) for correct (incorrect) predictions. The investigators
propose to refine this scale and further establish its validity. (2) Expanding
and validating a lexicon of natural language expressions that distinguish
epistemic thinking from aleatory thinking. (3) Developing a variety of
techniques for priming the salience of epistemic vs. aleatory uncertainty,
including a linguistic prime a pattern detection prime and a causal reasoning
prime. Next, it explores behavioral implications of the perceived nature of
uncertainty across a wide variety of domains, including: (1) judged probability
and (2) investment decisions; (3) budgeting and planning; and (4) beliefs about
social justice and social equity.&lt;br/&gt;.