* 1427812
* MRI: Development of and Broad-Based Materials Research with the Next Generation Nanomechanical Testing Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* George Pharr, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,542,631.00

Non-technical: The objective of this project is to push the frontier of
nanomechanical science to new horizons by developing the next generation
nanomechanical testing laboratory and using it to advance fundamental
understanding of materials behavior in several key scientific areas. Four core
scientific studies are planned by team members from several different academic
institutions. These are: (1) a fundamental study of the mechanisms of
deformation that often produce enormous strength when the size of an engineering
material is reduced to the sub-micrometer and nanometer scales; (2) nano-scale
mechanical studies of geophysical materials as they relate to and control large-
scale geophysical phenomena like earthquakes; (3) scientific factors limiting
the performance of materials used for sustainable energy conversion and storage
in advanced fuel cells; and (4) the unusual mechanisms of deformation and
fracture in bulk metallic glasses, a relatively new class of engineering
materials with unique properties not achievable in ordinary metals. In addition
to the four core studies, an extended team of research partners from nine
academic institutions and a national laboratory has been assembled to develop
and use the system for a variety of other cutting edge materials research
activities in areas as diverse as advanced batteries, welding, micro-electro-
mechanical systems, additive manufacturing, protective ceramic coatings, space
power systems, and two-dimensional sheet structures. The research and
development partners support numerous PhD students and postdocs who will use the
instrument in their research. To facilitate these interactions, summer workshops
are planned to provide basic operational instruction for the graduate students
and postdocs as well as summer research experiences for undergraduates. A key
industrial partner will commercialize the technology.

Technical: The nanomechanical testing laboratory, which can be used for
nanoindentation, nano-compression, and nano-tensile testing, is based on several
new technologies and capabilities not available on any other instrument in the
world. These include: highly localized electrical resistance heating for very
high temperature testing up to 1100C in high vacuum or in controlled gaseous
environments; a revolutionary laser interferometric displacement measurement
system with sub-nanometer resolution that eliminates longstanding problems
caused by thermal drift and load frame compliance; fast Fourier signal analyzers
for high speed data acquisition and feedback control at rates in the MHz range
to address many unanswered but timely questions about rate effects on material
behavior; unprecedented sample positioning and alignment made possible through
long working distance optical systems and five independent piezo motion
actuators to maximize alignment and targeting capability; and high rate testing
for rapid property mapping. Many other cutting-edge design elements are also
incorporated in the design. Effective integration of system components and
subsystems is greatly facilitated by the collective expertise of the broad range
of scientists and engineers on the team who have special skills and expertise in
materials science, mechanical engineering, physics, chemistry and geology. When
fully developed, the system will be operated as a national shared user facility
in the Joint Institute for Advanced Materials at the University of Tennessee.