* 1427665
* US-China-Germany Planning Visits: Direct and Inverse Scattering Methods for Periodic Structures with Arbitrary Profiles and Defects
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Jiguang Sun, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2016
* USD 36,745.00

Abstract Direct and Inverse Scattering Methods for Periodic Structures with
Arbitrary Profiles and Defects

Periodic structures have many applications, such as solar energy,
semiconductors, photonic crystals, medical imaging, and diffraction gratings. In
solar energy, the solar thermal collectors are periodic arrays. The surface of a
diffraction grating is made up with a periodic array of grooves. Optical
waveguides have many cells of the same structure. The main subject of the
proposed international collaboration is to develop fast and rigorous numerical
simulations and inverse scattering techniques for periodic structures with
arbitrary profiles and defects. The research is important to the analysis,
design, and optimization of periodic structures and has been an active area for
many mathematicians, scientists and engineers. The proposed research activities
will lead to important progress for computational methods and mathematical
theory for direct and inverse scattering problems for periodic structures with
arbitrary profiles and imbedded defects. The research outcome will provide
physicists and engineers useful tools to treat practical problems such as effect
of incidence angle and the shadowing phenomenon of diffraction gratings.

The first goal of the proposed research is to develop efficient and accurate
numerical methods for wave propagation in periodic structures and bi-periodic
structures with local defects. Due to the induced perturbed part of the
scattered field by the defects, classic methods, such as the differential
method, do not work in general. Based on the Limiting Absorption Principle,
i.e., the solution for the periodic structure without absorption is the unique
limit of the solutions as the absorption parameter tends to zero, the PI and his
collaborators propose to employ an effective recursive doubling technique. Since
the method can be further accelerated using super computers, it is realistic for
practical industry applications with legions of identical cells for periodic
structures. Detection of a compact inhomogeneity in a periodic structure has
been a challenging problem, which is of interest by many engineers. For example,
defects in memory chips and LCD electrodes have been a serious problem for
years. Efficient and effective inverse scattering algorithms to
detect/reconstruct defects are of great practical value. As the second goal, the
PI plans to develop effective qualitative methods for the reconstruction of
defects embedded in periodic structures. The qualitative methods avoid incorrect
model assumptions and can provide extremely fast reconstruction. To the PI's
knowledge, the proposed research is one the first attempts in the inverse
scattering community to effectively reconstruct defects in periodic structures
with arbitrary geometric profiles and physical properties.