* 1427422
* NRI: Biologically-inspired, hybrid quadruped robot control
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Sanford Meek, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2018
* USD 499,760.00

This research project is about designing better legs for legged robots. When a
robot needs to move across rough terrain, as would be the case when searching
for victims in a disaster area, legged robots have advantages over wheeled or
tracked robots. They can traverse such terrain more easily, for example,
stepping over fallen beams and bricks. However, legged robots are inherently
more complex. They have many more joints and are more difficult to control. The
goal of the project is to use ideas from nature to overcome some of these
difficulties. The shape and compliance of four-legged animals adds to their
stability passively when they trot or gallop. These ideas will be incorporated
into a four-legged robot, making its locomotion abilities more robust. A major
issue to duplicate from nature is the animal's ability to adaptively change the
compliance of their joints and legs. This is a primary objective of this
project. In addition to the research objectives, this project also includes
educational components involving graduate and undergraduate students as well as
outreach to secondary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken in this
project will simplify the control of quadruped robots by the use of
directionally compliant legs to passively stabilize the robot under dynamic
gaits such as trotting. Active control of the stiffness and joint equilibrium
positions will allow for adaptive parameter changes to changing terrain, gaits,
and robot variation (carry a load for example). The system will employ a hybrid
controller using passive, under-actuated legs during gaits, but actively
changing the passive characteristics. Stability of the robot is measured by the
pitch and roll of the robot body. The adaptive controller will minimize errors
in the desired pitch and roll by changing the joint stiffness, equilibrium
angles and positions of each joint.