* 1427740
* U.S.-Tanzania Planning Visit: Investigating Patterns of Self-organization in Large Vertebrates Using Very High-resolution Satellite Imagery
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Douglas McCauley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2016
* USD 74,640.00

This CNIC project will allow the PI, Douglas McCauley of the University of
California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) to develop a research area that is new to him
via a collaborative research effort with researchers at Sokoine University of
Agriculture (SUA) in Morogoro, Tanzania and a complementary research team in a
different department at UCSB. The goal of the project is to evaluate and adapt
new, very high-resolution satellite data and computational analysis tools to
directly study self-organization of large vertebrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
key intellectual merit of this project is to perform proof-of-concept
demonstrating that high-resolution satellite data can be used to understand the
scale, scope and parameters of self-organization geometries in large
vertebrates. This effort could have a transformative impact on the scale and
scope at which self-organization in vertebrates can be evaluated. Self-
organization geometries in animals, that is the collective behaviors that shape
the geometry of animal aggregations, have thus far focused primarily on small
vertebrates (e.g. minnows) and satellite data has not been utilized as a data
source. By exploring a new and significantly different set of animals this
project may significantly contribute to the understanding of group behavior and
pattern formation in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CNIC
proposal is to identify the necessary sub-meter panchromatic and multispectral
satellite data for a small pilot study in the Greater Serengeti Ecosystem,
ground truth the satellite data and validate the computer-assisted analysis
tools that will be applied, in this pilot effort, to evaluating self-
organization geometries of migrating wildebeest herds. These techniques may
allow study of how group architecture and migratory behaviors have been altered
by environmental change. More significantly, by comparing conclusions drawn from
the study of self-organization in large groups of large vertebrates to those
generated in groups of smallbodied aggregating organisms, it will be possible to
better understand the general principles that control animate self-organization.
The research is also likely to result in tools and information that can assist
the management of large vertebrates in ecosystems around the world that are
undergoing significant change.