* 1427882
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multiwavelength Raman Spectroscopy Facility for Catalysis, Biological, Nanoscale and Materials Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michael Neidig, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 250,179.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)program and support
from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) program, Professor Michael
Neidig and collaborators from the University of Rochester will acquire a
multiwavelength Raman spectrometer built around a triple spectrometer with
multiple laser lines to allow collection of Raman data from the near-IR to near-
UV regions. Raman spectroscopy in this region is used to measure the vibrational
frequencies of a material. This provides information on the chemical composition
and structure of substances. It is a widely used tool to understand the
properties of chemical and biological systems and in materials research. The
instrument will be a multi-user facility open to users at the university and in
the Rochester area including faculty at St. John Fisher College and SUNY-
Geneseo. It will advance the training of students in their research and course
work at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
investigating structure, bonding and mechanism in non-precious metal catalysis
for organic syntheses; (b) carrying out ultrafast photochemistry probed by
femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy; (c) analyzing biological specimens at
the cell and tissue level; (d) studying second-sphere effects in heme proteins
and engineered metalloproteins for energy conversion; (e) analyzing compounded
prescriptions; (f) elucidating binding conformation of A-beta peptides over gold
nanocolloids; and (g) studying hollow microneedles for gene delivery in living
cells.