* 1427705
* MRI: Acquisition of Confocal Raman Microscope for the Enhancement of Research and Education at Iona College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Joseph Ryan, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 184,153.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, Iona College will
acquire an inverted confocal Raman microscope. A microscope, which combines a
Raman spectrometer with a confocal optical microscope, provides qualitative and
quantitative vibrational information for structural and molecular analysis of
materials at both the microscopic and bulk level. By scanning across a sample
with high spatial resolution it provides analytical information on a wide range
of samples, including biological matrices. The acquisition will provide training
to undergraduate students in the use of this modern analytical tool. It will
strengthen research opportunities for students in STEP and CSTEP (Collegiate
STEP) programs funded by New York State that encourage underrepresented groups
and outreach activities to high school teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquistion is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) studying in-situ
microdroplet crystallization; (b) designing nanoparticle intracellular probes
and small-molecule delivery/detection devices and probing cellular uptake of the
nanocomplexes in situ for synthesis of drug delivery vehicles; (c) elucidating
fundamental biotoxicity mechanisms of type-2 alkenes via examination of
intracellular tracking of various molecular indicators for prediction of the
toxicity of environmental chemicals; and (d) characterizing copper nitrosyls
compounds and mechanisms of nitrosylations and denitrosylations to develop
denitrosylations and catalysis for environmental/biological applications.