* 1427035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Who's at stake? Nonhuman agency concepts and cultural resource conflict among Indigenous and Western actors in Panama
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Douglas Medin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,722.00

This research engages a fundamental question for cognitive science and decision
making: what is at stake in cultural resource conflict over human-environment
interactions? One of the most fundamental concepts under debate involves what-
or-who is at stake in environmental dilemmas. Understanding people's
environmental behavior requires understanding how they relate to other life
forms as intentional agents worthy of moral consideration. This
interdisciplinary research investigates how concepts of nonhuman agency
interrelate with environmental cognition and decision making across two
communities living in a shared ecosystem: Indigenous Ng√∂be and mainstream
(Ladino, Euro-American) actors in Bocas del Toro, Panama (also including
selected comparisons to standard U.S. samples). Studies employ cognitive and
psychological methods to target key predictions concerning cultural variation in
nonhuman agency concepts, and associated reasoning about moral circles and
ecological causation. It is predicted that cultural differences in cognition
will lead individuals to approach environmental decision making in very
different ways: either as an ecological question that positions humans as users
and protectors of the environment, or as a social question that positions both
humans and nonhumans as intentional stakeholders in shared
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will advance
cognitive theory by offering a novel analysis of the conceptual frameworks
involved in reasoning about nature across cultures, providing insight into the
moral and causal dimensions of ecological thought. A distinct advantage of this
work is its focus on under-represented perspectives of indigenous communities,
contributing to the diversity of social science study populations and offering a
unique vantage point on environmental questions. By documenting how cultural
concepts and values impact perceptions of environmental tradeoffs, this research
sheds light on cultural resource conflict (and cooperation) between indigenous
and mainstream groups. More broadly, the results will deepen knowledge about the
cultural and cognitive factors underlying environmental decision making,
speaking to core issues in the decision science of human-environment
interactions.