* 1427136
* MRI: Acquisition of an In situ Infrared Spectroscopy System for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kung Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 175,827.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities program (CRIF), West Virginia
University will acquire an infrared spectroscopy system equipped with a high
pressure reactor. A basic infrared spectrometer system provides spectroscopic
data in the infrared region of the spectrum. These data give information about
the vibrational frequencies of a substance, thus providing insight on the
chemical composition and structure of the materials under investigation.
Infrared spectroscopy is a widely used tool in understanding the properties of
chemical and biological systems and in materials research. The in situ high
pressure reactor will allow the study of reactions and products subjected to
pressures above ambient conditions. This tool will advance the training of
students in their research and course work at all levels. The instrumentation
will be made available to researchers at other institutions in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as studying (a) heterogeneous oxidation
of biomass materials and catalytic conversion of combustion pollutants, (b)
catalytic C-C bond forming reactions including reductive coupling of carbon
monoxide and dehydrogenative cross-coupling, (c) organometallic reactions
catalyzed by late transition metals ligated to an ambiphilic, multifunctional,
and 1,2,3-triazole ligand systems, and (d) palladium-catalyzed pathways for
making nitrogen heterocycles of biological importance.