* 1427357
* Strombolian and Hawaiian Explosions:  New Insights From Synchronizing Videos and Exsolved Volatiles
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Rebecca Carey, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 86,462.00

Kilauea, Stromboli and Etna are the three most intensely monitored, continually
active basaltic volcanoes in the world. This continuity of eruptive activity and
the existing and ongoing real-time geophysical and geochemical observations make
these volcanoes ideal for this study. Using well-characterized volcanoes, the
researchers expect results that can be applied to less well-constrained basaltic
eruptions. K&#299;lauea and Stromboli are also locations of large and growing
volcano-tourism operations. Summit eruptions pose particular issues for
management agencies because the sites are highly accessible and thus there is a
need to balance the strong public interest in viewing the activity against the
issue of public safety. The Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, for example, records
over 5000 visitors per day to the summit of K&#299;lauea. This group's aim is to
assist with satisfying public thirst for information and a need for improved
forecasting of the likely course of all future eruptions.

Coupling high-speed photography and high-resolution analysis of released
volcanic gas offers a powerful new way to first describe and then interpret
volcanic explosions. This study will couple these two techniques in real-time
for the first time at K&#299;lauea, Hawaii and Stromboli, and, if activity
permits, Etna, Italy. This has the potential to revolutionize ideas of the final
stages of melt and bubble rise leading to an eruption. Researchers will examine
a spectrum of types of activity, from short, widely spaced explosions
(Strombolian) to fountains lasting hours to days (Hawaiian), via three
synchronized high-speed cameras paired to volcanic gas studies using Fournier
Transform Infrared techniques and low-cost, portable, and precise multicomponent
gas sensors. They suggest that the exact form and duration of these eruptions is
driven by the form and timing of pulses of meter-sized gas bubbles that rise,
and interact in a highly dynamic fashion under the vent.