* 1427123
* X-ray Scattering Experiments on Melting and Equations of State of Candidate Compositions of Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Andrew Campbell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2018
* USD 380,000.00

The results expected from this project will improve our understanding of the
temperature and chemical composition of Earth's core. Earth's core is known to
be an iron-rich alloy, mostly molten but with a solid inner core. In addition to
iron it contains approximately 5% nickel and approximately 10% of a lighter
element, whose identity is uncertain but is likely a combination of oxygen,
sulfur, silicon, and/or carbon. A more precise understanding of the composition
of Earth's core is important to constrain our understanding of the chemical and
physical processes that led to the formation of our planet. Furthermore, the
temperature structure in the deep Earth is poorly known, and can be better
constrained with more accurate measurements of the melting temperatures of
candidate core compositions under the relevant pressure, temperature conditions.
Accordingly, the aims of this project are to measure the melting temperatures
and densities of iron alloys under the extreme pressure, temperature conditions
that exist in Earth's core. The experimental results will be applied to place
more accurate bounds on the temperatures and composition of Earth's
core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several specific experimental
research goals. These include (1) Establishing melting temperatures in the
ternary systems Fe-O-S, Fe-Si-S, and Fe-Si-O up to pressures appropriate in
Earth's outer core; (2) Analyzing X-ray diffuse scattering measured from melts
in these ternary systems to place constraints on their liquid densities; (3)
Extending the equations of state of Fe3C and Fe3S to higher pressure and
temperature conditions, to permit more precise thermodynamic treatment of
S,C-bearing Fe-alloys, and more precise density-based constraints on the maximum
content of S and C allowable in Earth's core. To achieve these goals the PI will
perform synchrotron-based X-ray scattering experiments on samples that are
pressurized and laser heated in a diamond anvil cell, reaching the extreme
pressure, temperature conditions (in excess of 140 GPa and 4000 K) that exist in
Earth's core. In parallel with these investigations, he will continue to develop
experimental methods to improve the ability of his lab and others to investigate
the material properties of Earth's core. These research projects will also serve
as a platform on which the PI's training of graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in laboratory research and scientific pursuit.