* 1427250
* NRI: Multi-Digit Coordination by Compliant Connections in an Anthropomorphic Hand
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Joshua Schultz, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 443,583.00

Robust, soft, lightweight, dexterous hands will be a crucial component of the
next generation of robots that physically interact with human co-workers. To
date, under-actuated robot hands (where one motor moves multiple joints) that
grasp objects reliably have been created largely by designer ingenuity using
"tricks of the trade" without fully capitalizing on the wealth of mathematical
grasping and manipulation theory. Moreover, anatomical studies of the human hand
and robotic hands that do useful work have largely evolved separately, leading
to similar conclusions expressed in a different way. This collaborative effort
between engineering and medical faculty will help bridge these gaps. Engineering
graduate students and medical residents will interact regularly; this will serve
to translate knowledge and experience across the boundaries of these two
disciplines, thereby fostering the ability to solve complex, multi-faceted
bioengineering problems. A key contribution of this project will be a
theoretical description of an elastic drive train that maps individual actuator
motions to key movements in tasks of daily living. The robotic hand produced as
another outcome of this work will serve as a robust platform for future
experimentation (for example, in studies on gesturing, communication for the
hearing impaired, and tactile exploration), and it will also be useful for
evaluating and visualizing the effect of potential surgical interventions ex
vivo. An important educational and research tool in the PI's institution, this
hand will be used to educate and interest university and K-12 students in
robotics. The PI team will coordinate with student groups and Native American
community organizations, to recruit qualified underrepresented minorities to
participate in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moving from single- to multi-
actuator multi-fingered dexterous robot hand design is not straightforward and
has frustrated researchers for several years; it will require a principled
formal treatment. In single-actuator hands, adding a spring to the drive train
improves the hand; the exact spring characteristics are not critical. In the
general case of multi-actuator compliant hands simply adding a spring is not
enough; a multidimensional spring of specific characteristic is needed. Concepts
from multiport circuit theory, mechanics of materials, linear algebra and
elements of general multi-fingered grasping theory will be used to understand
the behavior of such a multi-dimensional spring. The PI's approach is to break
this problem into sub-problems, greatly simplifying the analysis. There is also
the matter of which actions an under-actuated hand should be able to perform;
the PI argues that complete finger individuation is not necessary, rather
coupled finger movements should correspond to those used by humans to perform
tasks. Anatomical analysis of both normal humans and those that have undergone
surgical intervention will be used to prioritize basic human motion primitives.
Combined with the novel compliant grasping theory, under-actuated hand synthesis
will be formulated as a parameter fitting problem. Detailed evaluation of the
effects of surgical intervention on the human hand, the study of human anatomy,
multi-port circuit models, and consideration of compliant mechanisms and the
fundamental subspaces of linear algebra will all be blended. Taken together,
this will result in a method to synthesize an elastic drive train that maps
actuator contributions to useful, coordinated motions of the fingers.
Implications of the compliant actuation theory will be examined in the mechanism
synthesis and grasp stability contexts, and these will be evaluated
experimentally. The investigators will pursue this line of reasoning all the way
to implementation in a functioning anthropomorphic hand capable of performing
the most common tasks of everyday life.