* 1427642
* US-Namibia Planning Visit: Building a Research Collaboration on the Effects of Non-rainfall Input on Dryland Ecosystem Functions
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Lixin Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2017
* USD 67,348.00

This research project, led by PI Lixin Wang of Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis (IUPUI), will conduct planning meetings and collect and
analyze preliminary data to develop a project that will assess the effects of
non-rainfall water input on dryland ecosystem functions. The planning visit,
preliminary data collection and future research efforts will take place in the
Namib Desert, Namibia. Dr. Wang will collaborate with Dr. Mary Seely of the
Gobabeb Research and Training Center in the Namib-Naukluft National Park,
located in the Namib Desert. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort that will
result from this planning visit will test the hypothesis that non-rainfall
moisture contributes significantly to desert ecosystem function. Equally
importantly, the research will attempt to identify the source areas of fog/dew
using stable isotope analyses and will assess how much fog and dew contribute to
ecosystem function. With lower future rainfall predicted across drylands
globally, the role of non-rainfall moisture input may become even more valuable,
and assessing the sources of fog/dew inputs will allow modeling to determine how
those inputs may change with climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning
visit will include identification of specific sampling sites and collection of
fog, dew, precipitation and soil moisture samples in three ecosystems near
Gobabeb in the Naukluft Park area of the Namib Desert. The team will also meet
with ministry officials to explore the potential for additional permits for
sampling on non-park land closer to the shore where fog may be more frequent.
The planning visit will also assess the ability of the Gobabeb Training and
Research Center to support longer-term sampling efforts. Proof-of-concept stable
isotope analyses will be conducted on the samples collected during the planning
visit to verify that fog/dew isotope signatures can be differentiated from other
moisture sources and therefore form the foundation for future water source
modeling efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also has interesting and
valuable broader impacts. The planning visit team includes an education outreach
coordinator from the IUPUI Center for Earth and Environmental Science (CEES) who
will initiate an education module for third through ninth graders focusing on
the physical geography of the Namib Desert, the changes taking place in this
ecosystem and the implications for dryland ecosystems globally. This education
module will be fully developed in the full proposal that the team plans to
prepare based on this planning visit. In addition, a graduate student will
participate in the planning visit, initial data collection, data analyses and
preparation of the full proposal, providing that student with a valuable
professional development opportunity. The PI also plans to develop a new course
on Desert Environments for senior undergraduates and graduate students at IUPUI
using case studies based on this project, which will expose other students to
the international contexts of their studies. Undergraduates are expected to be
involved in the research that would be supported by a later full proposal.