* 1427782
* US-Australia Planning Visit: Foundational Research on Student Use of Interactive Science Simulations on Tablet Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Emily Moore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,408.00

This project will study two emerging and innovative technologies: interactive,
dynamic simulations and touch-based tablet devices. The use of touch-based
tablet technology (e.g., iPads) in the classroom is rapidly increasing, though
little research has been done to understand effective implementation for
learning science. Interactive simulations are now in use across K-16 levels of
education, though what impact tablet devices have on the effective
implementation of science simulations is not yet known. This project will
explore this new frontier in education, over a range of contexts, providing new
insight into effective interactive simulation design, classroom facilitation
techniques, and the effects of tablet-based simulation use on underrepresented
populations in STEM courses. Together, Dr. Emily Moore (PhET, UCB), a leader in
interactive simulation design and classroom use, and Dr. Roy Tasker of the
University of Western Sydney (UWS), a leader in chemistry education research,
science visualizations, and teaching with technology, will research on the new
technology frontier in science education - laying the groundwork for future
investigations of foundational questions in technology use for learning science.

This work has great potential to transform the future of science learning,
making it both more engaging and more effective for diverse populations. The
research findings will immediately impact 1) the design of new and existing PhET
simulations - reaching millions of students and teachers using PhET simulations
worldwide - and 2) the development of best practices guidelines for teachers
using tablet technology to increase student learning, engagement, and
participation in STEM disciplines.