* 1427096
* NRI: Using Multi-Robot Enabled Dexterous Locomotion to Search for Victims in Disaster Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Ronald Fearing, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

After a disaster, such as an earthquake or hurricane, victims are often trapped
in voids that are survivable but too difficult or dangerous for rescuers to
reach. Small robots that can crawl through narrow crevices could provide
rescuers with valuable information about where to focus their efforts. Although
individual small-scale robots have previously lacked the intelligence and
mobility of larger robots, recent breakthroughs in robot locomotion, and compact
computers (from cell-phone technology) will enable the development of
distributed robotic teams of dozens of very low-cost, small-scale mobile robots
coordinating with each other to overcome obstacles while rapidly making a map of
an irregular environment. This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) award supports
fundamental research in understanding how to design systems of multiple robots
which can cooperate with each other to identify and then move over obstacles,
while providing information to, and receiving overall guidance from, human
operators. Success in this research project will bring society closer to having
teams of mobile, disposable, search and rescue robots which can robustly
locomote through uncertain environments and find survivors in disaster
situations while removing risks posed to human and animal rescuers. In addition
to graduate students, undergraduate students will gain firsthand experience in
the design and control of millirobotic platforms, and robot designs will be made
publically available for construction and simulation. To increase youth interest
in science, technology, engineering and math, middle school students will be
engaged in robot design and build activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project aims to understand how to combine enhanced mobility through dynamic
robot cooperation with distributed low-cost mapping of irregular environments.
To reduce cost and complexity, millirobots are typically minimally actuated and
have limited mobility in complex terrain. Through dynamic robot cooperation,
multiple robots can jointly traverse terrain features which can block single
robots. Algorithms will be developed to flexibly surmount obstacles by combining
forces from multiple robots and using robot body surfaces as temporary bridging
or stepping elements, which should enable teams of millirobots to cooperatively
locomote and explore areas efficiently, for example by finding, or if necessary,
creating low-energy ingress paths. The research team will develop new techniques
for joint 3D mapping using multiple small and medium robots size equipped with
lightweight sensors. A research challenge is using compact (sub-5 gram)
steerable lasers and image sensors to identify reference points, and then using
low-bandwidth communication of the most salient features to higher level
computation nodes to create a 3D global map. Exterior surface maps will be fused
with interior maps to guide search planning towards the regions with highest
probability of unexplored volumes. Human searchers can carry lightweight mapping
gear (on the order of 100 grams) while working on exterior surfaces, and provide
information regarding the search regions. The robot ensemble will be tested at a
local urban search and rescue training facility.