* 1427873
* US-Jordan planning visit: Integrated wireless and geographic information infrastructure for security in a multi-organizational context
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Elizabeth Belding, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2016
* USD 26,763.00

This planning visit, led by Carleen Maitland of Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, will scope the technical, information sharing, and
organizational requirements for an integrated security information system for
use in refugee camps. The collaboration includes co-PIs Elizabeth Belding from
the University of California, Santa Barbara and Brian Tomaszewski from the
Rochester Institute of Technology working with Nijad al-Najdawi from Al-Balqa'
Applied University in Jordan. This planning effort will begin with the Za'atari
Camp for Syrian refugees in northern Jordan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will address important technical design constraints that can be applied
to a variety of systems, working first with the particularly challenging
constraints of a refugee camp with limited infrastructure, complex
organizational networks, and a population of shell shocked residents who are
unfamiliar with their physical environment, services providers, and one another.
The research resulting from this visit will generate design recommendations for
rapidly deployable integrated information systems which will: develop the
parameters to use wireless mesh networks to establish new approaches to location
identification, prepare GIS data analyses and visualizations that can meet the
needs of a variety of organizations and user skill levels, and evaluate
mechanisms for sharing security-related information between groups with
different concerns such as police, UN personnel, NGOs and residents themselves.
The planning visit includes important meetings with camp governance,
humanitarian and aid organizations, and with refugee community organizers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security is a significant problem in many environments but
particularly challenging in refugee camps due to the lack of infrastructure and
the information-sharing challenges stemming from security being a joint
responsibility of the United Nations and the host government. This effort will
develop design constraints for a system that could be applied to other refugee
camps as well as to other environments. The technical components of this intra-
camp system will consist of a wireless mesh network, augmented with cellular
network functionalities, integrated with a geographic information system (GIS).
The platform will enable information sharing by security personnel, humanitarian
service providers and residents. The platform will be tested with information
generated by a specially designed concealed weapons detection system, developed
by the Jordanian collaborator, Dr. Nijad al-Najdawi from Al-Balqa' Applied
University. The key intellectual contribution of the resulting work will be the
design and deployment insights gained from overcoming the infrastructural and
organizational challenges inherent in the refugee camp
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to foster human security
in a variety of contexts where emergencies such as natural disasters and violent
conflicts lead to people living in environments with limited infrastructure,
focusing first on the millions of people living in refugee camps. Two U.S.
graduate students will be involved in this planning visit and in subsequent
research efforts, providing an exciting opportunity for international,
interdisciplinary research early in their careers. This research represents a
new research trajectory for all four of the researchers involved, although
complementary to their existing expertise. The planning visit may also lead to
educational modules for undergraduate and graduate courses that will expose
other students to discipline-specific examples that provide an international
context for their studies.