* 1427639
* US - UK and Jamaica Planning Visits: Initiating an international collaborative network on the impacts of private yard management for people and urban biodiversity
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Peter Marra, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 51,162.00

a non-technical explanation &lt;br/&gt;This CNIC establishes international
collaborations and an international multi-city research network. It will lead to
determine how yard management decisions influence urban bird populations, the
rationale for these decisions and how they feedback to influence people through
ecosystem service provision. This mentor led citizen science project runs in
five US cities and has the dual objectives of scientific inquiry on avian
demographics, and educating the public about bird biology and the scientific
process. Funding is requested for two planning visits to Sheffield and one
planning visit to Montego Bay, Jamaica for four US scientists. These will a)
provide consultation with an international team (US, UK &amp; Jamaica) of expert
urban ecologists and social scientists, b) collect pilot data demonstrating
proof of concept and the feasibility of exporting NN to the UK and Jamaica, and
c) deliver an outline CNH proposal. This CNIC proposal is led by Dr. Susannah
Lerman (PI, University of Massachusetts) and Dr. Peter Marra (co-PI, Smithsonian
Institution). Dr. Karl Evans, the primary foreign collaborator (University of
Sheffield, UK) will be instrumental in establishing the international network by
co-organizing and actively participating in all activities, and contributing his
expertise in avian urban ecology and multi-disciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to rapid global urbanization the nature of
urban areas will make a significant contribution to determining the globe?s
biodiversity, and its ability to deliver ecosystem services to an urbanized
population - 80% of people are predicted to live in urban areas by 2050. The
research program will establish how yard management influences urban
biodiversity and peoples? health and well-being through the provision of
ecosystem services. The CNIC thus contributes to major societal goals of
preserving biodiversity and quality of life. Its legacy will include an
outstanding network of international collaborators from world-leading
institutions, including academics, NGOs (BirdsCarribean &amp; British Trust for
Ornithology) and government agencies (Forest Service &amp; Smithsonian). By
exporting the NN to the UK and Jamaica, the CNIC will further increase
scientific literacy within a global context and enable the public to increase
their sense of place and understanding of ecological processes. US and UK
graduate student participation provides outstanding training opportunities and
an exposure to interdisciplinary research within vastly different cultural and
ecological contexts. To draw wider attention to the CNIC?s activities the
collaborators will submit a symposium proposal for the 2016 Ecological Society
of America conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a technical description
&lt;br/&gt;Urban ecology has largely progressed as isolated studies that use
divergent methodologies, hindering comparisons between cities and regions. To
address this, the CNIC proposal establishes a consistent research methodology
across an international network of urban research sites. The CNIC, and follow on
research, will be the first study to address specifically how private yard
management decisions (plant choices, use of chemical inputs etc.) influence
avian survival, reproductive success, and health and physiological responses.
The network will also explore the motivations driving yard management decisions,
participation in citizen science and stewardship. Adapting the NN model enables
the acquisition of in-depth knowledge of how yards function as a social-
ecological system. The network of cities spans a range of cultural, socio-
economic and climatic contexts. It thus has considerable potential to address a
key knowledge gap in urban ecology at a global scale, i.e. the links between
yard management, biodiversity responses and consequences for ecosystem service
provision. Achieving this is essential for generating effective yard management
programs that enhance urban sustainability for wildlife and people. To achieve
this, the CNIC will establish uniform methodology for measuring avian biological
responses and assessing human attitudes to yard management and participation in
scientific research. Consistent methodologies will enable direct comparisons
across international boundaries and assess how the linkages generalize across
diverse cultural and ecological conditions.