* 1427129
* Engineering Beyond the Double Bind: Women of Color in Engineering Education and Careers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Maria Ong, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 541,420.00

This engineering education research project aims to significantly contribute to
the existing knowledge base about factors that promote and hinder African
American, Latina, Native American, and Asian American women in engineering at
the undergraduate and early career levels; and to enhance the understanding of
promising elements that lower barriers and diversify pathways to, and through,
engineering education programs and beyond. Currently, women of color in
engineering are severely underrepresented in the engineering workforce relative
to their representation in the U.S. population, yet little is known about their
educational or early career experiences or how these experiences contribute to
their attrition from, or retention in, engineering. The project has three
tracks:&lt;br/&gt;(I) a synthesis of empirical research from the last 15 years
on women of color in engineering education; &lt;br/&gt;(II) analysis of 75
narratives (life stories) by or about women of color in engineering education
and early careers; and &lt;br/&gt;(III) an interview study of 24 women of color
undergraduates and early professionals in subfields in which they are most
underrepresented: aerospace, civil, and mechanical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By producing a more systematic and
comprehensive understanding about what helps and hurts young women of color in
engineering education and early careers, findings from this project will
practically guide educators and employers on how to diversify their STEM
settings and thus cultivate a broader base of domestic talent. Current research
suggests that diverse groups? unique backgrounds, perspectives, and experiences
have potential to bring dramatically new approaches to discovery and innovation
within STEM. Thus, the broader significance and importance of this project
arises from how it will help to diversify engineering and thus strengthen the
United States? position as a scientific world leader. &lt;br/&gt;