* 1427313
* NRI: Biologically Inspired Feedback Control of Robots Interacting with Humans to Cooperate and Assist with Repetitive Movement Tasks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tetsuya Iwasaki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Biologically inspired feedback control of robots interacting with humans to
cooperate and assist with repetitive movement tasks

The project will address the fundamental problem of how to control the motion of
a robot so that it can cooperatively work with humans to assist them in
repetitive tasks. Oscillatory body movements constitute an elementary means for
various tasks in human living. Such repetitive movements include essential life
functions such as heart beat, breathing, eating (chewing), walking; basic daily
tasks such as brushing teeth, washing face; house-hold chores such as cleaning
windows, sweeping floor; health/entertainment activities such as dancing,
swimming, cycling, rowing; and manufacturing labors such as moving objects in
factory assembly lines. Robots and mechanical devices that assist such human
movements would be found useful in a number of contexts. A robotic manipulator
and a human arm may grab a common tool to work together on repetitive tasks
where the former assists the latter by providing force and stability to reduce
burden on the human. An exoskeleton may be worn to complement reduced capability
of, or provide rehabilitations for, elderly people and patients with
neurological disorders or physical disabilities. Thus, well-designed assistive
devices for oscillatory movements would significantly contribute to improving
quality of human life. Design of robotic mechanisms for such assistive devices
is surely a challenging task. Equally challenging is the design of control
algorithms that command the actuators and govern the motion of the robotic
device. The state-of-the-art control technologies allow a designer to program a
robot to achieve prescribed motion with speed, precision, and robustness, as
seen for instance in industrial manipulators. However, if such robots interact
with humans, they would be perceived as stiff, stubborn, or even dangerous, and
are therefore not suitable as co-robots in direct support of humans. What is
needed is control algorithms that make robots understand human intentions,
cooperate with humans without insisting on their preprogramed operations, and
assist with human tasks. Development of such algorithms will be the focus of
this project.

This basic research aims to establish a systematic method for designing a
feedback controller for a general robotic system interacting with a human to
stabilize the oscillation intended by the human and to reduce the burden on the
human by providing assistive forces. The control architecture is inspired by the
central pattern generator (CPG) -- neuronal circuits that command muscle
contractions to achieve rhythmic body movements during animal locomotion. CPGs
are attractive for engineering applications due to its ability to conform their
oscillations to natural dynamics of a varying environment through sensory
feedback. This exploratory research will investigate the potential of the CPG
architecture to provide a viable foundation for a new system design for
achieving co-robots that assist humans to execute oscillation tasks. The
controller is realized as an interconnection of identical units, emulating
neuronal dynamics. The problem is formulated as the search for the
interconnection such that the robot-human-CPG system has a stable limit cycle in
which human decides an appropriate oscillation and CPG-controlled robot assists.
The method of multivariable harmonic balance will be employed to obtain a convex
characterization of feasible interconnection matrices that meet oscillation
specifications. The approximate nature of the design method will be complemented
by extensive simulations as well as physical experiments on robotic
manipulators. While the central theme of control theory has been the regulation
around an equilibrium point of a dynamical system, capability of generating
coordinated autonomous oscillations can be extremely useful in many engineering
applications. The basic research proposed here will provide an initial stepping
stone toward a new paradigm for cooperative pattern generations by feedback
control.