* 1427568
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for the Improvement of Undergraduate and Graduate Research Capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Albert Russell, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 285,500.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Mohamed Abdalla from Tuskegee University and colleague Albert Russell will
acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research
performed by undergraduate students at this historically black college
(HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will enhance research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as (a) synthesis and characterization of
biologically active compounds; (b) characterization of botanical extracts from
local plants; (c) studies nanoparticle catalyzed cellulose deconstruction for
the production of ethanol; (d) determination of protein structure; and (e)
development of coatings from natural sources for the prevention of steel
corrosion and fouling.