* 1427838
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Develop an Ubiquitous Wireless Sensor Network for Measurement, Modeling, and Prediction in Water Resource Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bo Sun, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 216,000.00

This project, acquiring equipment to advance real-time in situ monitoring of
data related to water quantity and quality, aims to develop Wireless Sensor
Networks (WSNs) to - Obtain measurements of temperature, water dissolved oxygen,
water depth, flow rate, and pH value spatially and temporally with high
resolution and accuracy; - Apply WSN-collected real-time, large-scale
heterogeneous data to develop, calibrate, and validate water quantity and
quality models, to characterize interactions among water resources, climate
changes, and human impact to provide more accurate prediction for water
sustainability management under different scenarios; and - Compile and
distribute regional and national measurements and design a database/online
repository. Hydrologists, water resource scientists, and water resource
engineers will utilize the WSN-framework with the expectation of - Deriving
understanding of complex interactions among water resource, global climate
change, and human impacts from data inference; - Utilizing the research results
to provide effective and economic solutions for sustainable water resource
management; - Providing a current water quantity and quality database and online
repository for others to increase collaboration.

The instrumentation enables the collaborative application of technologies to
water resource management research advancing understanding of complex problems
to optimize consumption of limited water under different climate conditions. It
also contributes to establish an appropriate environment to broaden students'
knowledge and research experience, and encourages participation of
underrepresented minorities/women, Furthermore, research results will be
integrated into the curricula in CS and water resource education, as well as
introduced to a large number of low-income and minority students within their
communities in grades 6-12.