* 1427274
* Experimental Investigations of Peridotite-H2O-CO2 Interactions under Hydrothermal Conditions:   A Study of Carbon Sequestration and Abiotic Synthesis of Organic Compounds
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Frieder Klein, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,740.00

The reaction of some rocks found on Earth's surface with carbon dioxide (CO2)
dissolved in surface and subsurface waters can result in mineral reactions that
remove CO2 from the fluid. This, in turn, removes CO2 from the atmosphere in a
process called carbon sequestration. Under the right conditions, the same
reactions can cause the formation of organic compounds in a process called
abiotic synthesis which results in the formation of organic compounds from
inorganic chemical species. If we better understand processes of carbon
sequestration involving natural rock systems, we may be able to devise efficient
and effective means for reducing atmospheric CO2 by locking atmospheric carbon
up in minerals. A better understanding of how organic compounds form from
inorganic materials and interactions with minerals will help us better
understand how microbes that live deep in Earth's subsurface are able to survive
and thrive in environments where they are isolated from conventional sources of
the organic material. This research provides fundamental experimental data and
thermodynamic parameters that improve our understanding of how rocks (i.e.
peridotites) that are common on the seafloor and also that occur in some places
on land react with CO2-charged aqueous fluids to precipitate the mineral
serpentine (i.e. a process called serpentinization) and minerals containing
carbon (i.e., carbonates). Experiments will also examine how the same reactions
reduce carbon from CO2 to form hydrocarbons that can serve as food for microbes
living deep inside the Earth in rocks and sediments. Broader impacts of the work
include broadening participation of groups under-represented in the sciences by
engaging Puerto Rican undergraduates in research and bringing them to the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution as Woods Hole Summer Student Fellows. Students
will remain in residence for 10 to 12 weeks and participate in the experimental
work. The effort also includes close interaction between a faculty member at the
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez and researchers at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution in Massachusetts. Additional impacts include training of a female
PhD student and interaction between the scientists and high school students at
the Falmouth Academy near Woods Hole MA. The interaction with the Academy will
include lectures and visits to the experimental lab at Woods Hole so students
can see, first hand, what it is like to do science and what tools and approaches
scientists use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve research goals, laboratory
experiments will be run in Dixon bombs at temperatures from 200 to 300 C, 35
MPa, and water-to-rock ratios found in natural seafloor hydrothermal systems.
Each experiment will last for several months and involve the reaction of
peridotite (lherzolite) and minerals (olivine) with CO2-charged fluids.
Experiments have been designed to cause the formation and growth of serpentine
and carbonate minerals from starting materials. Changes in fluid composition
will be monitored over the duration of the experiments, as will the
compositional changes in system solids. Special attention will be paid to the
formation of carbonate minerals of various types and the abiotic synthesis of
organic compounds in particular CO2, H2, HCOOH, CO, CH3OH, and CH4. Run
reactants and products will be characterized and examined by petrographic and
spectroscopic techniques. Using these resulting data, correlations will be made
between mineral replacement reactions and fluid chemical changes. Additionally,
changes in fluid chemistry will be used to determine stable and metastable
heterogeneous phase equilibria, reaction pathways, and kinetic rates of both
serpentinization and mineral carbonation reactions. Reaction path models will be
used for the system Mg-Si-Fe-Al-Ca-Na-K-O-H-C both to help design the
experiments and analyze results using thermodynamic and kinetic constraints.