* 1427213
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Optimal Interaction Design Framework for Powered Lower-Extremity Exoskeletons
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Peter Neuhaus, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 458,431.00

The goal of this project is to establish a user-centered optimal design
framework for customized lower-extremity exoskeletons, in which human-
exoskeleton physical interactions and dynamics can be predicted and optimized to
provide design requirements. The objectives are to establish: (1) mathematical
models of disability parameters, performance indices, and desired/task-failure
motions; (2) formulations for constraint status, contact load, and coupled
dynamics; (3) optimization method of contact load distribution; (4) sensor
integration for required data and experimental validation; and (5) prototype
design modification, fabrication, and usability tests. This research will open a
new paradigm for systematic characterization of disability parameters and the
desired motions from engineering perspectives, leading to user-specific
mathematical models. The potential to reduce the need for involving human
subjects as part of the design iteration loop will result in accelerated
development and better performing assistive devices at reduced cost. Given the
growing number of individuals who would benefit from customized exoskeletons as
assistive devices, this project will have broad social impact by resolving major
hurdles to their widespread use. This research will be integrated into
comprehensive education and outreach plans for minority students and individuals
with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithm with controlled
infeasibility will provide physically valid solutions of task failure as well as
desired motions for integrated human-exoskeleton systems. The concurrent
formulations for constraint status/loads and coupled dynamics will resolve the
problems of incorporating physical interactions into optimal motions. As a novel
design method, this project will introduce optimal contact load distribution
subject to exoskeleton dynamics and transformation of a complex design into a
dynamically equivalent model. The feedback loops in the design framework will
serve as self-evaluation/contingency plans. This research will transform
exoskeleton technologies through user-centered design and predictive evaluations
by systematically considering end-user requirements and limitations right from
the beginning and at each stage of design. Project outcomes will represent a
significant breakthrough that will bring exoskeleton technologies to the next
level by (a) functioning as a central hub that systematically connects and
integrates relevant disciplines; and (b) providing customized design, reduced
design cycle, optimized systems with light weight and natural motion, and
improved user comfort and safety.