* 1427797
* CNIC: U.S.-Netherlands Project Development for Research on the Zebrafish (Danio rerio) as a Toxicological Model Using Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and Imaging Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* John Berry, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2016
* USD 57,595.00

This research visit will initiate a new collaboration between the P.I., Dr. John
Berry, at Florida International University, and counterparts at laboratories in
the Netherlands and Germany. Their goal is to develop cutting-edge techniques -
based on principles of magnetic resonance, and the zebrafish as an aquatic
animal model - for investigation of environmental toxicants, and specifically
toxic metabolites derived from marine and freshwater "harmful algal bloom" (HAB)
species. Aquatic animals, as "model systems," are fundamental tools to
understanding environmental toxicants. Of these, the zebrafish (Danio rerio) has
emerged as an important toxicological model for use in a wide range of relevant
toxic compounds in the environment, including those associated with HABs.
Magnetic resonance (MR) utilizes the inherent "magnetic spin" of atomic nuclei
to selectively distinguish molecules of interest. When applied to living
systems, MR is capable of high-resolution imaging as well as probing the uptake,
fate and metabolism of molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory of the
international partner, Dr. A. Alia, jointly housed at the University of Leiden,
in the Netherlands, and at Leipzig University, in Germany, has recently
developed MR imaging and spectroscopy techniques that are capable of
visualization/imaging and quantifying metabolites in the zebrafish, including
embryo, larval and adult stages. Accordingly, the plans for initiating this
research will require obtaining initial data demonstrating the use of MR to
investigate uptake, localization, and metabolism of several relevant HAB toxins
in the zebrafish model. Finally, although this research planning visit by the
P.I. and one U.S. graduate student will focus specifically on investigation of
HAB toxins in the zebrafish system, the techniques to be jointly developed in
the future have the potential to be transformative in the field of environmental
toxicology, and if successful, the proposed approach may be applied to a wide
range of environmental contaminants, such as industrial pollutants, oil spills,
or toxic metals.