* 1427595
* US-Australia planning visit:  Social dimensions of ecosystem service provision from ecological restoration projects
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Virginia Matzek, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 09/30/2015
* USD 39,643.00

This proposal seeks to create a new intellectual partnership between US- and
Australia-based researchers to explore the dynamics of a coupled natural-human
system: the restoration of ecosystems to provide ecological services. The
foreign collaborators are conservation ecologist Kerrie Wilson (University of
Queensland), and environmental economist Marit Kragt (University of Western
Australia). Increasingly, societies are calling on ecological restoration not
just to reverse the degradation of habitats for flora and fauna, but to yield
valuable material and non-material benefits to humans, such as water quality,
carbon sequestration, pollination, and recreational opportunities. This work
will explore an understudied social dimension of ecological restoration through
a series of stakeholder surveys. It aims to elucidate the relationship between
what people know, how much they care, and whether they
act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research asks the basic question, "How does what
people know influence how they act?" Answering this question is fundamental to
understanding what makes for "actionable science," and to developing resilient
natural-human systems, shaped by people to meet their needs sustainably. Our
pilot study will advance understanding of a major component of the socio-
ecological system surrounding habitat restoration, while laying the groundwork
for future work that will explore how stakeholders, scientists, land managers,
and policymakers interact with ecosystems to determine ecological trajectories.
The findings will be directly useful to resource management, especially
conservation planners and restoration practitioners. The project will lend
international experience to an early-career, female scientist exploring a new
scientific direction under the mentorship of the foreign collaborators. An
undergraduate student will be trained in research and teaching skills, and the
PI?s experience with new methods will enrich coursework at a primarily
undergraduate institution.