* 1427125
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research:   Oyster fisheries in the Chesapeake Bay: Integrating stakeholder objectives with natural system models to promote sustainable policy
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Troy Hartley, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2020
* USD 458,207.00

Researchers will use the oyster fisheries in the Chesapeake Bay as a test case
for collaborative policy development that is grounded in sound science.
Environmental policies often create controversy and can be difficult to enforce,
particularly when people do not understand the reason for the rules or do not
consider the rules to be fair. Natural resources can be better sustained by
policies developed cooperatively among all affected stakeholders, scientists,
and government representatives. In a systematic approach, the project team will
hold a series of workshops in which a full set of stakeholders will work with
scientists to guide development of a model, select policy objectives, and apply
the model to make policy recommendations. A collaborative modeling approach will
ensure that stakeholders have an opportunity to incorporate their values,
objectives, and knowledge into the model of the estuarine ecosystem which will
include many benefits from the natural system such as commercial and
recreational fishing, safe swimmable water, and other ecosystem services.
Researchers will study the sociology and economics that influence stakeholder
involvement and policy formation in order to better understand the human
dimensions, improve the process, and enhance the implementation success of
recommended policies. The lessons learned regarding the oyster ecosystem and
fishery will advance the tools and practices of sustainable management of
shellfisheries. The policy recommendations from the stakeholder workshops will
be evaluated by state and federal agencies, and if implemented, would be an
outcome that would directly enhance coastal sustainability. One Ph.D. student,
two masters students, and one postdoctoral researcher will be trained in the
science of coupled natural-human systems. This project is supported as part of
the National Science Foundation's Coastal Science, Engineering, and Education
for Sustainability program - Coastal SEES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
aims to improve the utility of predictive models for shaping natural resource
policy and management. The research team will build an innovative natural
systems model that integrates three-dimensional hydrodynamic, water quality and
larval transport models with oyster demographics, human uses, and economics at a
scale that is applicable to restoration and management. The modeling system
developed will substantially advance methods for investigating, and
understanding, natural systems with complex feedbacks between physical
conditions, vital rates of organisms, and humans. Researchers will include
stakeholder values, objectives, and knowledge in the model design process.
Through a series of workshops, stakeholders will select the policy objectives
and the integrated model will project how well policies are expected to meet
these objectives. This iterative process will ensure that the natural system
model will incorporate the complex human uses of the ecosystem. A targeted
effort will be made to study the socioeconomic drivers of stakeholder
involvement, information flow, use and influence, and the policy formation in
order to improve the process and enhance the implementation success of
recommended policies. By doing so, this research will advance understanding of
the human dimensions needed to create sustainable policy as well as provide
important new strategies for integrating natural and social sciences, and
scientists, in sustainable resource management. This generalizable research
component provides an important complement to the research on oysters, both of
which will advance the tools and practices of sustainable management of
shellfisheries.