* 1427137
* Macro-Dynamic Modeling of Systemic Risk
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Engle, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This award funds a project that develops statistical models to measure systemic
risk in the financial sector, taking into account changes in leverage and
banckruptcies. The result of the project will be a new model of the capital that
a financial firm would need to raise in order to function normally in a
financial crisis. The measure can be used to assist regulators in monitoring
systemic financial risk and how it evolves over time. As a result, the project
advances science through providing a new method to measure a key variable.
Because financial crises can have wide-ranging effects on the overall US
economy, the project will also contribute to the national
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well established that increasing the
ration of assets to equity increases the volatility of equity prices. However,
this structural theory of credit has not been integrated with volatility models.
The project will consider a structural garch model that includes leverage as one
determinant of volatility. The result will be a version of the existing SRISK
measure that takes the risk of a leverage spiral into account. Understanding the
deviations between risk measures with CDS and equities will possibly also allow
measurement of implicit guarantees that were extended to some firms during the
recent financial crisis.