* 1427660
* MRI: Acquisition of a Pressure Rheometer with Structural Analysis Accessories for Oil Well Cement and Other Materials Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Zhihui Sun, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 140,438.00

Rheological properties - the flow and deformation of materials under shearing -
is critical to the functioning of many large-scale systems, ranging from water
pipelines, to landfills, oil wells and pipelines and biofuels plants. This Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will fund the acquisition of a pressure
rheometer with structural analysis accessories to support ongoing research,
teaching, and training programs at the University of Louisville (UofL),
Kentucky. The instrument will be shared by UofL faculty to conduct potentially
transformative fundamental research in civil engineering and materials science.
It will allow researchers to obtain the rheological properties of a wide range
of engineering materials, including oil well cement slurry, pipe seals,
organoclay suspensions, and biomass and biofuels. This knowledge will enable the
design of advanced materials and more efficient and resilient systems, enhancing
the safety of the nation's oil production facilities and landfills, the quality
of the water supply, and promoting sustainable energy development. The
instrumentation will also enhance interdisciplinary research collaborations and
provide educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.

The significant feature of this instrument is its ability to apply extreme high
temperature (400 Â°C) and high pressure (100 MPa) when measuring a sample's
rheological properties. A high resolution microscope and a small angle light
scattering system can be attached to the rheometer to characterize the
microstructure of the material when subjected to shear. The multi-functional
instrument will simulate the critical downhole conditions in a deep oilwell to
systematically study the rheological properties of oilwell cement slurry under
both dynamic and static status. These measured rheological properties are
believed to be the true indications of the pumpability and gelation of the
cement slurry, which are crucial to the safety of oilwell construction. The
attached microscope and the small-angle light scattering system will allow in-
situ observations of cement particle dispersion, agglomeration, and flocculation
during gelation of cement. These findings will close the knowledge gap of cement
slurry microstructure and its influences on rheological properties during and
after oilwell construction. The instrument will also facilitate fundamental
research on 1) the mechanical and thermal behavior of geo/soil materials under
temperature change and dynamic loads to investigate the their potential
application as slurry wall filling materials, 2) the chloramine degradation
progression of the elastomer in pipe seals and 3) characterizing and developing
new geological materials, smart materials, mechanical fluids, and bio and bio-
inspired materials to advance the development of renewable energy and
sustainable materials.