* 1427526
* The Rocky Mountain-Great Plains Graduate Research Workshop in Combinatorics, July 27 - August 9, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Paul Horn, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Qing Xiang
* 04/30/2015
* USD 23,996.00

Combinatorics is a growing and important area of mathematics. The focus of
combinatorics is the structure of discrete (as opposed to continuous) sets of
objects. Combinatorics is critical to many areas of mathematics, and plays a key
role in computational, scientific, and engineering applications. In part due to
the legacy of Paul Erdos, combinatorics is a research field driven by
collaboration. In order to provide graduate students in combinatorics a
collaborative research opportunity and nurture long-lasting research
collaborations, we will organize the Rocky Mountain-Great Plains Workshop
Graduate Research Workshop in Combinatorics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will support the Rocky Mountain-Great Plains Workshop Graduate Research Workshop
in Combinatorics (GRWC), which will be held in Denver, CO from July 28th-August
8th, 2014, will involve approximately 30 graduate students, 4 postdoctoral
researchers and 10 faculty in an intense two-week collaborative research
experience. Participants will work to solve important, relevant problems from
graph theory, enumeration, combinatorial matrix theory, finite geometry and
other modern sub-disciplines of combinatorics. Students will prepare open
problems prior to the workshop under the guidance of a faculty mentor from the
organizing committee, which consists of faculty from the University of Colorado
Denver, University of Denver, Iowa State University, the University of Wyoming
and the University of Nebraska Lincoln. These problems will then either be
presented at the workshop by their proposers or hosted on the workshop's secure
problem wiki, and will be worked on by small groups of participating students,
postdocs and faculty. For more information about the GRWC, including a detailed
description of the workshop format please see the workshop website at
http://sites.google.com/site/rmgpgrwc .