* 1427210
* International Workshop on Urbanization in Watersheds: Ecological and Environmental Responses
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Arthur Gold, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 59,846.00

NSF Abstract: International Workshop on Urbanization in Watersheds: Ecological
and Environmental Responses&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 1427210, NSF IIA- Catalyzing
New International Collaboration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical project
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;China has experienced unprecedented
urbanization in recent decades, and Chinese decision makers are now seeking
scientific guidance on sustainable water management in urbanizing area. China
has enormous potential to incorporate novel "green infrastructure" into its
urban development and potentially sustain water resources through the use of
green roofs, rain gardens and optimized placements of parks and green space.
With support from the U.S. National Science Foundation a group of U.S.
investigators (senior faculty, young faculty, and graduate students) will work
with their Chinese counterparts to develop approaches for comparative studies of
urban watersheds in the U.S. and China. The scientists will build upon on
approaches used in U.S. National Science Foundation funded Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) sites in Baltimore and Phoenix. Collaborative research will be
fostered through a research development workshop on "Urbanization in Watersheds:
Ecological and Environmental Responses" to be held in Xiamen China from October
12-17, 2014. The Institute of Urban Environment (IUE), Chinese Academy of
Sciences, will serve as the in-country host institution and the University of
Rhode Island will coordinate the U.S. efforts. The project has the potential to
fundamentally transform urban watershed research in China by catalyzing
collaborations with scientists from the U.S. that have training and experience
in the transdisciplinary studies that are fundamental to progress in this area.
At the same time, the project has the potential to transform urban ecology in
the U.S. by exposing U.S. students and early career scientists, several from
underrepresented groups, to the challenges and approaches that have been taken
to urban ecosystem studies in China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of NSF funding a group of Chinese
and U.S. scientists will jointly develop research questions and approaches to
foster understanding of the mechanisms, drivers and responses of watersheds to
urbanization. A workshop will be held in Xiamen, China in October, 2014 to
generate new international collaborations with the Institute of Urban
Environment (IUE), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, China and other urban
ecosystem researchers in China. The workshop will seek to establish
collaborations between terrestrial and aquatic scientists and to cultivate links
between biophysical scientists and managers interested in watershed
applications. Approaches for comparative studies of urban watersheds in the U.S.
and China will be based on insights gained from the U.S. National Science
Foundation funded Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) network. The workshop
will lead to grant proposals for integrated, comparative watershed research in
the U.S. and China to NSF programs in Ecosystem Studies, Coupled Natural Human
Systems, Coastal Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability, and
Water Sustainability and Climate. In addition, there will be an emphasis on
developing opportunities for students and young scientists based on approaches
taken in the U.S. NSF Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) program.