* 1427111
* NRI/Collaborative Research: Improving the Safety and Agility of Robotic Flight with Bat-Inspired Flexible-Winged Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Seth Hutchinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

Bat flight, perhaps the most advanced and efficient form of animal flight, has
long been a source of inspiration for roboticists and biologists alike. This
National Robotics Initiative (NRI) collaborative research award supports
research aimed at understanding and reproducing the unparalleled agility and
resilience of bat flight. Biological studies of bats (their structure, muscle
movement, and flight dynamics) will drive the engineering development of
mathematical models of robotic flight and the eventual design and implementation
of a prototype 30-80cm bat-like robot. The physical flight capabilities of the
robot will be augmented with perception and reasoning abilities, with the aim of
providing support for construction site activities such as site monitoring,
inspection, and general surveillance of the work site to provide image data to
enhance situational awareness of human workers. The research involves several
disciplines, including biology, aerodynamics, robotics, control systems
engineering, and construction engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerial robots
have nowhere near the agility and efficiency of animal flight, especially in
complex, constrained environments. This is not surprising since even the
simplest winged robots have complex flight dynamics that pose significant
challenges for modeling, design, and control. In the case of bat-inspired
robots, these difficulties are exacerbated by the use of under-actuated
mechanisms driving wings constructed from flexible membranes. This project will
combine biological and engineering research to address these problems.
Biological research on the kinematics of bats and their flight will provide a
basis for mechanical designs. To control the robot, agile motion planning and
flight control algorithms will employ motion primitives that are derived from
biological investigation of the dynamics of bat flight. Conversely, models
obtained from biological studies will be validated by experimental
investigations using the prototype robot, enabling iterative refinement of
reduced-order models and control algorithms. Ultimately, the robots will be
equipped with sensing systems and planning algorithms, to facilitate
localization, mapping, inspection and surveillance at construction sites.