* 1427985
* US-UK Planning Visit: Anti-Zeolites for Anion Exchange
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Scott Oliver, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,999.00

a non-technical explanation&lt;br/&gt;This CNIC proposal seeks to initiate a new
international collaboration between the Oliver group at UC Santa Cruz and the
Fogg group at the University of Liverpool. They are two of very few groups
worldwide which focus on cationic inorganic materials templated by anions. This
project will combine these efforts towards the goal of ?anti-zeolites?: 3-D
nanoporous metal oxides that bear a cationic charge and can selectively trap
pollutant anions such as chromate, perchlorate and pertechnetate.
&lt;br/&gt;This new collaboration will greatly benefit all researchers of both
groups. One graduate and one senior undergraduate will make extended trips to
Liverpool, for state-of-the-art training of students at both educational levels.
The graduate student will spend one quarter in Liverpool and is an
underrepresented minority U.S. citizen. The Fogg group also has expertise and
access to in situ powder X-ray diffraction at the Diamond Light Source in
Oxfordshire, England. This data collection will be conducted during extended
visits to the Fogg lab for understanding the kinetics and thermodynamics of both
the synthesis and anion-exchange. Such understanding will allow us to target
anionic pollutants of interest and establish reversibility for reuse of the
materials. Fogg is one of only a handful of PIs worldwide that studies time
resolved in-situ energy dispersive X-ray diffraction to probe the kinetics,
mechanism and intermediate formation under both ambient and hydrothermal
conditions. This essential insight will allow us to optimize the synthesis and
exchange processes of the new materials. Both groups will be involved in the
synthesis and characterization of the products by multiple techniques. Advances
into pollutant trapping would have broader impact on the purification of potable
water, a critical issue that will continue to grow in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a technical description &lt;br/&gt;Anti-zeolites
show greater thermal and chemical stability than anion exchange resins, and
remain heterogeneous for possible recharge and reuse. To date, the metal
building blocks have been Cu, Ag, Er, Yb and Th. The major goal of this project
will be to realize cationic, nanoporous 3-D metal oxides where the pore
size/shape can be tuned via choice of anion templating agent. Such control of
structure would be analogous to that achieved for zeolites (which are only
anionic, so can only exchange extra-framework cations) and allow size/shape
selective separation of anions. The synthetic expertise of the two PIs will be
coupled to design a suitable anionic template, metal source and synthetic
conditions to induce a 3-D nanoporous structure. An understanding of the
structure-property relationships would allow the earth abundant metal building
blocks to be used such as magnesium, aluminum or transition metals. In addition,
the porosity and selectivity could be tuned for targeting heavy metal pollutant
anions as well as other applications including catalysis and gas storage as
determined by the synthesized frameworks. The combined techniques available to
each group will give the project an unprecedented suite of characterization
tools.