* 1427145
* Collaborative Research: The Building of a Continent: The Archean to Proterozoic Growth and Modification of Western Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Julia Baldwin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2019
* USD 146,115.00

The formation, growth, and modification of the continents is a fundamental topic
in the geosciences. The key to understanding these processes lies in the rocks
that form the "basement" of the continents. These rocks formed earlier in the
history of the Earth and provide the foundation on which the continents were
built. The age of these basement continental rocks, how they formed, and how
they have been amalgamated and modified to form the foundation of the present
day continents, however, is far from clear. The main reason for this is that
these basement rocks are often buried under younger rocks or sediments and
consequently are not exposed at the surface of the Earth. Where basement
exposures do exist--at the cores of many continents and in isolated blocks that
have been tectonically brought to the surface--these exposures provide critical
pieces of the puzzle of the growth, evolution, and modification of the
continents. One such area of basement rocks is the Clearwater complex, a nearly
continuous block of crystalline basement exposed across a 115-km-long region of
north central Idaho. Recent U-Pb zircon dating of rocks in the Clearwater
complex by the PIs and their students have identified discrete periods of crust
formation at 2.66 and 1.86 Ga and garnet Lu-Hf and monazite U-Th-Pb
geochronology have demonstrated a complex metamorphic history from ~ 1.3 to 1.0
Ga. These new data and the fact that this area represents the largest belt of
Neoarchean and Paleoproterozoic crust exposed in the Northwest U.S. outside of
the Wyoming Province, that has been largely unexplored, make it a compelling
area for further research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
proposed research is to use the Clearwater complex to examine three important
transitions (2.7-2.6 Ga, 1.9-1.7 Ga, and 1.3-1.1 Ga) in Earth's history from the
Neoarchean to the Mesoproterozoic. This work will be accomplished through two
principal tasks. First, we will examine the magmatic record preserved in
orthogneisses to document the change in the nature of crust formation in this
region from 2.6 to 1.8 Ga, which is preserved in the zircon U-Pb and Hf, and
whole-rock Hf-Nd isotopic records. Second, we will examine the metamorphic
record preserved in spatially associated metasedimentary rocks in order to
document the timing and crustal conditions during the subsequent modification of
this region during the Mesoproterozoic. The tools for this part of our work will
be P-T phase equilibria studies that are integrated with monazite U-Th-Pb and
garnet Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd geochronology. The detailed chronology obtained on these
rocks will be accomplished by analysis of monazite inclusions in situ within
garnet and subsequent dating of the same garnet by Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd methods. This
integrated approach will allow insight into the nature of the coupling of these
chronometers during regional metamorphism that will be of broad use to the
metamorphic community.