* 1427734
* Further Studies of Lightning Initiation, Propagation, and Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Thomas Marshall, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 779,045.00

Thunderstorms and their accompanying lightning flashes are responsible for a
substantial number of casualties and property damage each year in the USA.
However, we still do not understand the physical mechanisms that cause the first
spark of a lightning flash or that allow the spark to grow into a conducting
channel that travels to ground first through the cloud and then through the air.
Intracloud flashes, those which move only inside and around a cloud (but not to
ground), are a hazard for aircraft and space-bound rockets just after launch.
This project aims to gain a better understanding of the important processes in
lightning initiation, lightning propagation through cloud and air, and lightning
evolution from a small spark to an electrical discharge that is miles long and
can strike in multiple locations that are miles apart. The project will use
existing data from a unique array of sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize data collected in summer 2011 around
NASA Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, under a prior NSF award. The data
come from a combination of six sensor sets, each of which reveals different
information about a flash. Three systems were operated by KSC and provided data
on the lightning paths (composed of short steps), the overall lightning charge,
and lightning ground strike points. Two research arrays of electric field change
sensors provided data on the location and amount of electric current for
different parts of the flash; these currents can travel 50 yards to several
miles in one-thousandth of a second or less. The sixth sensor was a high-speed
video camera (operating at 50,000 fps) which yields detailed information on any
luminous features of the lightning, including flash initiation and positive and
negative charge motion. Seven scientific articles have already been published
using this dataset and seven more are either under review or being written.
However, the available multi-sensor dataset remains very rich and deep. For
example, on one day (August 14, 2011) there were 25,500 intracloud and 1,700
cloud-to-ground flashes within 50 miles of KSC, and there are similarly good
data on 15 storm days. Thus, there is much as-yet-unstudied data that can be
used to learn new details about lightning initiation, propagation, and
evolution. The project will be aided by many computer tools developed in a prior
NSF award; these tools will enhance the data analysis from day one of this
project. This project will also extend the previous dataset by including
archived data from the Melbourne National Weather Service radar located near
KSC. The additional radar data will allow comparisons of lightning initiation,
propagation, and development to the thunderstorm reflectivity parameters (and
other radar parameters) used by weather forecasters. Thus, the main intellectual
merit of the study is that it will use existing data to advance the
understanding of lightning mechanisms and better characterize the evolution of
lightning structure throughout the thunderstorm
lifecycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Kennedy Space Center
is located in a region with one of the largest numbers of lightning flashes per
year; these flashes endanger the workers, space-bound vehicles, and special
equipment at KSC. With its mission to safely launch rockets carrying satellites
and astronauts, NASA is especially concerned about lightning. To continue
reducing the lightning threat for the general public and for NASA, it is
essential to better understand how lightning works; this project aims to advance
that understanding. The project will be important for the development and
training of several new scientists, including one post-doctoral researcher, one
research associate, two graduate students, and two undergraduate physics
students interested in scientific research. The training involves data analysis
techniques that are specific to electromagnetic measurements of lightning as
well as techniques that are generally applicable in many situations (including
computer programming, computational modeling, and oral and written dissemination
of results). Four of the eight anticipated project personnel are women. The
results of this project will also be broadly disseminated in the peer-reviewed
literature. Thus, the main broader impacts of this project are the potential
reduction in lightning threats based on better understanding of lightning and
the training of new and diverse scientists and engineers.