* 1427542
* US-Canada Planning Visit: Building a Transboundary Research Program to Understand the Influence of Climate Change on Southern Range Limits
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Aaron Wirsing, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 47,255.00

Climate change will profoundly influence the distribution and abundance of
species across the planet. Cold-adapted species may be especially prone to
retract their range at the southern edge of their distribution as the climate
warms, but our understanding of possible range shifts for this group is
incomplete. Within North America, addressing these effects on these southern
populations is additionally complicated by the fact that southern range limits
for many cold-adapted species fall along the U.S.-Canada border. A joint
U.S.-Canada research collaboration that addresses the influence of climate
change on southern populations of Canada lynx will develop from this project.
This project will have theoretical significance in terms of increasing our
knowledge regarding what limits the geographic range of species, as well as
applied conservation relevance, by providing improved predictions of response to
climate change for a threatened predator. Moreover, this transboundary
collaboration will increase the scope and importance of subsequent research on
Canada lynx, as well as provide a model for cross-border research that can be
applied to other species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the consequences of a
changing climate for the distribution and abundance of species remains a key
challenge in ecology. Simple models that predict how the range of a species will
shift in the future based on changing climatic conditions are commonly applied,
but such models are often inaccurate because they lack ecological realism. The
challenge of predicting species response to climate change is particularly
difficult at the southern range limits of species, where climate change impacts
are poorly understood and complex. The ultimate goal of this project will be to
examine the influence of climate, biotic interactions (competition and
predation), and population spatial structure on southern range limits of Canada
lynx. This international collaboration will build a highly coordinated team of
experts, with complementary expertise and datasets, which will allow for
meaningful transboundary research and conservation. As a result, the products
that emerge from the project will provide guidelines for a research strategy
that will furnish new insights into the biology of southern lynx populations.