* 1427922
* MRI: Acquisition of an Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (MS) to Accelerate Studies on Small Molecules and Broaden MS Use at UCSC
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Scott Lokey, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 335,525.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Phillip Crews from the University of California Santa Cruz and colleagues
Rebecca Braslau, Theodore Holman, Roger Linington and Scott Lokey will acquire
an orbitrap mass spectrometer. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the
key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent
ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a
complex mixture. In an orbitrap instrument there an outer section that acts as
an electrode and a coaxial inner spindle-like electrode that traps ions in an
orbital motion around the inner electrode. An image of the current is produced
and converted to a mass spectrum using mathematical (Fourier transform) methods.
This spectrometer will also be used in curricular activities involving students,
many of whom are from underrepresented groups.

The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) studying metabolites and natural product
identification; (b) metabolomics; (c) lipidomics; and (d) organic polymer
profiling.