* 1427737
* Collaborative Research: Crustal Modulation of Flood Basalts--Integrating Field, Geochemical and Computational Data for the Steens Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wendy Bohrson, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2018
* USD 182,015.00

Flood basalt eruptions are geologically short-lived, catastrophic volcanic
events that pour enormous volumes of lava - tens to hundreds of thousands of
times greater than the 1980 Mount St Helens eruption? onto Earth's surface. They
are important geologic events that completely change the landscape and also have
the potential to impact climate and ecosystems. The only flood basalt in the
United States is the Columbia River Flood Basalt (CRB), which dominates the
landscape in parts of Washington and Oregon. Most of the CRB lavas erupted
mainly 16 -15 million years ago and are noted for being among the world's
largest individual lava flows. Among the oldest part of the CRB is the Steens
Basalt (16.8-16 million years old), which overran 53,000 km2 of land surface in
what is now Oregon. The Steens Basalts are compositionally more magnesian than
the bulk of the CRB and so provide a unique record of the interaction between
mantle-derived basalt and the crust (the outer rocky shell of Earth that extends
~40 km below the surface). At Steens Mountain, in southeastern Oregon, as many
as 200 lava flows are spectacularly exposed in a nearly kilometer-thick stack
that records how magma (molten rock) changed composition during the earliest
stages of the CRB event. Fieldwork at Steens Mountain will yield a temporal
(older to younger) sequence of lava samples that will be chemically analyzed
using an array of tools. These data will be assessed with a range of computer
models, including the latest generation of model called the Magma Chamber
Simulator. Modeling results will provide estimates of the amount of new magma
added to the crust from the mantle, the ultimate source of the basalt, and also
how much crust is incorporated into magma. The sequential sampling allows
documentation of how these parameters change with time as the magmatic pulse
waxes and wanes. The methodology of combining field and chemical data with
computer analysis can be broadly applied to other volcanic terrains, and the
results of this study provide a quantitative basis for understanding other large
volume magmatic events on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We hypothesize that the
lower Steens Basalt represents magmatism dominated by high rates of magma input
during an earlier, energetically waxing stage of magmatism. In contrast, Upper
Steens Basalt experienced more interaction with the crust in a thermally waning
system, as the locus of CRB activity migrated north and the crustal magmatic
system moved to shallower depths in the crust. These hypotheses will be tested
by fieldwork, where a representative suite of lava samples will be collected;
collection of whole-rock major and trace elements, O-, Sr-, Nd-, Pb-, Hf-, Os-
and He-isotopes, petrography and mineral chemistry data; and thermobarometric
calculations and other computational petrologic models. Results of this study
will allow the petrologic evolution of Steens magmas to be placed in context
with mass and thermal exchange that occurred between crust and mantle during the
onset of the Columbia River flood basalt event. The broader impacts include (1)
involvement of a diverse group of scientists including 2 PIs, 1 PhD student, 2
MS students and several undergraduates. At least 5 are female scientists
(including one Latina); (2) development/refinement and presentation of modeling
tutorials; (3) scientific outreach in the form of public lectures and field
trips; (4) dissemination of results via publications, and conferences; (5)
integration of results and rock samples into classes.