* 1427584
* US-Japan planning visit on power management, energy-efficient computing, and smart control for alternative energy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Wolfgang Bein, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This project catalyzes a new collaboration in the area of green computing
between the PI Bein of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas and Dr. Hito Ito of
the University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo as well as engineers at
Panasonic Japan. The collaboration focuses on applying algorithmic ideas in the
area of sustainability. Power management and energy-efficient computing are ever
more important, given the exponential growth in the number of information
technology devices worldwide. Japan?s Green IT Initiative has focused especially
on advanced control and management enabled by IT and electronics. Japan has now
a lead position in this area. One of the goals of the planning visit is to set a
foundation for future collaborative research and mutual technology transfer. An
important component of this project is student involvement, with the PI?s Ph.D.
student participating in the planning visit to enhance professional development
and enable fuller participation in follow-up research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific areas for investigations are power-down problems,
speed scaling mechanisms and smart algorithms for alternative energy management
and storage. Energy conservation and management involves decision making in
complex situations and with incomplete information about the future. Thus, it is
natural to study such problems in the framework of game theoretic and online
competitive models. The proposed new U.S.-Japanese collaboration seeks to tackle
a number of difficult problems in the area of online algorithms, with great
potential for impact in application areas, and along the way we expect to find
general paradigms for online algorithms. It is expected that techniques
developed by the proposer such as the knowledge state method, tracklessness, and
task system analysis will complement the Japanese host?s research in green
computing with a focus on consumer electronics applications.