* 1427553
* Characterizing Faculty Discourses on Gender in Engineering Education for Effective Interventions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Kacey Beddoes, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 02/29/2016
* USD 250,959.00

Faculty pedagogy and interactions have been shown to play a significant role in
students' decisions to leave STEM majors, and female students in particular
report experiencing negative classroom interactions. This project addresses that
problem by examining what and how faculty members think about gender, and how
that shapes their educational practices and developing relevant intervention
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forty-five engineering faculty members spanning
multiple disciplines and career levels at three different institutions are
participating in in-depth qualitative interviews that examine their
perspectives, practices, and decision-making vis-Ã -vis gendered facets of
engineering education. The findings from the interviews are being used to create
faculty development materials and educational materials for future faculty
members. Characterizing what and how faculty think about gender will provide a
basis for appropriate and successful interventions for faculty and future
faculty because rather than merely picking an intervention haphazardly,
interventions should be strategically selected to align with the most salient
issues or problems. Materials are being implemented at faculty development
centers, workshops at national engineering education conferences, and in a newly
created graduate course at Oregon State University. Faculty development
materials created enhance intellectual infrastructure locally and nationally by
providing the first research-based interventions of this kind. Curricular
materials created enhance intellectual infrastructure locally and nationally by
educating future engineering faculty on how to create more gender-equitable
classrooms.