* 1427494
* MRI:   Acquisition of a gas chromatograph and isotope ratio mass spectrometer interface for compound-specific isotope analyses at the University of North Carolina Wilmington
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Eleanora Reber, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 110,196.00

Isotopic analysis of individual chemical compounds is a technique that is
quickly proving to be one of the most groundbreaking advances in biogeochemical
research. This award provides funding to early career researchers and tenured
faculty at the University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) Center for Marine
Science (CMS) to acquire an instrument for compound-specific isotopic analyses.
The instrumentation will contribute to the teaching and research missions of
both UNCW and CMS. Research projects that will utilize the instrumentation
include: reconstructing paleoclimate of the circum-Caribbean and southeastern
U.S, sourcing of atmospheric pollution, improving identification and
characterization of prehistoric agriculture and land use, understanding polar
food webs, reconstructing prehistoric tsunamis, storms, and changes in relative
sea level, and investigating geoarchaeology of late Pleistocene deposits in the
Paleolithic of Portuguese Estremadura. The PIs will incorporate the new
instrumentation into a variety of graduate and undergraduate courses at UNCW.
For example, students in the stable isotope geochemistry course will analyze
standard mixtures of organic compounds from hypothetical stratigraphic profiles
to infer ecological and climate change through time, while students in advanced
organic chemistry techniques courses will examine potential adulteration of
olive oil samples, demonstrating real-world application of this technique.
Acquisition of this instrumentation will also facilitate collaboration with
nearby institutions such as UNC-Chapel Hill, East Carolina University, North
Carolina State University, and Western Carolina
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award provides for the
acquisition of a gas chromatograph (GC), GC combustion interface, and flow
controller to be interfaced with an existing Thermo Scientific DELTA V Plus mass
spectrometer by researchers spanning four academic departments at the University
of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW). These upgrades will allow for the carbon,
nitrogen, and hydrogen isotopic analyses of a wide variety of individual
chemical compounds. The requested instrument will expand the capabilities of the
UNCW stable isotope laboratory (SIL) and researchers within this region, given
there is currently no instrument of this kind accessible to researchers in the
state. The UNCW SIL is a core research and training facility located in at CMS
and is currently used by more than 30 students, postdocs, and faculty from a
wide variety of disciplines including anthropology, biology, chemistry, ecology,
geography, geology, and marine science. The requested instrumentation will
expand the analytical capabilities of the SIL and facilitate novel approaches to
the active and future research topics of the researchers' intra- and inter-
institutional collaborators, and their students.