* 1427949
* MRI: Acquisition of a high-performance computing cluster to enhance undergraduate research and education across the sciences at Oberlin College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Matthew Elrod, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 486,256.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to Oberlin College to support
acquisition of a high-performance computational (HPC) cluster. As part of its
educational mission, Oberlin College emphasizes undergraduate research and hence
endeavors to provide the facilities and institutional support to sustain
meaningful, student-centered faculty research. Numerous science faculty have
externally funded research programs, an increasing number of which depend on
high-performance computing. The cluster will be used by more than a dozen
Oberlin faculty in departments throughout the natural and social sciences to
support a diverse array of research, ranging from modeling black hole collisions
to analyzing the effects of organic molecules on air quality, and from
determining the protein characteristics of the earliest life on Earth to
reconstructing the evolution of flowering plants using massive amounts of DNA
sequence data. The award will also have a dramatic impact on student research
and training. More than 100 Oberlin undergraduates per year will perform
analyses on the computing cluster through mentored research and class-associated
projects in at least eight courses, in the Departments of Biology, Chemistry,
Computer Science, Physics, and Psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The award will fund the acquisition of a greatly improved
high-performance computational (HPC) cluster that will fill a pressing need for
computational support of research, research training, and teaching at Oberlin
College. To facilitate the diverse computational needs of Oberlin science
faculty, a cluster that maximizes parallelization while also offering multiple
nodes with relatively large amounts of RAM for protein folding analyses, de novo
assembly of next-generation sequencing data, and large-scale phylogenetic
analyses will be installed. The cluster will include at least 38 Intel Xeon E5
compute nodes with a total of 544 cores, with RAM varying across these nodes
from 32 GB/node to 512 GB/node. The cluster will also include at least two
Nvidia Tesla K20 GPUs and at least two Intel Xeon Phi 5110P coprocessors to
dramatically increase processing speeds for jobs that are embarrassingly
parallel, and will have at least 244 TB of long-term storage space. The HPC
cluster will thus have sufficient computational power and long-term archival
storage to advance the increasingly large genomics, chemistry, and physics data
sets that several Oberlin faculty now use in their research, and will have the
flexibility to be utilized by the increasing number of Oberlin faculty who
incorporate HPC work in their research, including in astrophysics, genomics,
phylogenetics, proteomics, metabolomics, biophysics, atmospheric chemistry,
behavioral psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and computer science.