* 1428318
* MRI: Development of a Controlled-Trajectory Rapid Compression and Expansion Machine
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* David Kittelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 927,605.00

MRI: Development of a Controlled-Trajectory Rapid Compression and Expansion
Machine to Enable Fundamental Research on the Internal Combustion
Engine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal combustion engines contribute to air
pollution and global warming. With increasing global demand for cars, there is a
need for new technologies to enhance engine efficiency and reduce emissions. To
design better engines, we need to understand how different designs affect engine
performance, the advantages of various fuel mixtures, and what constitute
effective strategies for engine control. This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award would develop unique instrumentation to enable fundamental research
in fuels, advanced combustion, new engine architectures and control. This
knowledge could lead to new technologies that significantly reduce energy
consumption and emissions for transportation, construction and agriculture. This
instrumentation will enhance the shared research infrastructure at the
University of Minnesota and promote multi-disciplinary research. In addition,
designing and constructing instrumentation is a critical skill, both for
academia and industry. This project provides an excellent platform for training
both graduate and undergraduate students on the fundamental research issues and
the instrumentation development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation uses a high pressure and high speed hydraulic actuation system
and unique motion control methodologies to achieve precise and flexible
compression and expansion processes. This new design and control approach offers
added flexibility in controlling the trajectory of the piston, better
repeatability with real-time feedback, and improved throughput without the need
to adjust the mechanical system. Unlike conventional rapid compression machines,
the proposed instrument can control the trajectory of the piston to track any
desired signal for engine performance. This unique capability offers real-time
control of the combustion chamber volume, which affects the temperature,
pressure and the concentrations of different gases. Such functionalities, when
combined with gas sampling analysis and optical measurement, will allow
researchers to directly access combustion processes in a dynamic and controlled
fashion. This can create new experimental conditions and enable real-time
measurements that are not possible with conventional rapid compression machines,
which could lead to major breakthroughs in fundamental research in this field.