* 1428673
* MRI:  Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Research Training at California State University, Bakersfield
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Dirk Baron, California State University-Bakersfield
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 196,725.00

X-ray diffraction is a fundamental analytical technique used in the
characterization and identification of crystalline substances, with many
applications across multiple disciplines. The principles behind the technique
are relatively simple, training is simple, and instruments require little
maintenance. As such, an X-ray diffraction lab is an ideally versatile facility
for ongoing and future multidisciplinary research and educational activities at
California State University Bakersfield (CSUB), a small regional state
university. The X-ray diffraction instrumentation funded by this award will be
utilized by a team led by geological sciences faculty with experience in
establishing, maintaining, and sustaining sophisticated instrument laboratories
at CSUB and a strong record of externally-funded research. They will be joined
by a multi-disciplinary group of junior faculty with strong, student-centered
research programs and a commitment to student research and training. The
instrument will support existing and enable new research directions and
collaborations between faculty at CSUB and promote collaborations with
researchers from other institutions. The new instrument will provide research
training for students at a minority-serving institution in a region with a large
and fast-growing population from groups underrepresented in the sciences and
engineering. It will also be an integral part of teaching at CSUB and
neighboring partner institutions such as Bakersfield College and Taft College.
The instrument will also enhance outreach efforts to high schools and science
teacher training initiatives which are partly supported by separate NSF
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds the acquisition of
a new PANalytical Inc. Empyrean X-ray diffractometer (XRD) to replace an
outdated instrument acquired in 1991. The selected instrument has very versatile
capabilities making it ideal for applications in different fields. The proposed
instrument will allow continuation and timely completion of existing multi-
disciplinary research projects in several natural sciences disciplines, as well
as in engineering, and anthropology. Researchers in geological sciences will use
the instrumentation to characterize geologic formations proposed for carbon
capture and sequestration in the San Joaquin Valley, CA, to elucidate the
paleoclimatic records from paleolake deposits in the Carrizo Plain, CA, examine
thermodynamic properties of environmentally-relevant minerals, characterize the
mineralogical composition of dust generated from desert soils near Las Vegas,
NV, identify and quantify of clay and zeolite minerals involved in diagenesis of
sandstones in stream and lake environments, provide baseline measurements of
crystallinity and groundmass-crystal speciation as a geothermometer for welded
tuffs, and establish strain and phyllitic alteration gradients across intra-
batholith faults in the Sierra Nevada Batholith. Collaborative work with
researchers outside of geological sciences will determine the physical
parameters of soils that support the growth of the valley fever pathogen
(Biology), examine the structure of soft matter such as cellulose and its
relationship to physical properties (Engineering), and sourcing of
archaeological materials (Anthropology).