* 1428752
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Support Research and Undergraduate Research Training at Carleton College and St. Olaf College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Gretchen Hofmeister, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 335,465.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Gretchen Hofmeister from Carleton College and colleagues David Alberg and
Matthew Whited will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer with field gradient
capabilities for two-dimensional and dynamic NMR experiments. This spectrometer
will allow research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate
chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as allow study of
biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research
performed by undergraduate students at Carleton College and St. Olaf College.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) studies of trypanothione reductase inhibitors; (b)
synthesis and applications of extended linear chain (ELC) materials; (c) studies
of titanium(IV) trisphenolate catalysts; (d) organocatalysis; (e) studies of
metal/ligand cooperative reactivity; and (f) synthesis and structure of Mo(II)
acetyl complexes.