* 1428768
* MRI: Acquisition of Flow Cytometric Analyzer for Research and Training at Howard University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Michael Lipscomb, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2015
* USD 119,219.00

Flow cytometry is a powerful platform for fluorescence measurement of numerous
parameters in individual particles, cells, or subcellular components. This NSF
MRI award provides funds for the purchase of a 3 laser 10-paramter high
throughput flow cytometric analyzer at Howard University (HU). The university-
wide accessible instrument will markedly improve research infrastructure across
many STEM disciplines. Importantly, the instrument will enhance ongoing research
in multi- and interdisciplinary fields that intersect with the biological
sciences. The flow cytometric analyzer will better serve research activities and
attract new users whose needs cannot be met with the tools presently in use. The
equipment will open new opportunities to HU investigators and provides a conduit
for university-wide collaborations. This will serve to enhance research
infrastructure and expand the breadth of studies employed in biological
investigations. Principal investigators, post-doctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate student researchers at Howard University and collaborating
institutions will greatly benefit from the acquired instrument. Campus-wide
workshops will engage and educate the HU community to incorporate upper-level
research design and methods. Furthermore, these linked-activities will promote
initiatives for engaging women and underrepresented minorities in STEM research.
The acquired flow cytometric analyzer will become a staple in routine multi-user
research studies and integrate quantitative and qualitative science and
engineering approaches to advancing knowledge in biological
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although initially used for biomedical
science, the transformative potential of flow cytometry has provided the natural
sciences with means to study the properties of both living and non-living
samples. Further advancements in technology and configurability have extended
the range of analytical evaluation on a single cell level. These advances have
expanded the user base from traditional cell and molecular biologists to
nanomaterial scientists and bioengineers. Utilizing the vast assortment of
available fluorescently-labeled reagents, Howard University researchers will
engage in wide-ranging meritorious research. Scientists and engineers will
collectively measure: a) cell cycle and DNA fragmentation; b) apoptosis and cell
viability, c) differential expression of protein, lipids, and carbohydrates; d)
presence of parasitic invasion in host cells; e) bacteria viability and
enumeration; and f) phosphorylation vs. total protein content. Twenty-four (24)
researchers will be active in use of the campus-wide multi-user instrument. The
diversity, sensitivity, and specificity of their studies will be significantly
enhanced by using the flow cytometric analyzer?s multiple parameters and high
throughput processing applications. These features afford Howard University
faculty and collaborating researchers a robust and powerful measure for organic
and inorganic phenomena. The science generated from the instrument usage will
lead to better understanding of biological underpinnings and development of
innovative applications in basic and applied sciences.