* 1428334
* MRI: Acquisition of a Plasma Etching System for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Tom Oder, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 307,422.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: Youngstown State University (YSU)
and its industrial partners are aggressively pursuing research in various
materials including semiconductors, polymers, carbon nanotubes, ceramic-metallic
composites and functional materials. A major requirement in processing these
materials is the ability to etch desired patterns for devices. Funds from the
Major Research Instrumentation program provide support for acquisition of an
inductively-coupled plasma etching instrument. This instrument enables advances
in fabricating efficient devices and helps to educate and train K-12,
undergraduate &amp; graduate students and high school science teachers. With the
launch of YSU's new PhD program in Materials Science &amp; Engineering, this
instrument provides a pivotal training and research tool for use in at least 10
current research projects and provides training to over 30 PhD and MS graduate
students and postdocs, and more than 300 undergraduate students per year as it
is fully integrated into undergraduate and graduate curriculum at YSU. The PI
and co-PIs actively participate in various outreach and minority-oriented
programs such as the Youngstown Area Physics Alliance, Summer STEM for Minority
Students and Project SEED which provide a platform for recruiting students from
underrepresented groups to the research activities enabled by this
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The multi-disciplinary
materials-related research activities at YSU and its industrial partners include
wide-bandgap semiconductors for high power electronic and short wavelength
optoelectronic devices, multilayered polymeric systems for various photonic
applications, carbon nanotubes for chemical and biological sensor applications,
ceramic-metallic composites for military combat applications, and functional
materials for micro-electro-mechanical systems. High density plasma etching
offers a vital capability for fabricating the relevant functional device
designs. The goal of this acquisition of the inductively-coupled plasma etching
system is to support multidisciplinary research and education at YSU. Together
with the existing state-of-the-art electron microscopy and lithography tools
recently acquired at YSU, this equipment enables better understanding of the
underlying structures of these materials in order to develop optoelectronic and
nano/micro scale devices as well as elucidate the basic scientific processes
governing the interaction of photons and charge carriers with nanometer size
structures.