* 1428605
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Nick Flynn, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 371,700.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Catherine Clewett from West Texas A&amp;M University and colleagues Gary Barbee,
Erick Butler, Nick Flynn and Emery Shier (Amarillo College) will acquire a 400
MHz MHz NMR spectrometer with liquid and solid state capabilities. This
spectrometer will allow research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from
these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part
of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students at West
Texas A&amp;M University and Amarillo College. An important goal is for WTAMU be
the primary service region that will extend beyond the Texas borders into the
neighboring states of Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico and
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) characterizating
natural organic carbon in produced water; (b) characterizing fouling and design
of smart reverse osmosis membranes; (c) chemical characterization of CAFO lagoon
water and electrocoagulation; (d) characterizating non-traditional
lignocellulosic biomass dissolution in ionic liquids; (e) chemical
characterization for agriculture and the environment, i.e., moisture, fat and
protein in meat products as well as effects of manure, compost, and tillage on
gaseous emissions as well as forage production and soil, water, and nutrient
management; and (f) studying metabolism, toxicology, and medicine, i.e.,
measurement of glycine metabolism in yeast as well as environmental metabolomics
and development of antiepileptogenic neuroprotective agents.