* 1428184
* MRI: Acquisition of a time-resolved nanophotonic scanning probe microscope for the in situ characterization of materials for energy and sustainability
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Naomi Halas, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 177,003.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) program, Professor
Isabell Thommann from the William Marsh Rice University will acquire parts to
asssemble a femtosecond time-resolved nanophotonic scanning probe microscope.
This will make it possible to study nanostructured materials synthesized for
energy and sustainability applications with unprecedented spatial and temporal
resolution. These measurements will allow probing the chemical and physical
properties of the materials to help understand energy flow and charge carrier
dynamics in hybrid nanostructured materials. This will help to address
challenges in the production of large scale applications of these materials. The
acquisition will be a multiuser instrument used by researchers at the university
and also for new collaborations in the Houston area, and nationally. It will
strengthen the outreach efforts at the university to high school teachers and
students.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) studying charge separation kinetics in all-conjugated block
copolymer thin films; (b) investigating carrier dynamics in two-dimensional
materials and devices for energy; (c) using time-resolved photoluminescence as a
probe of hot electron dynamics; (d) studying hot electron dynamics in plasmonic
antennas; (e) carrying out spatiotemporal investigations of photocatalytic virus
inactivation; (f) studying photocatalytic water splitting on nanostructured
cobalt oxide by time-resolved tip-enhanced Raman scattering; (g) investigating
photocatalytic water splitting on plasmonic photoelectrodes.