* 1428312
* MRI: Acquisition of Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope System for Investigation and Characterization of Complex, Nanoscale Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Thomas Rich, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

PI: Palanki, Srinivas&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1428312&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI:
Acquisition of Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope System for
Investigation and Characterization of Complex, Nanoscale
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a JEM
2100 Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) on campus will have an immediate
impact in the training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-
doctoral associates in the use of a sophisticated instrument for materials
engineering and biomedical l engineering applications and the understanding of
nanoscale structures. Researchers will utilize this instrument to develop cross-
disciplinary collaborations between Material Sciences and Biological Sciences
and will have the opportunity to work on complex research projects that are
broad in scope. This training will have the broad impact of training a cadre of
engineers and scientists that will form the workforce of the future for the
aerospace, marine, chemical, and biological industries in the southeast,
especially in EPSCoR states such as Alabama and Mississippi. Many of the
graduate students in the recently created doctoral programs will work on
projects that require the use of the proposed TEM. Each area of study in this
research will directly involve at least one undergraduate student. In addition
local high school teachers and high school students via existing outreach
programs. Expanding the pool of knowledge will allow students to see how the
science they learn in school is translated to advances in society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The University of South
Alabama (USA, an EPSCoR State University) seeks funds to acquire a JEM 2100
Transmission Electron Microscope (Jeol USA, Inc.). Acquisition of the proposed
system will facilitate multi-disciplinary research by investigators at the USA
to characterize systems at nanometer scales. This resolution is critical for
ongoing research in the Materials and Biological Sciences, as well as integrated
studies into intersections of these disciplines, particularly in the areas of
nanoparticles and multiscale modeling of complex systems. The College of
Engineering has become a nexus of collaborative studies between
investigators&lt;br/&gt;in Departments of Chemical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, Civil Engineering, Oncologic Sciences, Physics, Pharmacology,
Physiology, Biology, Mathematics and Statistics, Chemistry, Biochemistry &amp;
Molecular Biology, and Computer Science. Specific areas of ongoing collaboration
include materials sciences, understanding of cellular signaling mechanisms,
developing smart nanoparticles, and multiscale modeling of complex systems. The
knowledge gained from the studies described in this proposal will allow a large
number of researchers across multiple departments in the University of South
Alabama to garner a better characterization of nanoscale systems.