* 1428657
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer - A Vital Instrument to Sustain and Enhance Research and Scholarship at St. Cloud State
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mohammad Mahroof-Tahir, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 281,884.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Latha Ramakrishnan from St. Cloud State University and colleagues Tamara Leenay,
Mohammad Mahroof-Tahir and Mark Mechelke will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer. This spectrometer will allow research in a variety of fields such
as the study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate students at St. Cloud State University and
neighboring institutions such as North Hennepin Community College as well as
local and regional industries.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) investigating fundamental biochemical principles such as
the function and mechanism of action of major inhibitory and excitatory neural
communication systems in flatworms; (b) studying the mechanism of toxicity of
natural producs towards cancer cells; (c) investigating structure-properties,
i.e., physical, chemical, and electronic relationships of vanadium complexes to
decode their potential anti-diabetic mechanisms; and (d) studying the mechanism
of cytotoxicity of cyclic Mannich bases.