* 1428548
* MRI: Acquisition of an AquaLab Vapor Sorption Analyzer for Studying Sorption Equilibrium Moisture Characteristics of Biomass Feedstocks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Nirmal JOSHEE, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 41,123.00

Proposal: 1428548&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mahapatra, Ajit K.&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI:
Acquisition of an AquaLab Vapor Sorption Analyzer for Studying Sorption
Equilibrium Moisture Characteristics of Biomass
Feedstocks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;One of the major issues
regarding the commercialization of biomass feedstocks as a bioenergy source is
the fact that there is only limited information available regarding their
storability. One of the ways to determine if a biomass feedstock will maintain
its quality under different storage conditions is to develop its moisture
sorption isotherms. There are three major issues associated with the traditional
method of using saturated salt solutions in desiccators to conduct moisture
sorption studies: 1) lengthy period of time required to achieve equilibrium
(four weeks for a single temperature), 2) difficulty of obtaining accurate
measurements due to the protocol of continuously removing the biomass sample and
exposing it to lab environment which often has a different relative humidity and
temperature, and 3) the time-consuming, cumbersome steps required of the
researcher to obtain weight measurements for the duration of the equilibration
period. By acquiring an AquaLab Vapor Sorption Analyzer (Model No. 40430,
Decagon Devices, Inc., Pullman, WA), both static and dynamic vapor sorption
analysis can be performed with ease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Development of biomass feedstock moisture sorption
isotherms at different temperatures and relative humidities will provide
critical information in determining how a biomass feedstock will react in
different climates, and thus aid in establishing the optimal storage,
transportation, and drying conditions. The proposed instrument will be used to
study the equilibrium moisture&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of several biomass
feedstocks. More specifically, the AquaLab Vapor Sorption Analyzer (VSA) would
provide the PI the opportunity for conducting the following research activities:
(1) determination of moisture sorption characteristics of sweet sorghum,
energycane, napiergrass, and Paulownia; and (2) evaluation of isotherm models
for describing isotherm sorption data for sweet sorghum, energycane,
napiergrass, and Paulownia.