* 1428042
* MRI:   Acquisition of Multi-Constellation Multi-Frequency Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) Data Collection Arrays for Low Latitude Ionospheric Effects Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Yu Morton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2017
* USD 176,604.00

The great utility of the US Global Positioning System (GPS) has led to our
society?s increased dependency on precise positioning and timing services and
the emergence of multiple constellations of GNSS from world economic powers such
as China, Russia, and the European Union. By 2023, there will be more than 160
navigation satellites beaming over 400 signals from their medium Earth orbits
(MEO). With their well-defined open signal structures and distributed global
coverage, these trans-ionosphere radio signals will offer unprecedented
opportunities for passive sensing and scientific study of our space environment.
There are, however, enormous challenges to effectively and efficiently utilize
GNSS signals and systems to accurately characterize atmospheric properties. The
objective of this award is to acquire six units of multi-constellation, multi-
band global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) wideband data collection systems
for passive remote sensing of ionospheric phenomena. The equipment will be
deployed at the Jicamarca Ionospheric Radio Observatory (JIRO) and the Arecibo
Observatory (AO) to form spaced receiver arrays with existing GNSS setups to
support research activities in five areas: (1) equatorial ionospheric
irregularity formation and evolution mechanisms and plasma dynamics studies; (2)
diagnostics of high power radio wave modification effects on ionosphere; (3)
high resolution ionospheric total electron content (TEC) and TEC gradients
mapping; (4) ionospheric effects on radio wave propagation; (5) development of
advanced GNSS receiver algorithms for assured navigation in physically and
electromagnetically challenging environments. This project will help to advance
understanding of the space environment and ionosphere processes and aid the
development of the next generation of satellite navigation technology. The
instrument will also play an important role in enhancing undergraduate and
graduate education at universities with programs in ionospheric research and
GNSS engineering, strengthen collaborative relationships among universities and
institutions, and support on-going outreach efforts. Data collected by the
equipment will be used in GNSS signal processing and atmospheric science class
projects for upper-level undergraduate and graduate level courses, in senior
capstone projects, and to support graduate thesis and post-doctoral research.
Processed measurements will be published online to increase public awareness of
atmospheric phenomena and the advancements taking place in satellite navigation
technologies.