* 1428550
* EAGER: Migration of Research and Evidence-based Instructional Technology into K-12 Schools
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Beverly Woolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2019
* USD 299,063.00

This exploratory research seeks to advance understanding of how research-based,
highly innovative technology tools that support student learning can be
implemented in schools in a sustainable way. This is an important and basically
unchartered area of research. Both public and private agencies and business have
invested significant sums in designing and testing technology systems and
applications for education. While exciting and potentially transformative, many
of these innovative tools have not been successfully implemented, in part
because of a lack of knowledge or theory about what is needed in the schools.
Different designs (e.g. whole unit, replacement units, tutoring systems, etc.)
may require different levels of support. There is very little research on what
it takes to implement and sustain technology enhanced educational systems and
products that lead to increased student learning.

Through a series of case studies, this project will study what is needed to
implement three very different types of digital resources that can be
implemented and sustained in schools. The case studies will focus on technology
difficulties, systems integration and pedagogical support. The findings could
have broad impact on the how educational technology is developed and
implemented.