* 1428914
* MRI: Development of an Advanced Cryogenic Gas Stopper for Energetic Rare Isotope Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Antonio Villari, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 633,920.00

All of the matter on Earth is composed primarily of stable or long-lived
isotopes created in a stellar explosion billions of years ago. However, the
isotopes we observe here on Earth comprise only a small fraction of those that
are known to exist. Study of short-lived, or rare, isotopes is key to
understanding the origin of matter in the universe, how neutrons and protons
collectively form into atomic nuclei, and to explore fundamental symmetries of
nature. As these rare isotopes are not naturally occurring on Earth, they must
be created in powerful particle accelerators, such those at the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL), located on the campus of Michigan
State University (MSU). There beams of rare isotopes are created at half the
speed of light. However, some of the most precise experimental techniques for
probing the properties of rare isotopes require beams with energies up to a
billion times less than what they are created with at NSCL. These high-energy
beams can be slowed using solid degraders and brought to rest in a chamber
filled with a buffer gas, a technique currently in use at the NSCL. The
development of a next-generation Advanced Cryogenic Gas Stopper (ACGS) will
improve the efficiency and speed at which rare isotopes are delivered to
experiments, expanding the reach of several experimental programs to even more
exotic isotopes. It will benefit the user community of the NSF-funded NSCL and,
through the scientific progress it enables, society at large. The project will
follow NSCL and MSU policies for ensuring a diverse scientific workforce. A
state-of-the-art development project like ACGS, with close ties to a leading
research university that actively encourages and supports a multicultural
research body, will create an optimal environment for under-represented and
minority students to be trained as scientists.

The ACGS is a next-generation high-performance linear gas-stopping device for
converting fast rare isotope beams into stopped beams that can be used directly
or reaccelerated. The delivery of rare-isotope beams over a wide range of
energies is necessary to maximize the number of experimental techniques that can
be employed. Beams with energies of 0.01 to 100 keV are used in high-precision
experiments with ion traps and lasers, to measure nuclear binding energies
(masses), to determine nuclear radii and moments, and to test fundamental
symmetries at levels complementing much more expensive high-energy experiments.
Precision beams of rare isotopes with energies of 0.1 to 20 MeV/u are used to
measure cross sections of key reactions that are critical for understanding
nuclear synthesis in the cosmos and for nuclear reaction studies that help
determine detailed nuclear properties needed for further advances in nuclear
theory. After installation at the NSCL, the ACGS will provide high-purity beams
with high efficiency, with short extraction times to provide access to short-
lived isotopes, and with a high beam rate capability to enable world-class
science, in particular with reaccelerated beams. Fast beams provided by NSCL's
Coupled Cyclotron Facility will be slowed down in solid degraders prior to being
stopped in helium gas inside the ACGS. The thermalized ions are then guided to
an extraction orifice using RF ion transport techniques and a low-energy, so
called "stopped" beam is formed. The design is tailored to allow the ACGS to
accept incident beam rates exceeding 10^8/s. A novel electrode design, compared
to existing linear gas stoppers, will provide an order of magnitude higher beam
rate capability and cryogenic operation guarantees delivery of clean rare
isotope beams. The use of novel RF-carpet ion-transport techniques will provide
extraction times as short as ten milliseconds. The ACGS is best suited for the
stopping of medium-to-heavy-mass isotopes that have relatively narrow range
straggling distributions in the helium gas and will constitute a high-
performance complement to the light-ion Cyclotron Stopper already being built at
the NSCL. The availability of intense stopped and reaccelerated beams of short-
lived isotopes will play a critical role in the future research program at the
NSCL and will be a key feature of research at the Facility for Rare Isotope
Beams (FRIB) under construction at MSU.