* 1428322
* MRI: Acquisition of a Light-Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) System for Civil Infrastructure Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Dru Germanoski, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2017
* USD 158,605.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award funds the acquisition of an
advanced time-of-flight terrestrial Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) system
to expand research opportunities, and to integrate cutting edge technology into
the engineering and sciences classrooms at Lafayette College. Time-of-flight
LIDAR uses laser pulses to capture the position and reflectivity of objects and
surfaces in three-dimensional space. The new generation of LIDAR technology and
associated post-processing software are far more capable and user friendly than
previous generations. This particular LIDAR system is sturdy enough for hands-on
use by undergraduate students and is equipped with full waveform processing to
explore entirely new ways of visualizing and characterizing objects and terrain.
The movement of LIDAR technology toward the mainstream is creating a revolution
in how engineers and scientists sense, map, and record the natural and built
environment. This revolution extends beyond the sciences and into fields of
historical preservation, law enforcement, and art. In the foreseeable future,
even personal vehicles will utilize LIDAR for autonomous navigation. Therefore,
it is essential to introduce students at an undergraduate level to LIDAR, and
assist them in identifying new and creative uses of this technology. The LIDAR
system and the research it will enable will be used for: the training of future
engineers and scientists through research and pedagogy that embraces new
technology; the development of new collaborations and partnerships between
academia and industry; and the significant enhancement of the capability to
perform leading edge research at Lafayette College. Lafayette students involved
in undergraduate research are typically inspired to pursue advanced degrees and
research-related professions in both academia and industry. LIDAR is a versatile
tool that will not only expand the research infrastructure at Lafayette but also
provide new experimental experiences in the engineering and science curricula.
The LIDAR system will support at least nine courses at Lafayette College as well
as research intensive independent study and honors thesis courses, with
approximately 400 student contacts per year. The high tech nature and
portability of the LIDAR lends itself well to conducting outreach demonstrations
for local high school students, many of whom are underrepresented minorities, to
generate excitement about the STEM fields. The PI and Co-PIs have strong records
mentoring women students and will take advantage of new efforts that are
underway at Lafayette to recruit additional members of underrepresented groups
into their research program

The intellectual merit of this project is centered on creating new knowledge and
enhancing the research opportunities for faculty and undergraduate students at
Lafayette College. The LIDAR system will have the immediate impact of enabling
the PI, Co-PIs, research students, and outside collaborators in academia and
industry to conduct research in the following areas: 1) transportation
infrastructure, 2) slope stability and erosional processes, 3) hydrology and
sediment transport, and 4) application of remote sensing to soil
characterization. The projects in these areas directly address important issues
and questions related to the built and natural environments at a local and
national level. Specifically, the LIDAR system will enable research activities
with the following impacts: development of best practices for using LIDAR to
measure performance of Geosynthetic-Reinforced Soil Integrated Bridge Systems
(GRS-IBS); movement toward consensus on how to efficiently design Column-
Supported Embankments (CSEs); advancement in understanding of the complex soil-
structure interaction that exists in slopes stabilized with slender reinforcing
elements; characterization of the factors leading to instability of slopes near
Lafayette College formed in the Franklin Formation; examination of the effects
of bedrock geology and long-term dam operation on channel morphology along
rivers and streams; and development of an innovative concept to characterize key
properties of compacted soil by leveraging data from remote sensing instruments.