* 1428948
* MRI: Acquisition of TIRF Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nathan Derr, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 553,646.00

The aquisition of a total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscope
will greatly enhance the life sciences at Smith College, the nation's largest
liberal arts college for women. This microscope will inspire a new generation of
scientists through its ability to observe individual molecules in real time,
thereby providing an opportunity to go from textbook descriptions of molecules
to actually witnessing their behavior and showing how molecular activity leads
to the behavior of whole cells. Interdisciplinary research in Biochemistry,
Biology, Chemistry, Engineering, Neuroscience and Physics will include: cellular
organization and cargo transport by the molecular motors that allow for cell
movement; interactions of molecular motors and their tracks at different stages
in muscle and nerve development; time-dependent function of single molecule
catalysts; characterization of designed proteins that may inhibit cancer
progression; and time-dependent responses of novel polymers designed to react to
specific environmental conditions. Finally, the TIRF microscope will facilitate
the creation and validation of a low-cost teaching TIRF microscope designed for
pedagogical applications and laboratory class exercises. Design plans and
materials for this teaching system will be disseminated to colleges and
universities throughout the United States as part of Smith College?s substantial
community outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently great progress has
been made in understanding the biophysics and mechanochemistry of proteins and
small molecules. Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy is an
essential tool enabling this revolution as it enables sub-diffraction-limited
single molecule localizations to a precision of ~1 nm. A TIRF microscope at
Smith College will enable single molecule research in eight laboratories
representing six departments and programs. Research is focused in three areas:
1) mechanochemistry, genetics, and biophysics of the cytoskeleton, 2) single
molecule mechanisms of chemical polymerization and catalysis, and 3) engineered
proteins and their interactions within cells. Several cytoskeleton projects will
delve into understanding the motor proteins dynein, kinesin, and myosin and how
they interact with one another and their microtubule and microfilament tracks.
Investigations of how anesthetics catalyze cytoskeletal rearrangement in neurons
and how kinesin inhibitors alter radial glial cells in development will also be
conducted. The molecular level dynamics of peptide interactions and how these
interactions affect the macroscopic mechanical attributes of polymers of these
peptides will be studied.