* 1428681
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Stereoscopic Interactive Visualization System for Research and Education in Science, Engineering and the Humanities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Regis Kopper, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,720.00

High-resolution immersive interactive visualization systems allow users to
explore and understand data from a first person perspective using natural
techniques. Immersive visualization improves spatial understanding, enables
training in safe yet realistic environments and allows the understanding of and
interaction with data in an intuitive way. Particularly, researchers and
students in engineering, science and the humanities can benefit from high-
definition immersive visualization systems because many times the nature of the
data in those disciplines is spatial and highly detailed. Within this context,
this Major Research Instrumentation award allows Duke University to build the
High-fidelity Duke immersive Virtual Environment (HiDiVE). Built on the success
of the Duke immersive Virtual Environment (DiVE) over the past decade, the
HiDiVE will consist of a six-sided room in the form of a cube, with two
projectors for each surface, in a total resolution of 22.1 million pixels. This
level of detail is roughly four times what the current DiVE system has and will
allow for analysis of high-resolution data. Motion trackers will enable users to
interact with data in the HiDiVE using natural and intuitive motions. This next
generation system opens the possibility for research and education projects
using high-definition data and computer graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Regis
Kopper, along with co-investigators Dr. Kevin LaBar and Dr. Silvia Ferrari, six
senior personnel and five users will initially use the HiDiVE in projects
spanning several areas of knowledge, including cognitive neuroscience,
intelligent systems and control, digital archeology and human-factors
engineering. Specifically, the HiDiVE will support studies to understand human
fear recovery and response to stress triggers. The HiDiVE will also be used for
human-robot interaction experiments, particularly in the understanding of human-
decision making to design robots that mimic human behavior and to validate
robotic path planning. Another use of the HiDiVE will be in digital archeology,
where users will be able to experience virtual dig sites, explore artifacts,
stratigraphy, and conceptual reconstructions of pre-historic sites. In human-
factors engineering, the HiDiVE will be a platform for studying the motions of
humans doing repetitive work and how visual complexity may impact human mental
workload. Apart from being a research facility, the HiDiVE will support
educational and outreach activities. Students will use the system as a
development platform for computer science and human-computer interaction
courses. The HiDiVE will partner with the NSF IGERT on Wireless Intelligent
Sensor Networks (WISeNet)to recruitand support minority students to engage in
research activities and will be an inclusive environment with reach beyond the
boundaries of the university, allowing visitors from schools and
underrepresented groups to experience an advanced immersive virtual reality
system.