* 1428567
* MRI: Development of the Northeastern University Marine Observatory NETwork (NU MONET)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Milica Stojanovic, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 448,000.00

This project, developing an underwater network instrument, enables studying and
collecting data from oceanic life and environment. The project builds this novel
underwater network using current commercial products and develops new components
that do not exist today. The instrument is built in a modular fashion so that
improved hardware and software can constantly be developed and integrated. In
addition, the team develops a modular protocol stack that addresses the
constraints that exist with acoustic wireless networks. This project addresses
the data exchange from the underwater sensors, robotics, and real-time video
that requires fundamentally different modes of networking protocols and
behaviors. Integration of computational capabilities to commercial communication
units (Teledyne Benthos acoustic modems) will be developed to grant flexible and
modular protocol stack implementation, with capabilities of network
reconfiguration and instrument programming from remote locations. The instrument
will be integrated with the Marine Science Center that will provide maintenance
and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance will be felt in a
broad area of marine sciences where the instrument will provide the option to
consistently collect and observe data in a large body of water. Many other
science disciplines will be able to take advantage of the type of data exchange
with this instrument, including environmental sciences dealing with natural and
human caused catastrophes. Important discoveries can be expected in the area of
innovative communications networks able to operate under the challenging
conditions of underwater communications. Some of the output could be proposed as
standards as a much desired network standard does not exist today.