* 1428925
* MRI - Head Injury Biomechanics Measurement System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Namas Chandra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 116,896.00

PI: Pfister, Bryan J. Proposal: 1428925 Title: MRI - Head Injury Biomechanics
Measurement System

Significance Mild traumatic brain injuries (TBI) and concussions are currently a
major public health concern that dominates our lives from adolescent activities
to professional sports to everyday falls. An estimated 1.6 to 3.8 million
sports-related concussions occur in US alone. Though there are many research
efforts to describe and treat concussion medically, trauma to the head is
essentially a biomechanical problem. The PIs have extensive experience with TBI
and blast brain trauma research. They believe that the problem can be defined by
specifying the biomechanical boundary value problem through prescribing the
right geometry and material and initial/boundary conditions through carefully
conducted experiments and modeling. The head injury biomechanics measurement
system will enable the PIs to control and measure the biomechanical parameters
that bound concussive conditions. This effort will lead in developing a Brain
Injury Criterion (BIC) similar to the development of the Head Injury Criterion
for automotive accidents. This effort will fill the important fundamental
knowledge gap in current traumatic concussive brain injury research.

Technical Description The major goal of both PIs and the Center for Injury
Biomechanics, Materials and Medicine (CIBM3) is to provide a link between
external loading of the head to the spatial and temporal stress and strains that
cause injury to the brain. The Head Injury Biomechanical Measurement System
proposed here is an enabling component that will allow researchers to precisely
replicate the injury event, accurately measure stresses and strains at multiple
discrete locations and help develop bio-fidelic computer models to establish the
relationship between external loading and tissue level state of stress. This
will be important to researchers internationally to replicate clinically
relevant biomechanical injury parameters in their models to investigate the
traumatic mechanisms of concussive injury.

The proposed Head Injury Biomechanical Measurement System will be a unique
system in the academic research community. This unique research approach of
using cadavers in addition to physical dummy models will add clinical relevance
towards developing a BIC and the potential to be a standard in the field.