* 1428646
* Collaborative Research:  Military Veteran Students' Pathways in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Joyce Main, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2021
* USD 110,295.00

Military veterans hold tremendous promise for expanding and diversifying the
engineering workforce. Given the diverse backgrounds of veterans, their
increasing numbers, and the growing national demand for engineers, the timing is
ideal to study the conditions under which veterans pursue and succeed in
engineering education. Student veterans bring valuable assets to their
engineering education, but more research is needed to understand their academic
and social acculturation into campus life. Therefore, this project aims to (1)
identify why veterans pursue bachelor's degrees in engineering, (2) illustrate
veteran experiences in engineering education, and (3) advance knowledge on how
academic institutions can further support veterans in engineering. This
comparative case study of student veterans in engineering across four academic
institutions will include interviews of student veterans and key stakeholders,
as well as a content analysis of materials and websites related to student
veteran issues and concerns. The interdisciplinary research team from
engineering, sociology, and education brings expertise on veterans, gender,
race/ethnicity, social capital, and persistence in higher education that
provides a strong foundation for advancing knowledge in engineering education.

Supporting more veterans to transition to successful careers in engineering is a
vital service to the nation. Broadening the participation of veterans in
engineering offers the potential to enhance diversity in engineering across
multiple dimensions since, compared to civilian students, veterans are more
likely to be older, first-generation college, disabled, African-American, or
Latino. The study results will provide context and information for various
applications, such as: development of new strategies to support student
veterans' success, identification of overlooked areas to promote student
veterans' participation in engineering, and generation of critical information
for development of larger-scale studies for investigating student veterans in
engineering. A comprehensive dissemination plan ensures that the study results,
particularly the best practices for supporting veterans in engineering, reach
diverse audiences interested in student veterans and engineering education. The
advisory board includes a variety of stakeholders who have the interest,
expertise, and commitment to act on the policy implications of the study.