* 1428436
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D X-Ray Computed Tomography Scanner for Imaging of Large Size Infrastructure, Biological, and Mechanical Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Duane Storti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 988,660.00

X-ray computed tomography (CT) allows researchers to see inside structural,
mechanical, electronic or biological parts and produce high-resolution 3D images
of the parts, inside and out. This technology has evolved to enable X-ray CT
scanning of larger parts made from denser materials while achieving high
resolution at fast scan times. These advances have made x-ray CT a unique tool
for researchers in disciplines from civil engineering to biology. This Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an advanced
X-ray CT scanner capable of scanning parts as large as 1.2 meters tall and 0.84
meters wide at very high resolutions. A multidisciplinary team of University of
Washington (UW) researchers has been assembled to acquire the instrument,
including researchers from civil engineering, mechanical engineering,
aeronautical engineering, anthropology, the Washington Nanofabrication Facility
(WNF)/Electrical Engineering, biology, earth and space sciences, material
science, and the Burke Museum which is a natural history and cultural museum on
the campus of the University of Washington. The research enabled by this
instrument is as broad and multidisciplinary as the research team and it will
help to drive innovations in these diverse disciplines.

The imaging capability provided by the x-ray CT will allow structural
engineering researchers to perform tests of large-scale structural
subassemblages and then image the key components following the tests; enabling
discovery of damage not visible from the surface. X-ray CT will be used to
monitor damage progression in reinforced concrete bond zones, improving
understanding and modeling of bond zone behavior. Researchers in composite
structures used in aero, mechanical and civil applications will image composite
components to investigate barely visible and subsurface defects, and failure
initiation. These data will help develop and validate numerical models that rely
on accurate characterization of voids and variations in fiber angles across
laminate layers, advance composite micromechanics and failure theories for
composites, and improve bond quality. Researchers in 3D printing will use the
X-ray CT for nondestructive inspection of both internal and external geometry of
3D printed parts. They will also explore the effectiveness of X-ray CT
evaluation of spatially controlled material composition of the 3D printed parts
which is not otherwise feasible. Researchers in biological systems will image
large portions of skeletal remains, fossils, and recently deceased animals to
determine exact geometries; these data will enable the development of bio-
mechanical models and investigation of the function of biological structures.
Researchers in electrical engineering and nanofabrication will use the
instrument in failure analysis of electronics fabricated with advanced
techniques. The instrument will become a key piece of research infrastructure
for the University of Washington and the Pacific Northwest.