* 1428387
* MRI:Acquisition of a multifunctional imager for research, undergraduate training, and curricular applications
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Janet Kirkley, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 41,902.00

An award is made to Knox College to acquire a Bio-Rad V3 WW ChemiDoc MP imager
package. The imager will contribute to research activities and undergraduate
education in Biochemistry, Biology, and Neuroscience, permitting accelerated gel
electrophoresis and transfer and fluorescence detection for Western blotting, as
well as supporting multiple methods for visualization of protein and nucleic
acid gels. The ChemiDoc MP will contribute significantly to undergraduate
research and curricular applications, thus enhancing student research training
at Knox. Incorporation of the instrument into coursework and laboratory
activities in Biochemistry, Biology, and Neuroscience will benefit approximately
140 students per year. The instrument will allow for adoption of more
environmentally-friendly techniques and will improve data acquisition and
analysis.

Because of the broad application of the techniques supported by this instrument,
the ChemiDoc MP imager will contribute to research in a number of laboratories.
Research into the mechanisms by which ethanol decreases the immune defense will
use the imager to study changes in signal transduction events occurring early in
the inflammatory response to better understand how acute ethanol exposure
impairs defense against illness-producing pathogens. The instrument will also be
used for research addressing the role of intersectin in cellular transport of
macromolecules during the development of the nervous system, with implications
for better understanding crucial events in early development. Another research
program uses molecular biology techniques facilitated by the imager to create a
more robust protein-based hydrogel biopolymer, which has important uses in
tissue engineering and drug delivery design. One laboratory will visualize
nucleic acid gels as part of its exploration of the diversity of small RNAs
expressed in dictyostelid social amoebas as a way of achieving better
understanding of the evolutionary history of these important regulators of gene
expression. The imager will also be used in research that addresses gender
differences in the development of drug addiction by studying the role of the
female hormone estrogen in the development of drug dependence. These programs
combined will involve five investigators and approximately 20 undergraduate
students annually in independent research initiatives.