* 1428690
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Grant in Economics: Beliefs and Preferences: An Experimental Investigation of Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,04/30/2017
* David Levine, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 04/30/2017
* USD 3,419.00

To better understand individual decision-making, economists have increasingly
recognized the importance of subjective expectations and the necessity of
disentangling beliefs and preferences. This exercise is useful in settings where
behavior appears puzzling--for example, entrepreneurship. The high failure rate
of new businesses is well-documented and yet individuals continue to forego paid
employment to open their own business. This project uses laboratory experiments
to disentangle beliefs and preferences to understand why individuals tend to
overestimate the probability of high payoff outcomes. In settings, such as
entrepreneurship, it is common to assume that an individual overestimates the
probability of success because he overestimates his abilities. However, it is
also possible that he is simply optimistic and believes good things are more
likely to occur. We isolate beliefs about performance from optimism to test the
prevailing assumption that the two are independent and to ask to what extent
overestimation of the probability of success is driven by performance beliefs
versus optimism. We find that both optimism and performance overestimation drive
individuals to overestimate the probability of success; however, women are
driven more by optimism than men. We also find that performance overestimation
and optimism are highly correlated--individuals who are optimistic are also more
likely to overestimate their performance. Next, we will examine the relationship
between preferences for risk-taking on optimism and performance overestimation,
as well as test whether individual optimism varies as the stakes involved
change.

We employ a 2x2 (Payment x Performance) within-subject experimental design,
where subjects are asked to report their beliefs about probabilistic events with
known distributions and are incentivized for their accuracy via the quadratic
scoring rule. To identify optimism, the payment treatment maps outcomes of a
random draw from the distribution to monetary payoffs, varying whether specified
outcomes are payoff favorable. A subject is optimistic if a he believes an
outcome is more likely to occur when the outcome is payoff favorable than when
it is not. To identify performance overestimation the performance treatment
varies whether the subject's performance on IQ questions can affect the
distribution or whether the distribution is exogenously given by the
experimenter. When a subject answers an IQ question correctly, without feedback,
he is facing a better distribution in the sense of stochastic dominance. The
extent to which a subject overestimates his performance is measured by the
weight he puts on the probability of being in a better distribution than his
performance actually warrants. Because the quadratic scoring rule is only
incentive compatible assuming risk-neutrality and preferences given by expected
utility, we will correct for violations of these assumptions by eliciting risk
attitudes and jointly estimating risk preferences and subjective probabilities.
We will also examine the nature of the relationship between optimistic beliefs
and preferences by varying the intensity of the induced preference in the
payment treatment.