* 1428298
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of a Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting System for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Hargsoon Yoon, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2017
* USD 147,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation consortium grant will allow for the purchase
of a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) system to support active
scientific research, training and educational programs in Biotechnology,
Nanotechnology, and Photovoltaic technology. This TCSPC system has the
capability to measure critical information on the transient lifetime of
electrical charges at the picosecond to microsecond time-scale, while providing
the ability to visualize the physical and chemical processes of polymers,
nanoparticles, cells and semiconductors in a controlled atmosphere and at
varying temperatures. These crucial functions will enable faculty and students
to collect critical scientific data and provide key insights into nanoscale
level of understanding of physical and chemical processes. These insights will
be used for the development of new neural sensors, biomedical imaging tools,
drug delivery agents, and new energy conversion/storage technologies for a
sustainable future. The acquisition of this system will significantly enhance
research and educational collaboration in the Hampton Roads area, VA. In
addition, this system will be used to promote research and learning experiences
for students, particularly assisting underrepresented minority groups to pursue
advanced degrees in Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of a state-of-the-art TCSPC system aims to greatly broaden the scope
of research and foster multidisciplinary research collaborations in many
different research areas, while promoting student training programs. The TCSPC
offers advanced features including: i) in-situ time-resolved lifetime, ii)
temperature control from -25 to 150 aC, iii) 2D time-resolved fluorescence
images with extremely high-resolution morphologies, and iv) the low excitation
levels required to maintain bio-cell viability and avoid photo-bleaching. These
enhanced capabilities will revolutionize our understanding and advance dynamic
characteristics of a wide range of applications used for multidisciplinary and
interdisciplinary research. In particular, the acquisition of this TCSPC system
will greatly enhance our core research areas of 1) Biotechnology, 2)
Nanofabrication and technology, and 3) Photovoltaic Technology. The system will
be housed and regularly maintained at the Applied Research Center (ARC) of ODU,
and open to all of the research community, fulfilling a critical and growing
need for both education and research in Virginia¡¦s Hampton Roads area. The easy
access to this instrument will contribute not only to research in the areas of
nanotechnology, biology and energy but also to the training of graduate and
undergraduate students. To promote teaching, training, and learning, this
instrument will effectively be used to enhance the scope of several courses, by
adding hands-on experiences on biomaterials, nanomaterials, semiconductor
process/characterization and photovoltaics.