* 1428987
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High Resolution-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 320,477.00

A High Resolution-Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (HR-ICP-MS) is
one of the most rapid and sensitive methods for trace element analysis currently
available. The funded instrumentation will facilitate important research on
emerging environmental issues in the northern Gulf of Mexico, such as the fate,
transport, bioavailability and toxicity of contaminants from anthropogenic
activities (including the Deepwater Horizon oil spill) in the Gulf of Mexico, as
well as studies of contaminants, nutrients, and organics derived from riverine
exports and increasing coastal erosion, and processes and mechanisms related to
the formation of eutrophication and hypoxia. The principal investigator has a
long track record of contributions to trace metal biogeochemistry in aquatic and
marine systems. The investigator has trained a number of graduate and
undergraduate students in the use of ICP-MS over the last few years. In
addition, several students' theses have benefitted from data generated in the
facility. The community needs competent users of HR-ICP-MS as there is a real
national shortage currently. The instrument will provide new research
infrastructure to replace a very old but working instrument, which will be used
on both fundamental and applied research problems, as well as for contract
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High Resolution-Inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (HR-ICP-MS) is a highly sensitive (sub-parts-per-trillion) multi-
element analysis technique particularly suited for environmental analysis and is
the analytical instrument of choice for most academic labs doing ultra-clean
trace element work. Newly available HR-ICP-MS has increased dynamic range and
improved magnetic scan speed. Sensitivity and resolution should be improved. The
principal investigator's current instrument has been used for a number of mainly
NSF-funded projects including GEOTRACES analytical work, Deepwater Horizon oil
spill research, studies of colloid elemental composition as a function of size,
trace element chemistry of rivers, and fisheries research (fish otolith
composition). Other researchers from academia and government agencies
collaborating with the principal investigator have worked on studies of acid
mine drainage, submarine groundwater discharge, and various other projects
ranging from metal catalysts to engineered nanoparticles to enzyme co-factors.
The principal investigator has ongoing work associated with GEOTRACES and
expects to participate in regional oil spill recovery work which will involve
elemental analysis. The current instrument has also had a significant impact on
research training. Eight of the principal investigator's graduate students, plus
three Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) students, have used the
current HR-ICP-MS and there are at least 18 other graduate students (mainly from
other universities) who also have used it.