* 1428875
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope to Enable Undergraduate Research and Research Training across Disciplines
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Derek Gingerich, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 459,569.00

Non-technical: The acquisition of this confocal laser scanning microscope
enables new research programs in the Materials Science, Biology, and Chemistry
departments at the University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire. The instrument
significantly expands the imaging capabilities of the University's
interdisciplinary Materials Science Center, and is used to solve problems in
research areas such as smart suspensions, superconducting magnets, plant light
responses, movement within nematode cells, neural cell interactions, fluorescent
dye development, and nanomaterials. The instrument is also used to expand
undergraduate research training efforts in hard materials, soft materials,
nanomaterials and cellular biology, with an emphasis on underrepresented
students in the STEM disciplines. The instrument is further integrated into the
undergraduate lab curriculum of Materials Science and Biology, through courses
such as Materials Characterization, Developmental Biology, and Research Methods.
Existing industrial collaborations and K12 outreach efforts in the Materials
Science Center also utilize this system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
enables new research directions for faculty across disciplines, provides the
most relevant research and research training experiences for STEM
undergraduates, helps recruit high-quality researchers for the future, and
enables collaborations with neighboring institutions and industry. The research
of the principal investigators and senior personnel spans multiple disciplines,
including the interdisciplinary Materials Science Center, Biology Department,
and Chemistry Department. Current Materials Science projects include: (1)
investigation of colloidal gels, both for fundamental molecular interactions
research and for applications such as catalyst supports and membranes, using
temperature-controlled confocal fluorescence microscopy to generate 3D
reconstructions from confocal z-stacks for quiescent gels and fast resonant
scanning for particle tracking of colloidal suspensions under flow, and (2) the
characterization of fracture surfaces of low temperature and high temperature
superconductors using high z resolution confocal reflectance height maps, which
will help assess the role of the composite strand microstructure in the overall
wire fracture toughness. Current Biology principal investigator projects
include: (1) exploration of light response pathways in plants using high
resolution subcellular fluorescent protein imaging in living plant cells and
simultaneous detection of multiple fluorophores for determination of co-
localization and FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer experiments, and (2)
investigation of the movement of fluorescent-tagged components of the cilia of
nematodes using fast resonant scanning confocal fluorescence microscopy and
subcellular localization and co-localization of multiple fluorophores using high
resolution confocal fluorescence microscopy. Additional projects include: (1)
investigation of fluorescent rare earth ion-bound polypeptide aggregates using
3D confocal fluorescence imaging, (2) live cell imaging and kinetic studies of
cell interactions using high resolution fast resonant scanning confocal
microscopy and environmental control, and (3) the testing of new site-selective
fluorescent dyes by staining and 3D imaging live cells using confocal
fluorescence microscopy.