* 1428080
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Nanoindenter for Multiscale Mechanical Characterization of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Kumar Sridharan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 507,021.00

Non-technical: Nanoindentation is a versatile experimental tool for materials
characterization that uses diamond indenters into the surfaces of materials to
assess mechanical properties including hardness, modulus, toughness, creep,
wear, and damping. Nanoindentation has the ability to make measurements at
length scales ranging continuously between about 10 nm and 1 mm. It also has the
ability to rapidly and precisely place thousands of measurements for probing
internal structure of bulk specimens. For these reasons nanoindentation has
become an indispensable tool for research in fields ranging from Medicine to
Engineering to Biology, Geology, Chemistry, and Engineering Physics. The
Materials Science Center at the University of Wisconsin, Madison is designated
to house this nanoindenter for access by researchers across campus and at other
institutions, both private and public. Immediate outcomes of the proposed
studies include novel materials with the designed friction, adhesion and wear;
stronger and safer materials in nuclear, mechanical and electronics
applications; biomaterials to be used in regenerative and therapeutic medicine
fields, and early prediction of the strength of earthquake faults. Besides
serving research, this nanoindenter is expected to aid the teaching mission of
the University by providing a user-friendly testing platform to be employed in
undergraduate and graduate education. The research team also plans to organize
workshops and teach graduate courses on nanoindentation to expand the use of the
nanoindenter among various research groups in the university and in 13 local
industry partners. Finally, the research team is committed to disseminate
educational resources on nanoindentation to facilitate broader participation of
K-12 audiences to fundamental scientific and engineering concepts on
nanoindentation.

Technical: Characterization of fundamental strength and deformation mechanisms
in most of today?s demanding materials systems requires multiscale
investigation. Automated advanced nanoindentation and scratch experiments are
suited for this challenging task due to their high spatial resolution and
throughput. Acquisition and utilization of an advanced automated nanoindenter to
the University of Wisconsin, Madison is the scope of this project. Specific
research activities to be enhanced and enabled by the automated nanoindenter
are: micro/nanomechanics and tribology of thin films, 2D materials, coatings and
interfaces; strength and deformation mechanisms in composites, and deformation
mechanisms and structure of metallic glasses and alloys; influence of radiation,
laser, and plasma treatments on materials microstructure and strength;
nanomechanical characterization of biomaterials including bone, cartilage and
skin, and mechanical effects of geological heterogeneity. To accomplish these
broad range of research activities, the nanoindenter based system is equipped
with modules for dynamic mechanical analysis; extended travel stage and
fluorescence microscope for soft/biomaterials; high load transducer for
tribology applications; acoustic emission monitoring; nanoscale
electromechanical characterization; high-resolution mechanical property mapping;
high temperature stage, and ultra-low force mechanical characterization. This
compact and all-in-one configuration is expected to expand present research
capabilities of 21 research groups, over 60 graduate, 20 undergraduate students,
and 10 postdoctoral researchers and open entirely new avenues of materials
science research including the design of novel materials in industrial, nuclear,
biomedical and geological applications.