* 1428012
* MRI: Acquisition of a Portable X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer at Hamline University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Deanna O'Donnell, Hamline University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 54,950.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, Hamline University will acquire a
portable X-Ray fluorescence spectrometer. An X-ray fluorescence spectrometer is
an analytical tool used to determine the chemical elements in a sample. Because
it is portable and hand held, it can be used to analyze samples away from a
laboratory, for example in a classroom, at an archeological site, or to examine
art objects or cultural heritage materials in museums. The instrument will be
shared with researchers at Minnesota State University-Mankato and two non-profit
organizations, the Minnesota Historical Society (MHS) and the Midwest Art
Conservation Center (MACC). It will be used in undergraduate chemistry courses,
a teacher education course and a forensics/anthropology course. It will also be
used in high school courses and in elementary school demonstrations. This
community outreach includes a large minority student population. The societal
benefit includes understanding and preserving cultural artifacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) identifying the chemical
composition of forensic samples, art and cultural heritage objects; (b)
characterizing artifacts for provenience; (c) understanding the influence of the
Golgi membrane on the formation of paired-helical fibers (PHFs) from the protein
tau; (d) synthesizing aluminum oxide (alumina) nanoparticles; and (e) developing
a searchable database for rapid and reliable field use of materials commonly
found at crime scenes.