* 1428633
* MRI: Acquisition of Transient Absorption Spectrometer for Multidisciplinary Research in Chemistry, Materials Science and Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sankaran Thayumanavan, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,900.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Elizabeth Young from Amherst College and colleagues Alexi Arango (Mount
Holyoke), Michael Barnes (University of Massachussetts-Amherst) and Sankaran
Thayumanavan (University of Massachussetts-Amherst) will acquire a transient
absorption spectrometer with a femtosecond Ti:sapphire amplifier system for a
five-college consortium (Amherst College, Mount Holyoke College, Smith College,
Hampshire Colleges and University of Massachusetts-Amherst). In general, tunable
Ti:sapphire lasers that emit red and near-infrared light are used to irradiate a
substance to investigate how they respond to short energy pulses. This provides
information on the molecular structure and interactions between atoms. The
ultrafast (femtosecond) methods allow study of important biological mechanisms
such as the charge transfer dynamics in photosynthesis reaction centers that
have important implications in how plants utilize solar energy to produce food.

This award will enhance research and education at all levels, especially in
areas such as (a) investigation of charge separation (CS) and recombination (CR)
dynamics in organic photovoltaic materials; (b) studys of covalently-linked
donor-acceptor (D-A) molecules based on BODIPY photooxidant and CS and CR in
thin-film bilayer photovoltaic assemblies; and (c) studies of exciton dynamics
in crystalline and semicrystalline polymer aggregates.