* 1428960
* MRI: Acquisition of a Chlorine Reactive Ion Etching System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Shepard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2016
* USD 419,440.00

Directional dry etching constitutes a fundamental fabrication technique in the
research and manufacturing of micro- and nanoscale devices. The proposal seeks
funding to allow Columbia University to acquire an advanced etching system that
allows for a diverse set of uses and will expand the range of a variety of
current projects at Columbia, including projects related to nano-electronics,
nanobiology and nano-neuro-biology, optoelectronics, photovoltaics and medical
research. The equipment will also enable a range of future projects that are
currently not possible, including lasers at the nanoscale level and a class of
semiconductors known as III/V semiconductors. As a major upgrade to the shared
Columbia Cleanroom -- currently the only shared cleanroom facility in the New
York City metropolitan area --the etching system to be acquired will directly
impact the educational and research activities of over 250 researchers (faculty,
staff, and students) at Columbia and neighboring institutions. The group of co-
Principal Investigators includes all the researchers who serve on the Cleanroom
Board of Directors, representing an accumulation of experience in the successful
installation and support of such equipment for a varied and evolving set of
users. The facility also hosts graduate and undergraduate lecture and laboratory
courses taught by the co-PIs, REUs and RETs, and independent study projects
advised by faculty from many departments. Since nanopatterning is a central
component of these courses, the requested etcher will directly impact the
educational program of several departments, providing students with important
skills for future careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ICP RIE (inductively-coupled plasma, reactive ion etching) system described in
this proposal will employ chlorine-based etch chemistries for vertical etching
of compound semiconductors, metals, and organic materials. The new patterning
capability and system will enable a range of future projects including nanoscale
lasers and sensors based on III/V semiconductors. During operation of the
etcher, recipes will be systematically developed to provide optimal results to
all researchers. The Columbia University clean room is currently the only
shared-access micro- and nano-fabrication facility in the metropolitan New York
City area and serves a diverse population of academic users and small
businesses. The facility has permanent technical and administrative support, and
the proposed ICP RIE system will constitute a crucial facility of the available
infrastructure for research training in nanoscale science and engineering. The
tool will be used directly by students and post-doctoral researchers as part of
their research activities, providing training in advanced nanopatterning
techniques.