* 1428425
* MRI: DEVELOPMENT OF FNIRS EQUIPMENT FOR ASSESSING FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN BRAIN INJURY
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Tara Alvarez, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,930.00

PI: Alvarez, Tara Proposal: 1428425 Title: MRI: DEVELOPMENT OF FNIRS EQUIPMENT
FOR ASSESSING FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN BRAIN INJURY

Significance This project can have a large impact. There are many clinical
populations including: TBI, stroke, multiple sclerosis, autism,
neurodegenerative disorders and aging, which could be studied with the proposed
equipment and integrated platform. The PIs were the first to study fMRI and eye
movements in vision rehabilitation in mTBI, which can potentially impact the
health care management of vision dysfunction. Functional brain connectivity and
eye movements show promise as potential biomarker(s) to quantitatively measure
neurological function in such clinical issues as moderate traumatic brain injury
(mTBI) in athletes and soldiers, as well as in children with vision dysfunction
and mTBI.

The PIs will integrate this platform into their signal processing and
instrumentation courses. The PIs have a history of outreach activities
previously funded through an NSF CAREER award and the NIH. All those activities
will continue, which include: mentorship of under-represented grade school, high
school, undergraduate, and graduate (Masters and Ph.D.) students.

Technical Description This proposal requests funding to design an integrated,
portable functional near infrared spectroscopy instrument (fNIRS) that was
successfully developed with Vision and Neural Assessment Equipment. The system
will have the following capabilities: 1) custom software with user-friendly
script language to program independent and multiple visual stimuli, 2)
simultaneous recording of functional connectivity with fNIRS and eye movement
responses, 3) library of visual stimuli for other clinicians to use and 4) data
analysis algorithms to determine potential brain connectivity measures or
biomarkers that are sensitive and specific in identifying neurological and
visual deficits. This transformative project will enable basic and clinical
research scientists to assess brain functions in normal and impaired
populations.