* 1428479
* MRI: Development of a Multidimensional Nonlinear Spectrometer Spanning the Ultraviolet to the Infrared
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Vanessa Sih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,070,380.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program and support from
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, Professor Jennifer Ogilvie from
the University of Michigan and colleagues Stephen Forrest, Kevin Kubarych,
Theodore Norris and Vanessa Sih will develop a multispectral multidimensional
non-linear (MMDS) spectrometer to enable studies of dynamical processes in
atomic, molecular, and material systems spanning femtoseconds to seconds, from
the ultraviolet (UV) to the infrared (IR) regimes. This will allow insight into
DNA photodamage and repair mechanisms and metalloenzyme function. The ability to
mix and match infrared, visible and ultraviolet wavelengths will be a novel and
potentially very powerful technique. The investigators will create modules that
will serve for outreach activities to K-12 students. Importantly, participation
of students and postdoctoral associates in this project will serve to educate a
new generation of instrumentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as the
study of complex condensed phase systems. The instrument will also be used to
probe the dynamics of the building blocks of biological matter: amino and
nucleic acids, to gain insight into DNA photodamage and repair mechanisms and
metalloenzyme function and will provide a tool for studying the physics of
nanostructures. It is also noted that the instrument would address key questions
relevant to improving the efficiency of organic photovoltaic devices.