* 1428062
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:  Mechanisms of Establishing and Maintaining an Algal Endosymbiont in a Vertebrate Host
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Ryan Kerney, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 05/31/2016
* USD 33,369.00

The investigators have recently discovered the first example of a beneficial,
symbiotic alga entering cells of a vertebrate host. The host in this association
is the common spotted salamander (Ambystoma maculatum) from Eastern North
America. The green algal symbiont enters tissues and cells of the salamander
embryos soon after they begin development in temporary vernal pools. The project
will use several experimental approaches, including cell co-culturing, mRNA
sequencing, and laser-based cell sorting, to determine the mechanisms of algal
cell entry into the salamander host and the physiological implications of this
unique association. The successful completion of this project will also make new
tools available for introducing foreign genes (transgenics) in both the algal
symbiont and salamander host, which will allow further investigation into the
cellular and molecular mechanisms that enable this intimate association. The
project will include training of undergraduate students from Gettysburg College
in both field sampling of multiple salamander species as well as advanced
techniques in cell culture, cell sorting, and next generation sequencing. The
project will also support a museum video exhibit through the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH), and fund a post-doctoral researcher at the museum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project outlines several high-risk high-reward
experiments that will significantly advance our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of this intimate association and provide a suite of research tools
for future investigations. The methods that will be employed to accomplish these
goals include: Collecting salamander embryos from New York, Pennsylvania and
Washington State; Culturing embryos and their algae from two salamander species
and switching symbionts between hosts; Dissociation and fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) of host cells containing algal endosymbionts;
Transcriptomics and accompanying bioinformatics to determine differentially
expressed genes in the host+endosymbiont cell population; Establishing host
endoderm cell culture for in vitro co-culturing with algal symbionts; Pilot
transgene transformation of both host and symbiont cell cultures using protocols
and vectors established in closely related model organisms. The results from
this work will reveal how a host?s response to a beneficial symbiont can differ
from known vertebrate reactions to harmful pathogens that enter host cells.