* 1428072
* Workshop: Developing New Methods and Analytic Networks for Researching Intelligence Communities and De-Classified National Security Documents
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Kathleen Vogel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 24,938.00

This award is to support a workshop at North Carolina State University that will
bring together intelligence analysts and practitioners with scholars in Science,
Technology, and Society (STS); participants will be from both the United States
and the United Kingdom. Among the topics to be discussed by workshop
participants is the conflict between studying intelligence communities and the
need for secrecy. More broadly, the workshop will focus on research methods for
analyzing intelligence communities and de-classified national security
documents. It will discuss how to develop and apply STS concepts, frameworks,
and methods to understand the production of knowledge in intelligence work. It
will also address how to increase opportunities and contexts for professional
engagements between STS and related scholars, intelligence practitioners, and
civil society members.

How a community (country, state, collective) gathers and utilizes intelligence
information is both timely and of utmost concern, which means that developing
better ways to study secrecy and the influence of secrecy practices on knowledge
gathering and utilization is very important. The project has a strong
dissemination plan that will enable the workshop proceedings to have a broad
impact on multiple communities including intelligence practitioners,
policymakers, and the public.