* 1428296
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High-Pressure Freezing System for Cryo-Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 198,328.00

Technical (Original) title: &lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of a High-Pressure
Freezing System for Cryo-Electron Microscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay Title:
Rapid Freezing for Advanced Electron Microscopy of Wet Materials
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical explanation: Using microscopes to see the
structure of a material provides very important information that helps
scientists and engineers understand how to make new materials with better
properties. While many microscopes use light to form images, electron
microscopes can reach much higher magnifications and resolve finer detail in a
material's structure. However, unlike light microscopes, electron microscopes
require a vacuum (the air inside the microscope must be removed )so that the
electrons will not collide with gas molecules from the air. Vacuum isn't a
problem when studying dry materials, but it is a big problem when studying wet
materials, because water quickly evaporates in a vacuum. This research team is
developing new materials that all contain water. These materials are being
designed to help regrow human tissue, to make biomedical implants more resistant
to infection, and to deliver drugs where and when they are needed within the
human body. These new materials can be studied in an electron microscope if they
are frozen and kept cold, because then the water is solid rather than liquid and
it doesn't evaporate. However, the freezing has to be done in a special way,
otherwise the material gets damaged just like a sealed bottle of milk will break
if it freezes. So, this research project is using a new tool called a high-
pressure freezer, which eliminates expansion of the liquid water when it
freezes. Consequently, the team is able to study wet materials and gather
information about structure at levels of detail that no one has previously
achieved. Because this approach is so new and significant, the research team is
working with an electron-microscope manufacturer to help share these
developments with other microscope users. And, because this freezing tool can
also be used to study everyday materials like cosmetics, food, plants, and
insects, the research team is partnering with an all-girls school in New Jersey
to use this new technology to help dozens of young women get exposed to some of
the excitement associated with science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project Description: While the average
morphology of many hydrated materials can often be determined by scattering
(neutron, X-ray, light), these techniques can not match the ability of electron
microscopes to collect site-specific, high-resolution, real-space, image data.
The high vacuum required for both scanning (SEM) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), however, precludes the direct observation of hydrated
specimens, and this limitation is only partially mitigated by variable-pressure
microscopes and environmental/liquid microscope stages. The long-standing
solution has been to freeze the specimens and study them in the electron
microscope under cryogenic conditions. Simply quenching specimens in a liquid
cryogen is, however, no longer adequate for the imaging problems being addressed
by this research team. This team is pursuing six externally funded inter-related
projects centered on polymer and nanoparticle self-assembly, microfluidic 3-D
tissue models, advanced scaffolds for tissue engineering, and hierarchical
surface nano-patterning for infection control. These projects all involve
advanced materials with high levels of hydration, which inhibits high-resolution
morphological studies using conventional cryo-EM techniques. The goal of this
project is thus to exploit the new technique of high-pressure freezing to
prepare highly hydrated materials for advanced electron microscopy, both SEM and
TEM, as well as for 3-D imaging using slice-and-view focused ion beam (FIB-SEM)
microscopy. High-pressure freezing mitigates artifacts created by water
crystallization and solute segregation during conventional freezing.
Incorporating this state-of-the-art technology is enabling the research team to
assess the detailed morphology of emerging materials and material systems in
their native hydrated state at pioneering levels of image resolution.