* 1428331
* MRI: Acquisition of a Structural Testing System for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Brian Brashaw, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 05/31/2016
* USD 289,600.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the procurement of a large-
scale structural testing system that is necessary to test full-scale specimens
and verify the performance as well as the efficiency of various rehabilitation
techniques for civil infrastructure. The evaluation and rehabilitation of
America's aging infrastructure is a serious issue that is costing the country
billions of dollars per year. For this reason, research investigating economical
rehabilitation techniques that can be applied easily, employed in a timely
manner and that offer superior durability is of the utmost importance.
Experimental testing is required to verify and validate the quality of these
rehabilitation techniques and materials before they are implemented. The overall
research vision for this project is the development of innovative, cost-
effective and sustainable solutions for the renewal and rehabilitation of civil
infrastructure in America and around the world. Results of this research will
benefit above and below grade structures including buildings, bridges and
pavements and will help in maintaining public safety and confidence in the
nation?s infrastructure. In addition, it will also serve to enhance the
education of engineering students by providing significant advancement in
learning through the integration of teaching and research at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels.

Durability is a key issue when it comes to investigating and evaluating the
success or failure of the structural design of a new or rehabilitated structure.
The use of advanced and sustainable materials is being proposed as alternative
solutions to ensure the durability of these structures. The performance of these
new and restorative materials will be evaluated by the research team through
structural testing of a wide-variety of large-scale specimens under different
loading combinations in conjunction with microstructural analysis of the
materials. This will allow the research team to evaluate the aforementioned
materials under real service conditions and aid in understanding their failure
mechanisms. Additional topics that will be researched include: development of
"smart" rehabilitated concrete and steel structures, performance of innovative
and sustainable materials for use in new construction and structural
rehabilitation, development of sustainable pavements infrastructure,
investigation of time-dependent properties of soils and performance of
engineered wood products.