* 1428480
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual Beam Plasma Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscope to Accelerate the Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,177,494.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses a new microscope that represents a breakthrough in materials
characterization. The new microscope, referred to as a xenon plasma focused ion
beam microscope, is being used by the research team to visualize the internal
structure and chemical composition of three-dimensional volumes of opaque
material with a resolution in the range of nanometers. For the first time, it is
possible to measure a large number of structural features in advanced ceramics,
high performance alloys, solid oxide fuel cells, and magnetic memory devices.
The important contribution is to move beyond isolated observations to a point
where we describe materials properties not only in terms of the average or
representative internal structure, but also in terms of rare events (large
deviations) in the microstructure. The new microscope accelerates research not
only at Carnegie Mellon, but also at research institutions and industries in the
region. Dozens of graduate and undergraduate students will be trained to use the
instrument at Carnegie Mellon. Training for the larger research community is
provided through an annual three-dimensional materials science summer school and
findings from the instrument are being made available through two web-based
repositories: the Three-Dimensional Materials Atlas and the Grain Boundary Data
Archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The xenon plasma
focused ion beam microscope deployed in this research has made it possible to
both image surfaces and to remove material from the same surfaces in a highly
controlled fashion with nano-scale precision, but 50 times faster than with pre-
existing instruments. The key to high removal rates is the plasma ion source,
which can achieve higher beam currents than the conventional liquid metal
sources. This has made it possible to conduct three-dimensional imaging
experiments throughout large volumes and conduct site-specific analysis (by
transmission electron microscopy or atom probe tomography) of features buried
deep within a specimen that are not accessible to conventional liquid metal
source microscopes. The project's goals are to prepare samples with specialized
geometries for imaging electronic devices under operating conditions by
transmission electron microscopy, for high-throughput measurements of grain
boundary mobility to study complex ion transitions, for the measurement of the
grain boundary character and energy distributions of engineering materials, and
for studying the influence of flaw types on stress corrosion cracking in high
performance alloys.