* 1428873
* MRI: Acquisition of  A Versatile High Resolution MS System for Determination of Small Molecules of Environmental and Health Concern
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* David Reckhow, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 455,000.00

PI: Reckhow, David A.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1428873&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI:
Acquisition of A Versatile High Resolution MS System for Determination of Small
Molecules of Environmental and Health
Concern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
for the acquisition of a high resolution system for identifying and quantifying
trace organic contaminants in water. The research group involved in this project
has forged a strong link between environmental engineering and public health.
Their proposed research projects have many applied objectives including
potential translational benefits, such as discovery and then remediation of
emerging contaminants in drinking water, and novel treatments for water and
sanitation in Third World countries. The Xevo G2-S QTof is ideally suited for
use by students from broad backgrounds due to its simple and intuitive
interface. This instrument will be a centerpiece of an open resource (EEAP)
available not only to those at UMass, but across the Northeast region. At UMass,
it will serve the core researchers in Environmental Engineering, as well as an
interdisciplinary group of researchers in various science disciplines and Public
Health. Outside of UMass, it will be available for use by researchers in the
5-college consortium, and beyond, especially Universities and Colleges in New
England and nearby states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the acquisition of a high
resolution system for identifying and quantifying trace organic contaminants in
water. The Xevo G2-S QTof is a quadrupole time-of-flight instrument capable of
rapidly switching between liquid (e.g., UPLC) and gas (e.g., GC) sources. This
instrument will be a centerpiece of an open resource (EEAP) available not only
to those at UMass, but across the Northeast region. This instrument will help
connect engineering management and control technologies to the ultimate
endpoints of public health. Examples include the role of watershed management
and treatment technologies on bladder cancer caused by halobenzoqinones and
related compounds in drinking water. Another touches upon the role of elevated
bromide from industrial activities on cancer. A third pertains to nitrogenous
organic compounds generated in surface waters from algal activity and
photonitration reactions and human health endpoints. Others employ innovative
mixed algal-bacterial granules to treat wastewater and produce biofuel, or
bioelectrical systems to facilitate wastewater treatment in modern non-flush
systems while producing electricity.