* 1428257
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High Resolution Proton-Transfer-Reaction Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometer (PTR-TOF-MS) for Research in Land And Atmospheric Science
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Dylan Millet, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 642,537.00

This project, part of the NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program, supports
the acquisition of a new instrument at the University of Minnesota (UMN) - Twin
Cities for making highly accurate measurements of organic compounds in the
atmosphere. The instrument will be used both in the field and in the laboratory.
Field sites where data will be collected include the UMN Tall Tower Observatory
and the PROPHET tower at the University of Michigan Biological Station. Newly
acquired data from the instrument will be used to improve scientific
understanding of the biogeochemistry of organic carbon in the land-atmosphere
system, with an emphasis on atmospheric composition, land-atmosphere coupling,
and the processes driving air pollution and global
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument, a Proton-Transfer-Reaction Time-Of-
Flight Mass Spectrometer (PTR-TOF-MS), will be used to address important
scientific issues including: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Land-atmosphere carbon exchange and
volatile organic compounds (VOCs); (2) Chemical properties and aging of gas-
phase organics; (3) Organic gas-aerosol interactions; and (4) Organic carbon
biogeochemistry in soils. The instrument will also support the education of
graduate and undergraduate students in Land and Atmospheric Science (LAAS)
Program at the University of Minnesota.