* 1428877
* MRI:   Acquisition of an electron probe microanalyzer for Earth Science and Materials research and education
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 987,919.00

This award will provide funds to acquire a state-of-the-art electron probe
microanalyzer (EPMA) to support numerous funded and ongoing research projects.
As a cornerstone instrument within the Center for Materials Characterization,
the EPMA is vital to the scientific health of the university and region by
providing a versatile platform for the analysis of major, minor, and trace
elements to promote NSF-funded research in the solid Earth Sciences and in
Materials Science and Engineering. The EPMA will directly enhance undergraduate
and graduate student research, teaching, and hands-on experiences through
directed research and classroom projects. Adding this instrument will fill a
critical need in the regional analytical infrastructure, promote cross-
disciplinary research, and greatly enhance the quality and scope of Earth
Science and Materials research and education in the Interior Northwest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major research objectives for the EPMA include the
following: 1. Analysis of major, minor, and trace element compositions and
zoning in metamorphic minerals to infer petrogenetic processes and pressure-
temperature conditions and evolution; 2. Major, minor, and trace element
analysis of igneous minerals to constrain (a) melt evolution at mid-ocean
ridges, (b) formation of the mantle lithosphere, and (c) felsic magmagenesis and
formation of continental crust (in conjunction with U-Pb geochronology); 3.
Major and minor element analysis of functional ceramics, e.g. barium
polytitanates and lanthanide perovskites, to evaluate how vacancy-producing
chemical substitutions affect physical and electrical properties; 4. Composition
maps of tooth enamel to understand mineralization processes of modern teeth
(which has implications for interpreting chemical and isotopic data) and trace
element uptake; 5. Trace element analysis of minerals for geologic thermometry
as applied to understanding the conditions of formation of mylonites and
dateable minerals like zircon and titanite; 6. Major and minor element analysis
of magnetic shape memory alloys, e.g. Ni-Mn-Ga, to determine micrometer-scale
element distributions and their influence on mechanical and magnetic properties;
7. Minor element contamination of materials of interest to the nuclear industry,
especially graphite- molten salt interactions; and 8. Major and minor element
stoichiometry of transition-metal dichalcogenides for electronics materials
research and development.