* 1428392
* MRI: Acquisition of a Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD) Tool with Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Neville Luhmann, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2017
* USD 489,125.00

University of California, Davis (UC Davis) proposes to acquire a thin film
deposition instrument to use as a shared resource for conducting fundamental
research on materials, processes, and devices for a wide spectrum of important
applications. The proposed instrument is capable of producing high
quality,highly conformal thin films (such as diamond or silica) on nano to
macroscale structures with controlled thickness and material properties at less
than 200 degree centigrade temperature. Such capabilities for low-temperature
thin-film deposition can enable coating of conventional substrates, such
assemiconductors, metals and ceramics, as well as flexible substrates, including
plastics and polymers. The instrument will also deposit thin films on
biocompatible materials for application in drug delivery, sensing, imaging and
printed electronics. Technologies developed as a result of this new equipment,
both directly and indirectly, could have revolutionary impact on our quality of
life in a wide spectrum of application areas, including ultra-reliable systems
for communication, transportation and information technology, security response
based on radiation detection, sustainable energy harvesting, sensing and
bioengineering systems. Large numbers of students at UC Davis, Northern
California high schools and community colleges, including many students from
minority and underrepresented communities, as well as postdoctoral researchers,
will have the opportunity to be educated in the immersive
transdisciplinaryenvironment surrounding this tool, uniquely preparing them to
solve important problems and succeed in today's highly competitive academic or
industrial environments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A plasma enhanced chemical vapor
deposition instrument with inductively coupled plasma (ICP-PECVD) is capable of
producing high quality, highly conformal thin films of silicon dioxide, silicon
nitride, silicon oxy-nitride, silicon carbide, amorphous silicon, and diamond-
like carbon. The tool will enable researchers at the University of California,
Davis, to use tightly controlled composition and thickness in the thin film,
with controlled doping and tunable index in 20-200 degree centigrade temperature
ranges, deposited on a variety of surfaces and over a range of structures. The
tool allows investigation of nano and microstructures that otherwise could not
be fabricated. The principal objectives of research using the ICP-PECVD tool
will include: (1) fabrication of nano and microscale structures on lattice
matched and mismatched substrates and integrated devices for photonics, energy
conversion, biosensing, and MEMS/NEMS; (2) defect-free conformal passivation and
encapsulation of devices and systems for improved efficiency and reliability;
(3) transmission and reflection coatings for optoelectronic and energy
conversion devices; (4) low-temperature coatings for biocompatible and other
temperature sensitive materials for applications in drug delivery, sensing,
imaging and printed electronics; and (5) new semiconductor materials such as
III-nitride for ultra-reliable systems. The unique characteristics of PECVD
integrated with ICP will allow operations at low temperatures, significantly
strengthen a number of ongoing interdisciplinary research programs, and enable
an even greater number of research activities over itsuseful lifetime. The tool
will be operated in a professionally run environment to facilitate work in two
complementary research dimensions: (i) inquiry-based dimension defining the
foundational engineering science for future technologies, including the elements
of new materials platforms, component and device innovation, circuit and systems
design, and novel process and manufacturing science; and (ii) integrative
technology-based application dimension that becomes part of a test bed at UC
Davis for making working prototypes and systems to test novel ideas generated by
students and faculty members.