* 1428919
* MRI: Acquisition of Raman-AFM-Lifetime System for Materials Research and Training
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 634,623.00

PI: Sokolov, Igor Proposal: 1428919 Title: MRI: Acquisition of Raman-AFM-
Lifetime System for Materials Research and Training

Significance The requested system has the ability to collect multiple parameters
(using Raman, AFM and optical excitation) from the same area of the sample
surface, opening the possibility for a better understanding of surface
properties. The system has significant advantages over previous systems,
including function-structure studies and uses a smaller amount of laser
radiation, thus allowing the study of many organic samples in non-destructive
way, and faster acquisition of Raman maps. This new version of confocal imaging
Raman spectrometer allows collection of Raman spectra over a sample surface much
faster than was previously possible. It opens a window of opportunities for both
research and education. In addition to allowing studies of organic samples non-
destructively, it will achieve faster acquisition of Raman maps allowing the use
of the instrument for real-time demonstrations for students.

Technical Description The state-of-the-art integrated Raman-AFM-Lifetime system
by WITec Instruments Corp. (Alpha 300R+ Raman system) consists of three
integrated parts: a Confocal Raman imaging spectrometer, an atomic force
microscope (AFM), and a time-correlated single photon counter. It allows
measuring a unique synergistic combination of material parameters, which makes
this instrument a unique platform for a large number of potential applications
and users. The instrument, hosted at the School of Engineering of Tufts
University, will be used by researchers from multiple department and schools
across Tufts University as well as outside researchers, including those from the
Greater Boston Area (in which no similar instrument exists). The instrument
gives the material and stress specific information (the Raman part), physical
parameters (topography, electrical charges, viscoelastic moduli of the sample;
the AFM part), and lifetime of optical excitation (the lifetime part). All these
parameters are measured at the same location on the sample surface. Furthermore,
the AFM part will substantially enhance the spatial resolution of the Raman
mapping by using a combination with AFM through the tip-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (TERS). The option of single-photon sensitivity and ability to
measure life-time of radiated light allow, for example, not only luminescent
life-time mapping but also the separation of true Raman and (sometimes Raman-
look) fluorescent signals, which is important for quantitative measurements.