* 1428421
* MRI:  Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence scanner for automated high-resolution sensing of Earth system archives
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2016
* USD 392,000.00

The growing evidence for pervasive impacts of humanity on Earth's natural
systems makes it critical to assess natural variability in these diverse
systems, the extent to which humans perturbed the mean state or extreme ends,
and if these perturbations are beyond the systems natural variance. Changes in
sediment chemistry reflect changes in physical, biological and anthropogenic
processes shaping Earth's surface, recording change in climate, rivers, glacial
ice, and ocean conditions and productivity, and humans. This Major Research
Instrumentation award funds the acquisition of a high-resolution scanner for
rapid, cost-effective and non-destructive analyses of major and trace elemental
content of sedimentary records to address this research theme. Next-generation
high-resolution scanners measure elemental concentrations from Aluminum to
Uranium at high precision and high resolution, and co-register a high-resolution
color image of the sample and/or an internal image. These data are collected
orders of magnitude faster than traditional wet-chemistry and imaging approaches
(hours vs. weeks-months), and the high resolution of scanning is impossible to
achieve by physical sampling. This rapidity of data acquisition via next
generation high resolution scanning at otherwise impossible resolutions opens
new doors for tackling questions of Earth's natural systems behaviors over their
full dynamic range including human impacts. The acquisition of a high-resolution
elemental scanner and its pairing with the Oregon State University-Marine
Geology Repository will have an immediate broad impact on the Pacific Northwest
research community where this instrument is greatly needed, and service will
extend to national and international research communities. The instrument will
enhance at least 10 courses with for experiential learning, and train graduate
and undergraduate students in data-intensive geochemical studies. The scanner
will promote diversity in Earth sciences through its use of Research Experience
for Undergraduates and Increasing Diversity in Earth Sciences programs, coaching
underrepresented groups in state-of-the-art studies of Earth's natural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Oregon State and the College of
Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences (CEOAS) will use rapid, high-resolution,
and accurate measurements of geochemical changes in sedimentary records to track
variations in Earth's natural systems from sediment source to sink. A next-
generation X-ray fluorescence (XRF) scanner purchased with this award will be an
essential tool for the study of sedimentary geochemical archives of Earth system
processes. OSU's acquisition of an XRF scanner would be the first such
instrument in the Pacific Northwest, significantly advancing scientific
exploration. CEOAS has extensive experience managing large labs, analytical
equipment, and serving external users. The NSF-funded OSU Marine Geology
Repository will house the XRF scanner, efficient for application to one of the
nation's largest core archives and complementing existing tools including Geotek
multisensing core logging tracks and medical CT-scanner. These tools will serve
the OSU, regional, national and international research communities. Availability
of advanced high-resolution sensing tools will support data-intensive projects
consistent with modern "big data" initiatives like NSF's EarthCube. Specific
research programs that the instrument will immediately catalyze include: 1)
Reconstructing the Quaternary history of the Greenland, Cordilleran, Laurentide
and Antarctic ice sheets and their sensitivity to global warming using existing
and new sediment archives. 2) Paleoclimate studies of ocean climate adjacent to
these ice sheets, tropical Pacific changes and their impact on the carbon cycle,
and late-Holocene seasonal to century-scale changes in the high latitudes, all
of which are to determine the range of natural variability relative to recent
deviations. 3) Construct seasonal to century-scale changes in Earth's critical
zone that extends from the top of vegetation to the base of weathered bedrock
upon which humanity depends and is impacting. 4) Investigate preindustrial
paleoenvironments and human-landscape interactions, a baseline for recent
critical zone changes. 5) Document the frequency and severity of past
earthquakes in the Pacific Northwest and their impacts on the critical zone.