* 1428398
* MRI: Development of a Compact Instrument for Measurements of Retention forces in a Controlled Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Thomas Ho, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 124,885.00

PI: Tadmor, Rafael Proposal: 1428398 MRI: Development of a Compact Instrument
for Measurements of Retention forces in a Controlled Environment

Significance The main goal of this proposal is to develop a new Centrifugal
Adhesion Balance (CAB) model that includes temperature and humidity controls in
one compact unit to enable evaluating their effect on drop retention force, and
allow a systematic study of surface robustness from CAB measurements. This will
make the CAB applicable to new systems, and significantly enhance its use by
other researchers.

The problem of drops on surfaces has wide industrial implications related to
contact lenses, eye drops, inhalation drugs, and cosmetic industry as well as
implication in phenomena like deformable particles and nanotechnology. Roughness
plays a crucial role in wetting properties of many surfaces in nature, and can
be used to control the wettability of a surface. In some applications, it is
useful to retain the drops on the surfaces, for example in the case of water-
based herbicides, or in heat exchanger surface, or when trying to retain a
spill. In other applications, it is desired that the drops slide off the
surfaces as in oil extraction from porous rock and self-cleaning surfaces. The
interest in self-cleaning surfaces is being driven by the desire to fabricate
such surfaces for satellite dishes, solar energy panels, photovoltaics, exterior
architectural glass, and green houses.

Technical Description

Theories initiated by Shanahan and de-Gennes and confirmed experimentally using
the CAB show that a central parameter in relating normal to lateral forces is a
shear modulus that corresponds just to the outmost layer of the solid surface,
termed here interfacial modulus, . This property describes the surface
resilience to conform its outmost layer to a liquid drop in contact with it, and
is expected to be a strong function of the temperature and relative humidity.
The new CAB will enable temperature and humidity controls and thereby allow
measurements that lead to understanding of the influence of these parameters on
for different systems. Science is also lacking in understanding of the physics
related to nano-structured surfaces, and its relation to the ability of such
solid structures to conform to the liquid above them. These systems are
particularly sensitive to humidity and temperature. Biological surfaces are also
extremely sensitive to temperature and humidity. The proposed instrument will
enable systematic study of these systems.