* 1428500
* MRI: Acquisition of Atomic Layer Deposition Device for Nanoscale Materials Development Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Amy Fleischer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 412,106.00

Proposal: 1428500&lt;br/&gt;PI: Fleischer, Amy S.&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI:
Acquisition of Atomic Layer Deposition Device for Nanoscale Materials
Development Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The new
capabilities of the instrument will create an immediate and lasting impact on
their ability to recruit high-quality faculty members. As Villanova hires its
next generation of faculty members, it will be offer access to leading-edge
equipment. The emphasis on nanomaterials fabrication and development
necessitates the upgrading of their experimental facilities to attract leading
researchers and educators who can make an immediate impact as they join this
dynamic group. The PI and co-PIs are all dedicated to improving opportunities
and access for under-represented minorities in engineering and the sciences and
two of the principals on this grant are female STEM faculty members. The five
PIs combined are advising 16 graduate students, 7 of whom are women, and are
working with 19 undergraduate students, including 5 women. Bryn Mawr College was
established in 1885 as the first institution in the US to offer Ph.D. degrees to
women and the undergraduate program remains all-female, featuring 1300 women,
26% of whom are majoring in math or science. The Villanova College of
Engineering also features one of the highest percentages of female students
studying engineering, at almost 1/3 of the engineering school
enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The Villanova
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) facility will serve as a center for collaborative
nanomaterials research and development linking five faculty at three
Philadelphia-region colleges and universities. The collaborating faculty have
been using an existing first generation ALD device at the University of
Pennsylvania, but the expansion and growth in externally funded thin film
nanomaterials development research activity by the three Villanova faculty has
led to difficulties in coordination and timing with the Penn facilities. The
Villanova facility will greatly enhance faculty and student access and allow the
overall team to greatly expand their collaborative work. The Villanova facility
will feature an ALD system with significantly upgraded capabilities. The system
will be faster and feature improved batch operation, allowing the scheduling of
a greater volume of work, and feature the ability to do both thermal and plasma
deposition. The addition of plasma deposition technology features greater
precision and control of the deposition process leading to significantly higher
film quality. The plasma deposition process features enhanced nucleation and
growth of the films, leading to greater homogeneity and film density. The plasma
process also enables the deposition of a much wider variety of thin film
materials enabling critical new research areas.