* 1428703
* MRI Development:  Imaging FlowCytobot on Autonomous Vehicles for Plankton Research and Harmful Algal Bloom Mitigation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robert Olson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 517,998.00

Imaging FlowCytobot (IFCB) was developed to identify and monitor plankton in the
size range 10 ~ 200 microns, which can be especially important in coastal blooms
(including harmful algal blooms, HABs) and play critical roles in marine
ecosystems. IFCB uses a combination of flow cytometric and video technology to
automatically capture images of microscopic organisms. Existing IFCB instruments
can be deployed unattended in the ocean for 6-9 month duration and have been
used to produce fixed location plankton time series with unprecedented detail.
Because these studies take place in a fluid ocean, they are always subject to
questions about spatial variability in a patchy and dynamic system. This project
will advance IFCB technology to develop an autonomous vehicle-ready version of
the instrument (IFCB-AV) that can be deployed on diverse vehicles to enable high
resolution plankton studies with both long duration and spatial coverage.
Because of the current gap in technology for observing phytoplankton at
appropriate spatial scales, access to shared-use IFCB-AVs (with vehicles) will
advance knowledge in a wide range of aquatic research areas. Research topics
that will directly benefit from IFCB-AV include effects of climate change on
plankton community structure in US coastal waters and the Arctic, causes of
variability in shelf break ecosystems that support critical fisheries,
regulation of seasonal phytoplankton blooms, and early detection of harmful
algal blooms in the Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf of Maine. The broader impacts of
applications of IFCB-AV technology will span from basic research problems to
science-based support for management and decision making in societally relevant
problems. The existing IFCB time series technology has already proven effective
for mitigation of HAB events, and IFCB-AV will enhance impact for these
problems, as well as to other environmental management applications, such as
knowledge-based Integrated Ecosystem Assessments in support of problems in
fisheries. The proposed activities will improve training infrastructure and
development of the research workforce. As shared use of the IFCB-AV system
proceeds, diverse trainees will be involved in study design, field operation,
and analysis of results from deployments. The project will also influence
classroom instruction by enhancing content related to scales and impacts of
spatial variability in marine ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IFCB-AV will be
developed for use with multiple vehicles to suit different research goals. An
iterative process for design, construction, and evaluation will be employed.
Laboratory-based tests with a conventional IFCB oriented horizontally (as
required for deployment on small vehicles) will guide design and operational
modifications needed for long-duration deployments. An in-water (towed)
deployment mode is preferred for compatibility with a wide range of vehicles and
to simplify instrument temperature control and water sampling. If this approach
proves problematic, the instrument will be redesigned to obtain vertical water
flow through the critical analysis region but with modular layout of the
remaining components. In this case the instrument will fit within a flat box
compatible with a range of vehicle hulls.