* 1428689
* Collaborative Research: Intersectionality of Non-normative Identities in the Cultures of Engineering (InIce)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Geoffrey Potvin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 170,527.00

This project is motivated by the need to increase and diversify the engineering
workforce, which will help to increase economic growth and prosperity in the
United States. The ultimate goal of this project is to understand more
effectively the ways in which students can become interested in pursuing
engineering majors in college and how to help them persist through to the end of
an engineering degree, with particular attention on those students who may have
different views of the role of engineering. This will be accomplished by a large
quantitative assessment followed by a longitudinal study of students who are
identified as holding various normative or non-normative attitudinal
profiles,&lt;br/&gt;with a focus on understanding students' feelings of
belongingness in engineering and their developing engineering identities. The
outcomes of this work will result in practical ways to increase diversity in
engineering programs through research-based recruitment and teaching strategies
focused on student identities within engineering. Specific course materials will
be developed to target graduate students entering academia (who will be teaching
future engineering students) to help begin to foster a more welcoming culture in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical framing of this work is an
intersectional approach towards "normativity" in engineering culture.
Methodologically, this project will utilize modern statistical techniques to
identify clusters of students through their attitudinal data, without the prior
imposition of categorizations of students (e.g. gender, race, ethnicity) in
order to understand how engineering students' attitudes group into various
"normative" and "non-normative" profiles. Following this, we will conduct a
longitudinal study of a selection of students from the empirically-identified
attitudinal profiles to understand how these students navigate their engineering
experiences and develop their identities in their chosen majors. The
intellectual merit of this work is an improved understanding of the ways in
which different students develop their engineering identities, navigate their
engineering communities, and enculturate into their chosen disciplines as well
as in the development of practical ways to help students be successful in
engineering. This extends previous findings that dissatisfaction and lack of
community within engineering are causes for students not choosing or leaving
engineering studies. Addressing the core issue of student perceptions of not
fitting into engineering can begin to staunch the exodus of talented individuals
from engineering. The results of this research will then be incorporated into
the development of workshops (for current graduate students and faculty) and
widely available graduate&lt;br/&gt;courses designed around diversity in
engineering. The broader impact of this work will be to promote an empirically-
validated understanding of how to retain a more diverse body of engineering
majors including pragmatic solutions for educators and administrators, both at
the researchers' institutions and in the wider engineering community.