* 1428975
* MRI:   Stable isotope analyses in a liberal arts college setting: teaching and research opportunities for undergraduates and faculty
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Pedro Marenco, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,914.00

Elemental and stable isotopic analyses of geological and biological materials
are fundamental tools in the study of recent and ancient climate and
environmental change. Through this MRI award, Bryn Mawr College will acquire
instrumentation that will allow researchers and educators to provide
undergraduate women with rigorous and socially relevant independent research
experiences in climate and environmental change studies. The instrumentation
will also be used to advance faculty research by providing Bryn Mawr College
faculty and thesis students the ability to generate high-resolution carbon
isotopic data. The acquisition of the proposed instrumentation will allow for
higher resolution, less expensive, and timelier analysis of carbon isotopic data
for active research programs such as: investigating changes in ancient ocean
conditions and their relationships to mass extinctions and the implications of
nitrogen pollution and elevated greenhouse gas concentrations on invasive
species and ecosystem services in tidal wetlands. This will ultimately help
train a more scientifically literate work force and will provide aspiring women
scientists with analytical skills that are very much in-demand. The
instrumentation will directly improve the research opportunities for
undergraduate women at Bryn Mawr College by providing in-house analytical
capabilities. The instrumentation will also be an integral component in summer
and semester programming for the two Bryn Mawr College STEM Posses, each of
which is a diverse group of ten aspiring scientists recruited from urban public
schools in Boston. Bryn Mawr College's programming for the current STEM Posse
has allowed faculty to identify and remedy weaknesses in approaches to
diversifying STEM majors. Thus, the instrumentation will ultimately serve to
help increase diversity within STEM
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds Bryn Mawr
College's acquisition of a Picarro Dual Carbon Isotope Analyzer for analysis of
the carbon isotopic composition of carbon dioxide and methane, coupled with a
Costech Elemental Combustion System. The Picarro Dual Carbon Isotope Analyzer
utilizes cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS) in order to measure stable
isotopes of carbon. Picarro CRDS devices are less expensive and are easier to
use and maintain than the isotope ratio mass spectrometers (IRMS) operated by
larger research institutions. This advance in technology allows for stable
isotopic analysis to be used for teaching and research in a liberal arts college
setting. Because of increased demand among liberal arts college students for
applications of science to societal issues, there is a critical need to provide
those students with practical experiences performing analyses that are used to
study climate and environmental change. The proposed instrumentation will also
be used to develop laboratory exercises for introductory, major, and advanced
level courses in the Geology and Biology programs. These laboratory exercises
will be posted on a website entitled Stable Isotope Science for Undergraduates
from which other educators can access teaching plans, visuals and class analysis
results. This website will be maintained and updated beyond the life of the
proposed project.