* 1428069
* MRI: Acquisition of Hybrid and Versatile Magnetron Sputtering/E-beam/Evaporation Thin Film Deposition System for Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Joe Lo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2022
* USD 402,753.00

The objective of this MRI acquisition is to enhance existing research programs,
facilitate and promote new multidisciplinary research, and enrich the
educational curriculum at University of Michigan-Dearborn (UMD). The requested
hybrid and versatile magnetron sputtering/e-beam/evaporation thin film
deposition&amp;coating instrument is the next generation thin film deposition
system, with unique capabilities of versatile sputtering, electron beam, thermal
and organic evaporation, this is the latest and highest quality thin film
deposition platform under the same high vacuum chamber. The proposed acquisition
of the requested instrument will have great potential to bring more students to
engineering and science areas addressing emerging technology demands in the
Southeastern Michigan region. This acquisition will significantly enhance the
research quality, quantity and visibility, not only at UM-D campus, but also at
nearby institutions in the Southeastern Michigan area, and will set the stage
for increased levels of interdisciplinary collaborations. The requested
instrument with its unique properties will also enable a wide variety of cross
disciplinary research initiatives in the Southeastern Michigan region, including
General Motors (GM) Global R&amp;D research center, Oakland University, Lawrence
Technology University and Henry Ford Community College, as well as education and
outreach efforts for K-12 students. Overall, the Principal Investigators expect
the requested instrument will impact more than 126 users from 27 research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested hybrid and versatile magnetron
sputtering/e-beam/evaporation thin film deposition&amp;coating instrument will
critically provide the fundamental framework for UMD campus in all engineering
and science departments to enhance their research efforts and to have a positive
impact on associated research and education training. With its unique hybrid and
versatile magnetron sputtering, e-beam and evaporation capabilities, multilayer
high quality and ultra-thin films can be deposited combining dielectric, metal,
semiconductor, organic and magnetic materials with superior interface
properties. In situ characterization of a broad range of material properties can
be achieved. The requested instrument will enable the exploration of a variety
of cross-disciplinary research activities: advanced intelligent and energy
efficient vehicle system utilizing integrated optoelectronic devices; high
quality and ultra thin functional thin films for next generation photovoltaic
cells and solid state lighting devices; batteries; data storage; bioMEMS and
microfludics for biomedical engineering; and nanoparticles for health care.