* 1428787
* MRI: Acquisition of a high resolution orbitrap liquid chromatograph tandem mass spectrometer for enhancing research and education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Hao Chen, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 398,414.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Stephen Bergmeier from Ohio University and colleagues Hao Chen, Michael Held II,
Justin Holub and Marcia Kieliszewski will acquire a high resolution orbitrap
liquid chromatograph tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of
the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph provides additional structural identification power by separating
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. In an orbitrap
instrument there an outer section that acts as an electrode and a coaxial inner
spindle-like electrode that traps ions in an orbital motion around the inner
electrode. An image of the current is produced and converted to a mass spectrum
using mathematical (Fourier transform) methods. This spectrometer will also be
used in curricular activities involving students and researchers from the
southeastern Ohio region and it will be used also by industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) the study of proteins
involving elucidation of glycoprotein structures, probing protein redox
chemistry, detection of miniature protein ligands and analyses of protein damage
from oxidative stress; (b) characterizing synthesized drug candidates, natural
products and their metabolites; and (c) establishing chemometric approaches for
the identification of biomarkers and validation of chemometric models and
algorithms.