* 1428921
* MRI: Acquisition of High-speed Cameras with Quantitative Stereo Imaging and Digital Image Correlation for Research and Teaching
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jamal Yagoobi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 326,876.00

MRI: Acquisition of High-Speed Cameras with Quantitative Stereo Imaging and
Digital Image Correlation Capabilities for Multidisciplinary Research and Educat
ion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visualization
and imaging are important aspects in the processes of discovering and
understanding new phenomena. Because of recent advances in imaging technologies
and related hardware and software, improved capabilities to perceive and measure
three-dimensional events at high-speeds allow for investigating various
phenomena at a more detailed level than ever before. Furthermore, as new
materials, devices, and systems move beyond the exploration stage and relatively
simple configurations to more complex ones, high-resolution analysis and testing
become critical issues and particularly to those involving both, spatial and
temporal domains. These state-of-the-art imaging instruments will provide new
capabilities for three-dimensional imaging of a variety of collaborative and
multidisciplinary projects spanning from testing materials and systems at the
meso- and micro-scale to biomedical, manufacturing, and energy applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These high-speed cameras with quantitative digital image
correlation will facilitate the complete three-dimensional investigation of
transient events with unprecedented spatial and temporal resolutions. Examples
of the use of these high-speed cameras at Worcester Polytechnic Institute will
include a- high-resolution acoustic-solid interactions and micro-/nano-systems;
b- measurement of bubble departure diameter rand frequency under extreme heat
fluxes for electrically driven liquid film flow boiling over surfaces enhanced
with nano-mats; c- capturing both instantaneous damage initiation events
(occurring at micro-/nano-structural features such as secondary phases/metal
matrix interfaces, grain/phase boundaries, defects, etc.), as well as crack
propagation phenomena at various growth rates; d- investigating the structure
and turbulent mixing processes of dust-air flames; and e- understanding of MRI-
guided deep brain surgery through quantitative assessment and optimization of
motion of the piezo crystals and surrounding tissue.