* 1428999
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Dual Acquisition Station Dense Sensory Array EEG/ERP System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Chad Dube, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 104,107.00

The executive cognitive functions are humans' most advanced component mental
operations. Examples of executive functions include manipulating the contents of
working memory, inhibiting automatic but inappropriate responses, and flexibly
switching between strategies. These functions allow people to make effective
decisions, regulate social behavior, and plan ahead. The executive functions are
the last to mature in development and are often the first to deteriorate in
normal aging as well as mental disorders and neurological injury and disease.
Research has yet to fully describe the neural bases of these higher-order mental
operations, and understanding the neural bases of the executive functions might
provide insight into why some people are better at planning and decision-making
than others and allow for more effective intervention and treatment of executive
function impairment. The neural bases of the executive functions likely involve
networks of neural structures distributed throughout the brain working together
in specific temporal sequences, with individual nodes active for only tens of
milliseconds. A large literature exists suggesting the prefrontal cortex as a
core structure within this network. The research enabled by the dense-sensor
array electroencephalography (EEG) system, with extended frontal coverage,
investigates the coordinated neural activity underlying the executive
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Event-related potentials (ERPs) are scalp
recorded neural electrical responses to stimuli and actions embedded in the
ongoing EEG. ERPs are an excellent means of assessing the timecourse of
functionally relevant neural activity during cognitive processing, and hence a
powerful tool for investigating the neural network dynamics that make executive
functioning possible. Dense-sensor array EEG, like the 128 channel system here,
improves ERP's spatial resolution, allowing better estimation of the neural
sources of the scalp-recorded signal. Dense sensor array ERPs allows researchers
to examine the neural network activity related to specific cognitive operations.
Researchers will use this system to study learning and memory, potentially
improving learning strategies, individual differences in risky decision-making
(why some individuals make riskier choices than others), attention selection
(how the brain may use economic principles, like expected value, to allocate its
limited capacity processing resources), and other executive functions, their
variability across individuals, and their disruption in neurological injuries
(e.g. mild traumatic brain injury) and disease (e.g. Huntington's disease).