* 1428092
* MRI: Development of a Bio-Pick and Place Instrument for the Fabrication of 3D Organs from Complex Shaped Living Building Parts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Morgan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,397,151.00

PI: Morgan, Jeffrey Proposal: 1428092 Title: MRI: Development of a Bio-Pick and
Place Instrument for the Fabrication of 3D Organs from Complex Shaped Living
Building Parts

Significance The Bio-Pick & Place instrument will make Brown University a world
leader in 3D organ fabrication. In addition to being a showcase instrument for
bioengineering, the Bio-P&P will be one-of-a-kind with unique technical
capabilities. There is already a strong well-funded community of tissue
engineers at Brown in the School of Engineering, the Division of BioMed and
affiliated hospitals that would benefit from this instrument. There are other
faculty in need of a replacement for animals and new complex test beds to
evaluate the toxicity of chemicals, nanomaterials, new therapies and drug
delivery. This unique instrument will aid in recruiting future faculty and will
make possible new collaborations and new funding opportunities (NIH, NSF, DOD,
industry). As a world-class instrument, it will foster collaboration with
academics, clinicians and industry. Development of the instrument will generate
new intellectual property and further strengthen the synergism that the Center
for Biomedical Engineering has created between BioMed and Engineering.

The instrument will significantly enhance the training infrastructure including;
a new generation of instrumentalists facile in the use of engineering principles
for the fabrication of a wide range of living materials, a new generation of
scientists, engineers, and physicians using 3D living structures to investigate
questions in developmental biology, the reduction of the use of animals in
research, as well as the enhancement of tissue engineering research, toxicology
testing, drug discovery, production of therapeutic proteins and clinical
applications.

Technical Description The major engineering challenge to the field of tissue
engineering is the in vitro fabrication of large solid organs with high
densities of living cells. Diffusion of oxygen, nutrients and removal of
metabolic waste products limit current engineered tissues to thicknesses of
~100-200ìm in order to maintain cell viability. Natural organs are much larger
and contain a branching vascular supply that perfuses the entire organ and
ensures all cells are close to blood vessels. As the field of tissue engineering
struggles with this limitation, the field of induced pluripotent (iPS) stem
cells is providing a plentiful source of immune-matched cells of a variety of
tissues and organs. The community does not yet have a means for the in vitro
fabrication of large 3D organs and tissues from this source of cells. An
instrument with this capability would have a worldwide impact in the field of
tissue engineering. Such an instrument would establish new paradigms in the
fields of biofabrication, biomanufacturing and would build new 3D models for
research useful in any number of basic as well as applied fields. The major
challenges in this area of organ fabrication are engineering in nature, albeit
ones that must be informed by biology. The Bio-P&P instrument will assemble
large 3D tissues/organs layer-by-layer using a controllable low level suction
head to pick up living building parts and place them onto other living building
parts in precise locations, while maintaining perfusion as parts fuse and the
living structure is built. This is a versatile building platform that can grip
multi-cellular building parts of any size, shape and cell type. The PIs have
produced large living building parts in the shape of a honeycomb and, when
stacked, the aligned lumens of these honeycomb parts will form channels that
enable perfusion of the organ under construction. Success