* 1428311
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Analysis of Carbon and Nitrogen in Soil and Sediment for an Undergraduate Research Program
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Gregory Lewis, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 92,007.00

Soil degradation is a major global environmental problem. Agroecological methods
such as no-till farming and intensive grazing have potential to restore soil
fertility, reduce the environmental impacts of agriculture, and restore soil
function as a sink for carbon. Degraded pasture land, one of the most prevalent
land covers on Earth and common in the South Carolina Piedmont, presents
significant potential for increased agricultural productivity and carbon
sequestration. This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award funds analytical
equipment that will be used to collect soil carbon data which will increase
understanding of current and future soil quality, and its relationship to land
uses such as pasture and urban lawns, in the South Carolina Piedmont. Better
understanding of the properties of Piedmont soils may lead to improved soil
management, which in turn can influence watershed hydrology and water quality in
the region. A major objective of instrumentation acquisition is to train
undergraduates to use research grade instruments and to interpret the data,
preparing them for both employment and graduate education. Students using this
instrument will conduct research in soil biogeochemistry, and results will
directly benefit local farmers working to mitigate soil degradation. Students
will benefit from interaction with farmers, gaining understanding of the
importance of agroecosystems to society. In addition to involving undergraduate
students (who are predominantly female) from Furman University, the researchers
will involve high school students through research and education programs
already in place. Also, Furman's membership in two consortia of southeastern
liberal arts colleges provides the opportunity to involve undergraduates from
several Historically Black Colleges. This project is jointly funded by the MRI
program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds the acquisition of a LECO
TruMac Series CN Macro Determinator to analyze the carbon and nitrogen content
of soils and sediments. This instrument will expand the research activities
associated with the River Basins Research Initiative at Furman University to
include studies of terrestrial, as well as aquatic, biogeochemistry. Initially,
the instrument will be used to analyze soil samples from soil cores collected
from farms in the South Carolina Piedmont. The primary objective of this
research is to understand how intensive grazing and no-till planting improve
soil organic carbon (SOC) and soil organic nitrogen (SON). One of the farms
began intensive grazing in 2012, and changes in SOC and SON at different depths
will be tracked over the next 10 years or more. A secondary objective is to
quantify the potential for pasture soils to serve as carbon sinks.