* 1428502
* Understanding and Diversifying Transfer Student Pathways to Engineering Degrees
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Valerie Taylor, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2018
* USD 293,171.00

This mixed methods research is developing a clearer understanding of transfer
student pathways as a means to increase engineering degree production and
broaden participation in engineering careers, especially for Hispanic students.
The study sites are 4 of the top 10 producers of U.S. Hispanic engineers: The
University of Texas at El Paso, Texas A&amp;M University, The University of
Texas at Austin, and The University of Texas-Pan American. The investigators are
surveying 5,200 students in 7 cohorts who transferred to 4-year institutions.
Staff at the 4 institutions are matching survey responses to GPAs and
engineering degree attainment so that statistical models can link educational
experiences to outcomes. The team is also interviewing a sample of 40
engineering transfer students (50% Hispanic) about their transfer experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hispanics continue to be an untapped pool of prospective
STEM talent in United States. Since 2005, Hispanics have exceeded more than 20
percent of students enrolled in the K-12 education system, yet they earned only
10 percent of the engineering degrees awarded in 2007. The state of Texas has
uniquely seen rapid economic (GDP) and population growth in the past few years,
coupled with a high minority population, making it an important setting for
studying transfer student pathways and ultimately broadening participation in
engineering. By partnering with the top 4 producers of Hispanic engineers in
Texas and 4 of their feeder community colleges (Austin Community College, Blinn
College, El Paso Community College, and South Texas College), this project has
the potential to dramatically increase the numbers of both Hispanic and non-
Hispanic students earning engineering degrees through transfer mechanisms.
Project advisory board members have strong professional networks for
disseminating the findings to policymakers and educational practitioners who can
put the findings into action.&lt;br/&gt;