* 1428922
* MRI: Acquisition of a Zeiss Elyra Super Resolution Microscope for BRC Imaging facility at Cornell
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Warren Zipfel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 789,918.00

An award is made to Cornell University to support the acquisition and technical
management of a new type of light microscope that provides the resolution to see
and differentiate features in living cells as small as 20 nm, or 5000 times
smaller than the diameter of a human hair. This is more than a 10 fold
improvement over what is achievable using a conventional light microscope. In
addition to enabling new avenues of biological and biomedical research that are
now impossible without it, the instrument will be located in the Cornell Imaging
Core Facility so that it is open and available to investigators and students
from all areas of scientific research inside and outside of Cornell. The imaging
facility has a steady flow of students passing through it due to its
participation in the numerous outreach programs occurring at Cornell. The
facility hosts educational workshops and supports STEM initiatives on campus by
providing tours and demonstration modules for a wide range of outreach
activities. In particular, broadening the participation of women and under-
represented minorities in engineering and biotechnology is a major focus at
Cornell, and the facility routinely offers unique imaging laboratory modules for
programs such as CATALYST and Expand Your Horizons. The acquisition of a unique
and cutting edge super-resolution light microscope will provide graduate,
undergraduate and local and visiting high school students with access to a type
of instrument not available anywhere else in the region. It will make students
of all ages aware of the remarkable developments in technology and engineering
that are continually advancing fields such as imaging, and let them see the
inner workings of living cells in ways that no one has ever before seen.

The newly acquired microscope will be used in variety of research projects
ranging from high resolution studies of the cellular biochemical signaling
machinery, to investigations into the molecular structure of cellulose in
research directed at improving biofuels. It will allow for the spatial, temporal
and functional relationships between, for example, proteins that regulate
transcription and the gene being transcribed to be mapped and quantified. The
field of super-resolution microscopy is in its infancy and new and important
applications of optical super-resolution are being demonstrated in all areas of
the life sciences at a remarkable rate. Cornell has a high level of microscopy
and biological imaging experience and a particularly broad repertoire of
applications, and as such, is an ideal site for an instrument such as this to be
located. The extensive microscopy expertise available at Cornell will lead to
synergistic advances in biological imaging and extend the emerging field of
super resolution microscopy through the development of new methodologies
tailored for the specific applications of the investigators. This type of
synergy will translate into the most significant and broadest possible impact of
the research carried out using the instrument, and ultimately advance the
knowledge base and understanding across diverse fields as the results are
published and new technology broadly utilized.