* 1428096
* MRI: Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer-Flame Ionization Detector (GC/MS-FID) for Research in Environmental and Agricultural Sciences
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,01/31/2016
* David Parker, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 160,000.00

PI: Parker, David B. Proposal: 1428096 Title: MRI: Acquisition of a Gas
Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer-Flame Ionization Detector (GC/MS-FID) for
Research in Environmental and Agricultural Sciences

Significance The instrument purchased through this project will enable
groundbreaking research that will support human and animal health, the cleanup
and protection of the environment, and the development and vitality of the
economy. For example, the results of research on environmental toxicology may
help policymakers make decisions regarding regulations that protect human and
ecological health; the results of research on fatty acid composition of beef may
allow beef producers to significantly improve the nutritional profile of their
product, thereby improving health for millions of people who consume the meat;
and the results of research on feed efficiency in beef production may help beef
producers increase production and drive economic growth.

In addition to the significant social benefits of the research itself, this
project will benefit the research and education communities through efforts to
support technology transfer, broaden participation of underrepresented groups
(women and minority researchers and students are directly involved), and
increase interest and participation in STEM education at the undergraduate and
K-12 levels.

Technical Description The addition of a GC/MS-FID to WTAMU?s Core Lab will
enable research activities that will generate new knowledge in the following
areas: The impacts of hazardous organic chemical releases into the environment:
The GC/MS-FID will be used to determine the concentrations of hydrocarbons in
environmental media (e.g., surface water, sediment, flora) and fauna at
oilfield-contaminated sites, and to collect analytical data to measure the
uptake, bioaccumulation, and toxic dose of complex mixtures of hydrocarbons in
reptile, amphibian, and bird species. The ability to analyze organic chemicals,
many of which can be carcinogens, at parts per million and parts per billion
levels, will enable research advancing knowledge of the fate, transport, and
ultimate toxicity of these chemicals in the environment. The fatty acid
composition of red meat: These fatty acids have been related to product shelf
life and nutritional value. They have also been shown to affect human
cholesterol levels and human heart disease. The GC/MS-FID will be used to
quantify fatty acids in meat products, in studies designed to generate new
knowledge on the effects of animal breed; feeding of ethanol byproducts, grass,
and grain; and cooking and temperature on fatty acid composition.