* 1428954
* MRI: Development of a Versatile, Self-Configuring Turbulent Flow  Condition System for a Shared-Use Hybrid Low-Speed Wind Tunnel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Corene Matyas, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 921,370.00

MRI: Develop Inastrumentation to Advance Fundamental Research on Simulating
Complex Wind Flow Near the Earth's Surface&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
boundary layer wind tunnel is an essential research tool for creating dynamic
wind flow that replicates the natural behavior of wind near the Earth?s surface.
This wind flow is applied to models of buildings and other structures to
determine their expected performance and to design them to survive extreme wind
events. The accurate replication of natural wind in a laboratory is not trivial.
The methods and equipment vary depending upon the wind condition (tornadoes,
hurricanes, thunderstorms, etc.), and the geographic location of the object
being studied (near the coast, in a suburban community, etc.). Current wind
tunnel facilities are limited in this regard, each capable of addressing a small
subset of wind phenomena. This award supports the development of an instrument
that vastly expands the capability of a single facility to study a wide range of
wind conditions observed in nature and assess how they affect the built and
natural environments. This capability will accelerate the rate of discovery and
open pathways to solving problems in the development of resilient
infrastructure. Other applications include the study of pollutant dispersion,
siting of wind energy resources, biomechanics, human perception of hazards, and
micro aerial vehicle development. The project includes participants from five
continents. Thus the development of this instrument will strengthen US
competitiveness by enabling a breakthrough in boundary layer wind tunnel
technology, while enhancing international collaboration on wind hazard issues
that impact the entire populated world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to
develop an instrument capable of simulating nonstationary, non-neutral or
transitioning surface flows. Examples include offshore hurricane winds flowing
into a terrestrial environment, non-stationary gust fronts in thunderstorms,
transient coherent structures induced by the shearing motion aloft and wind-
driven rain. The instrument will command static and dynamic control devices that
automatically reconfigure to achieve user-specified similarity requirements such
as non-monotonic profiles, spatially variable power spectra and integral length
scales, transient gusts, and rain entrainment in the flow field. These control
devices must work in series (one stage conditions the next) to achieve the
intended function of the instrument. The instrument includes components adapted
from existing proof-of-concept studies and new technology to be developed. The
framework on which the instrument is to be developed is a conventional boundary
layer wind tunnel design, as a goal is to create a tool suitable for
implementation in facilities worldwide.