* 1428226
* MRI: Acquisition of Cryogen-Free High Magnetic Field Physical Property Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Rachel Goldman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 474,642.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum materials are an emergent field
integrating many science disciplines to develop next generation electronic and
energy technology. A well-known example of quantum materials is the high
temperature superconductor, which brings promise of electricity transfer without
energy loss. The acquisition of the cryogen-free Physical Properties Measurement
System (PPMS) enables researchers at the University of Michigan to measure the
properties of next-generation materials. The fundamental understanding gained
from the study of quantum materials lays the foundation for future electronics,
including high-density hard drives, quantum computers, and semiconductor panels
that generate electricity using solar energy or waste heat from your car engine.
The PPMS provides excellent avenues for training graduate and undergraduate
students. The students perform research using state-of-the-art equipment and
receive education and training in an interdisciplinary environment. PPMS allows
undergraduate and high school students, doing research with the investigators,
and those taking upper level physics laboratory courses, to easily and safely
perform experiments at cryogenic temperatures. The investigators leverage
existing REU and bridge-to-PhD programs to bring in students from
underrepresented groups to participate in projects on quantum electronic
materials, which enhance the diversity of the future US STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a
cryogen-free Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) with a 14 Tesla
magnet enables studies of novel quantum materials at the University of Michigan
in order to answer the following important problems. (1). What fundamentally new
physics and novel functionalities can be achieved in 2D electronic systems by
strong electronic correlations, interface engineering, and edge valley
polarization? (2). Why are the most well known 3D Dirac electronic systems good
thermoelectric materials? (3). What are the key parameters determining the
optoelectronic properties of dilute semiconductor alloys? (4). How are spins
coupled to the electronic degrees of freedom in conventional and novel
semiconductors? Aiming to answer these fundamental questions, the scope of
research includes: (1) Emergent novel two-dimensional electronic systems, (2)
Enhanced Thermoelectric materials in 3D Dirac electronic systems, (3) Physical
properties of Semiconductor Alloys, and (4) Manipulating spin and magnetic
properties in semiconductors. The methods and approaches of the research explore
a broad range of physical properties including resistivity, Hall effect,
magnetization, heat capacity, AC susceptibility, thermal conductivity, and
thermopower. The studies enable understanding of physical mechanisms, and lay
the foundation for important and novel applications of quantum materials.