* 1428915
* MRI:   Acquisition of a field-deployable mass spectrometer for biogeochemical research and education.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Lee, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 574,942.00

This award will facilitate the purchase of a Proton Transfer Reaction Mass
Spectrometer (PTR-MS) to study a variety of questions relating to the
biogeochemical cycling of volatile sulfur, nitrogen and carbon compounds in
aquatic environments. Mass spectrometers have become an invaluable tool in the
laboratory research, as evidenced by the large number of research institutions
with mass spectrometry core facilities. Yet, considerably fewer mass
spectrometers are routinely used in the field, particularly on oceanographic
expeditions. The PTR-MS system will provide an unparalleled ability to
simultaneously measure parameters relating to the concentrations and fluxes of a
number of ecologically and climatically important compounds such as carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and dimethylsulfide (DMS) onboard research ships
and in remote field camps. The instrument will provide a novel and state-of-the-
art research tool for undergraduate and graduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing studies point out that climate feedback
mechanisms involving phytoplankton, DMS and cloud formation are poorly
understand, which in turn hinders efforts to successfully model them. Refinement
of many of the functional relationships in the oceanic DMS cycle is required to
improve future models, including developing taxon-specific relationships.
Similarly, the inability of current models to successfully and consistently
reproduce some features of the cycle, such as the "summer DMS paradox", suggests
that key processes may not be incorporated or accurately depicted in some
models. The relative proportions of the cleavage of the oceanic precursor
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) to DMS or demethylation to other S-compounds
are also thought to be an important control on DMS production, but the factors
controlling these proportions remain unclear. Concurrently, changing global
climate is expected to cause an array of physico-chemical responses in the
world?s oceans that will have profound impact on marine phytoplankton
communities both at a cellular level (physiologically) and at a community level
(ecologically). The impacts could occur through changes in nutrient cycling,
such as iron or nitrogen, or changes in abiotic factors that control
phytoplankton growth, such as temperature and light. Depending on the taxa
involved, the responses of the phytoplankton communities will impact both
positively and negatively global biogeochemical cycles, including those of
carbon, nitrogen and sulfur, and feedback mechanisms involving those elements.
The PTR-MS system will be used to address a number of critical questions in the
biogeochemical cycling of sulfur, nitrogen and carbon, including species-
specific intracellular DMSP concentrations and biosynthesis rates, phytoplankton
metabolomics, the role of vitamin B12 in the production of DMSP and the
modulation of oceanic DMS levels, seawater ammonia concentrations and the
coupling between oceanic DMS and ammonia emissions, and biogeochemical cycling
in Antarctic lakes and sub-glacial environments. The results obtained from the
PTR-MS system during these investigations will advance understanding of aquatic
biogeochemical processes and provide critical information on the rates of
formation (or degradation) of a number of biogeochemically important compounds
and the relative importance of critical biogeochemical pathways, at both
cellular and ecosystem levels. This data will help refine global biogeochemical
and climate models.