* 1428148
* MRI: Development of an ENVIRATRON - an accelerator for climate change research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Thomas Lubberstedt, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 929,773.00

An award is made to Iowa State University to develop and construct an
Enviratron, a facility to test and evaluate the performance of plants under
variable environmental conditions. To date most research on the performance of
plants under different environmental conditions has been conducted with a
limited number of differences, such as a single environmental stress versus
control (unstressed) conditions. The Enviratron will permit researchers to
incrementally alter multiple critical variables to better simulate changing
conditions that will be faced in the future. The Enviratron will be an important
research and training tool for students in the plant sciences, particularly for
underrepresented minorities who will participate in the project through the
George Washington Carver Summer Research Internship Program. It will provide
them with the experience of simulating different environmental conditions or
different climates of the world and the opportunity to study and improve the
performance of plants under those conditions. It will also inspire engineering
students to learn how to work hand in hand with plant scientists. The Enviratron
will also be a demonstration centerpiece open to farmers and other visitors to
promote appreciation and a better understanding of agricultural
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how organisms in the biosphere can
adapt to climate change is one of the grand scientific challenges of these
times. This project creates a phenomics platform that will enable researchers to
non-destructively monitor the performance of plants throughout their lifecycle
under variable environmental conditions. The Enviratron represents a
revolutionary new design in plant phenomics facilities. It consists of an array
of plant growth chambers to create different environmental conditions. Unlike
commercial plant phenomics systems, plants will not be conveyed out of the
growth chambers to monitor their growth performance, rather a rover with a
robotically controlled arm will periodically visit each chamber to image and
analyze the plants. In addition to more standard visible light, fluorescence,
near infrared and infrared imaging, sensors on the rover will be capable of
imaging and conducting analyses not available on commercial systems such as
hyperspectral and holographic imaging and Raman spectroscopy. The robot-assisted
sensing approach will enable precise location-specific data acquisition,
resulting in improved sampling strategies and data quality. The Enviratron will
be used for research as well as graduate and undergraduate student training and
will be located in a facility where it can be used to educate the public about
climate change research.