* 1428620
* MRI: Acquisition of a Small-angle X-ray Scattering Instrument
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Dvora Perahia, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 584,229.00

Non-technical: Nanoscience is a major research focus across South Carolina. The
state has three research-intensive universities including the University of
South Carolina (USC), Clemson University, and the Medical University of South
Carolina, in addition to numerous research-active teaching-colleges. The
proposed small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) instrument fills a regional need
for nanoscale characterization capabilities and has written commitments from
more than 20 faculty members across 6 universities to put the tool to immediate
use. The SAXS instrument establishes an open regional facility called the South
Carolina SAXS Center (SCSC) that is centrally located to support affordable
access from HBCUs and PUIs. The instrument enables emerging research programs
from recently hired faculty and broadly supports numerous federally funded
programs on soft-matter physics, engineering, biological sciences, and
nanomaterials chemistry. SCSC supports the education of nearly two hundred
undergraduate and graduate students. The SAXS capabilities are being
incorporated into existing educational programs as well as into new USC
undergraduate and graduate courses on nanoscale characterization. A new summer
program at USC introduces SAXS to students of HBCUs, including South Carolina
State University, Claflin University, and Benedict College. In addition,
industrial research partners use the SAXS instrument to accelerate their
research that enhances the local economy, promotes close academic-industry
collaboration, and increases the hiring of South Carolina
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Establishing the South Carolina SAXS
Center transforms statewide nanoscale research capabilities, especially
regarding block copolymers, conductive polymers, nanocomposites, nanoparticles,
bioparticles, protein solutions/interfaces, mesoporous materials, and
nanomaterials for energy devices. The scientific problems to be studied all
require nanoscale structural information such as the long-range order of
nanocomposites or the shape and size of nanoparticles. The previous lack of
local access to a SAXS instrument had significantly slowed the scientific
research of numerous federally funded projects. This SAXS acquisition includes
several sample stages and multiple configurable detectors to support a diverse
range of measurement methods from small- to wide-angle scattering in both
transmission and reflection modes from solids, pastes, and liquids. The
temperature controlled environmental chamber, flow cell, and capillary stage
enable the diverse experimental needs of the broad user base. SCSC supports 24/7
cyber-access for remote instrument use and will promote the dissemination of
results with online data hosting. The user-friendly software packages guide
trained undergraduates, graduates, and senior scientists in SAXS analysis. SCSC
enhances ongoing fundamental studies and supports diverse applications such as
photovoltaics from anisotropic nanoparticles, high-performance membranes for
fuel cells, sustainable thermoplastic elastomers, and drug delivery from dynamic
nanocapsules. Accelerated results from the South Carolina SAXS Center transform
advanced research programs on polymers, nanocomposites, energy materials,
biological sciences, and physical sciences.