* 1428992
* MRI: Development of Novel Instrumentation to Probe Nanoscale Charge Carrier Dynamics with high Temporal and Spatial Resolution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* David Galipeau, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,065.00

PI: Qiao, Qiquan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1428992&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI: Development
of Novel Instrumentation to Probe Nanoscale Charge Carrier Dynamics with high
Temporal and Spatial Resolution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;This
instrumentation will significantly accelerate Photo Activated Nanoscale System
(PANS) and the Center for Advanced Photovoltics (CAP) research on converting
solar energy into low-cost electricity, enhance the research and education
activities of South Dakota State University?s Ph.D. program focused on
photovoltaics, and aid South Dakota?s ability to attract top researchers and
students to conduct leading-edge research. The research team will integrate this
tool into several undergraduate and graduate courses to improve the quality of
student education and research training. This tool is also expected to stimulate
the economy by speeding up the development of new cost-effective photovoltaic
technologies and the commercial production of a new instrument for nanoscale GHz
transient measurement. This project will broaden participation in science and
engineering research by actively involving female and Native American
undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will encourage female students from
his undergraduate and graduate classes to participate in this project and will
work with tribal colleges to recruit the involvement of Native American
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this MRI project is to develop a state-of-the-art atomic force microscope (AFM)
based instrumentation integrated with bias modulated hardware to probe local
charge carrier dynamics in nanostructured and disordered materials with high
spatial and temporal resolution. This instrument will enable researchers to
understand and quantify charge transport parameters in various
organic&lt;br/&gt;semiconductors, inorganic nanostructures, and their hybrids.
The integrated measurement system will probe charge carrier dynamics and map
carrier density, transport/recombination lifetimes, diffusion length, mobility,
and recombination rates with high spatial (nm) and temporal (sub-Ã¬s) resolution
in a wide variety of photovoltaic materials and devices based on a modified
conductive AFM (C-AFM)&lt;br/&gt;scanner head integrated with modulated bias
hardware (function generator, frequency response analyzer, and modulated laser
sources).