* 1429365
* MRI Development: EXPRES - the Extreme Precision Spectrograph for Exoplanet Studies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jeffrey Hall, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,375,115.00

Extensive surveys over the past two decades using ground- and space-based
observatories have cataloged thousands of planets beyond our solar system.
Unfortunately, most discovery techniques are able to provide little more
information than the orbital period around the parent star and the approximate
surface temperature of the planet. Of vital interest is the planet's mass, since
this, coupled with an estimate of its size, leads to a rough assessment of its
composition (rocky or gaseous). Planetary masses are obtained through the
gravitational attraction they exert on the parent star, with comparatively
lightweight planets like the Earth providing only feeble influences on stellar
motions. Indeed, the discovery of rocky, Earthlike exoplanets requires the
development of techniques that can measure periodic motions of a star well below
1 meter per second, or approximately the speed of a person strolling down a
sidewalk. Dr. D. Fischer (Yale University) seeks to accomplish exactly goal this
by constructing an instrument especially for exoplanet study and using it on a
new telescope high in the mountains outside Flagstaff,
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to accurate radial velocity measurements
of a star using the Doppler effect is stability: a stable temperature and
pressure environment for the spectrograph, stable illumination of the instrument
by the telescope, and a stable wavelength calibration source. Dr. Fischer's plan
includes the construction of an instrument specifically designed for exoplanet
study and its use on a telescope for a sizable, dedicated number of nights each
year. The stability criteria will be met by enclosing the entire spectrograph in
a temperature-controlled vacuum chamber, fiber-scrambling the input image, and
calibration using a Fabry-Perot etalon source whose passband wavelengths are
ultimately tied to an atomic clock with a stability of one part in 10^11. Using
the instrument, Dr. Fischer expects to find and characterize as many as 100
Earth-like analogs orbiting nearby stars, and for the first time obtain reliable
estimates of the frequency of possible life hosts beyond our solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of a precision
instrument for the study of exoplanets is being provided by NSF's Division of
Astronomical Sciences through its participation in the Major Research
Instrumentation program and by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.