* 1429711
* MRI: Acquisition of an EPR Spectrometer for Variable Temperature Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Robert Blankenship, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 254,816.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Liviu Mirica from Washington University and colleagues Robert Blankenship,
William Buhro, D. Andre d'Avignon and Sophia Hayes will acquire an EPR
spectrometer that would operate at X-band. This instrument will allow research
in a variety of fields such as those that provide insight on how biologically
relevant species behave when they possess unpaired electrons. In general, an EPR
spectrometer yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic
structure of molecular and solid state materials. It may also be used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive
species involved in valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation
of pathological tumor growth. These studies will impact a number of areas, from
the synthesis of inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid
state materials to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing
examples inspired from ongoing research, this instrument will be an integral
part of research and teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at
Washington University as well as institutions in the entire St. Louis area.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) investigating and developing metal-based catalytic systems;
(b) characterizing metal-containing biomolecules biological importance; (c)
studying biological macromolecular assemblies relevant to solar energy
conversion; (d) characterizing nanomaterials; and (e) understanding the
electronic characteristics of inorganic compounds.