* 1429236
* MRI: Development of a Sensitive Broadband Dual-Frequency Millimeter-Wavelength Polarimeter
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Charles Bennett, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,030,147.00

The development of a unique sensitive broadband dual-frequency millimeter-
wavelength polarimeter is proposed by C. Bennett (Johns Hopkins University) for
the primary purpose of detecting gravitational waves from the first moments of
the universe. The polarimeter will be used to answer fundamental questions such
as, "How did the universe begin?" In cosmology, Inflation is the cornerstone of
the standard model, and the polarimeter data will provide a greatly improved
limit or discovery of the energy level of Inflation. In physics, detection of a
specific polarization pattern would be a detection of gravitational waves. These
tests will be made using signals from the cosmic microwave background (CMB),
over the full range of angular scales on which the primordial gravitational
radiation leaves its strongest imprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
polarimeter uses dichroic detectors to operate simultaneously at 130-165 GHz and
200-234 GHz. These bands both provide extra sensitivity for the Cosmology Large
Angular Scale Surveyor (CLASS) array to the polarized CMB and serve as a
sensitive probe to identify and isolate polarized Galactic dust emission. When
combined with the lower frequency CLASS instruments, the scientific impact of
the original hardware investment is greatly amplified. The capability of CLASS
is accentuated by its sensitivity to angular scales &gt;10 degrees. From its
Atacama site in northern Chile, not far from the equator, CLASS will survey 70%
of the sky, overlapping the sky areas surveyed by the other northern and
southern hemisphere observatories, and enabling the kind of multi-band data from
multiple observatories that has proved so useful in the past. As all CLASS data
will be made public, they will be of legacy value to the entire
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of the dual-
frequency polarimeter for the study of inflation and gravitational waves in the
early universe is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences
through its participation in the Major Research Instrumentation program.