* 1429779
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF A MULTICOLLECTOR-ICP-MASS SPECTROMETER FOR MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH AND TEACHING AT NORTHERN ARIZONA UNIVERSITY
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2022
* USD 688,824.00

NSF funds will be used to acquire a multicollector-inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer (MC-ICPMS). The MC-ICPMS will promote understanding of
environmental challenges for rural Arizona, including remediation of areas that
have been polluted from mining, sourcing and transport/fate of anthropogenic
pollutants, volcanic hazards, and evidence for - and ecosystem responses to -
global change. It will improve STEM-related teaching and research training at a
university that serves a large rural Arizona and Native American population, as
well as a large Hispanic community. The diverse research capabilities enabled by
the new MC-ICPMS will be integral to the new comprehensive, integrative, and
distinctive Earth and Environmental Systems Ph.D. program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MC-ICPMS will advance research and training in isotope
chemistry that spans the Geology, Chemistry/Biochemistry, Anthropology, Biology,
Environmental Sciences and Forestry programs. With this instrument, the
assembled investigators and their students will obtain high precision isotopic
data for geochemical and geochronological investigations across the mass
spectrum. The new MC-ICPMS will play a vital role in advancing the research
objectives of at least 15 professional scientists and their students, including
advancing knowledge related to: (1) the assembly and eruption of magmas
responsible for explosive, sometime giant, events; (2) anthropogenic pollution;
(3) landscape and tectonic evolution; and (4) large earthquakes and periodic
fluid migration from depth.