* 1429464
* MRI: Acquisition of CRAY XC-30 HPC Cluster to Support NCAT Research Computing, Education and Outreach
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Yuh-Lang Lin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2017
* USD 246,358.00

This project, acquiring a CRAY XC-30 HPC Cluster, supports the NCAT Research
Computing, Education and Outreach. NCAT is requesting this support for the
Research Computing Consortium of the Sciences, Engineering and Technology
(ReCoSETC). This system will expand both the capacity and capability of high
performance Computing (HPC) at NCAT by increasing the number of CPU cores,
memory and disk, and adding a much needed GPGPU capability for applications
ranging from computer algebra systems to large scale modeling, simulations, and
database processing. This instrument will impact research advances in Astronomy
and Astrophysics, Biology, Education, Outreach and Training, Numerical Weather
Forecasting (NWF), GIS analysis, Acoustics, Nuclear and Particle Physics. In
addition, this cluster will be a significant enhancement for the current ongoing
research activities at NCAT including: material science, nano-engineering,
weather modeling and the collaborative development of research training and
education. The acquisition supports the following projects:&lt;br/&gt;- Variable
Star Identification and Modeling &lt;br/&gt;- In Silico Investigation on the
Potential of Novel Porous Materials for Olefin and Paraffin Separation for
Potential Use in Petroleum Refining Processes&lt;br/&gt;- Modeling and
Simulation of Complex Biological Systems &lt;br/&gt;- Investigation of the
Origin, Formation, and Propagation of the Pre-Tropical Cyclone African Easterly
Waves and Mesoscale Convective Systems &lt;br/&gt;- The Dynamics and Predictions
of Orographic Rainfall Associated with Landfalling Hurricanes&lt;br/&gt;-
Ancillary Research Projects;&lt;br/&gt;- Outreach to K-12 and the
Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation supports researchers and
their external collaborators in diverse data-intensive science fields such as
engineering, atmospheric sciences, energy and environmental systems, physics,
biology and bioengineering education and outreach. As a leading producer of
African-American baccalaureate, masters, and doctoral degree-holding engineers,
this integrated research instrument will serve as a focal point to promote
future collaborations with other academic institutions working on various
research topics. This instrument is expected to strengthen education training
activities by enabling innovative cross-disciplinary courses and promoting its
education outreach activity with K-12 teachers and students. The proposed
research at NCAT will promote a seamless integration of intellectual activity
with outreach at all levels.