* 1429664
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Brueckman Smartscan 3D Scanner for Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Object Imaging and Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* George Stanley, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 93,038.00

The University of Montana (UM) College of Humanities and Sciences (CH&amp;S)
will utilize NSF-MRI funding to acquire a Breuckmann SmartScan 3D Scanner for
the purpose of education and research among faculty, staff, and students in
various departments, including Anthropology, Computer Science, Biology, and
Geosciences. The research applications of this equipment include high resolution
digital capturing of prehistoric and historic artifacts, fossils, and biological
materials for the purpose of morphometric examination, preservation, and
curation. Educational applications include teaching morphometric analysis and
digital forensic reconstruction techniques. The 3D scanner will be located in
the Social Science Research Laboratory (SSRL), which is operated and maintained
by the CH&amp;S. The SSRL offers a computer-oriented teaching environment and a
technical research laboratory to faculty, staff, and students in the College of
Humanities and Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of this instrument
offers significant intellectual merit. The PI, co-PI, and other UM faculty use
the high resolution 3D scanner to expand their research capabilities as well as
the educational offerings available to students. The quality of ongoing research
is greatly enhanced by this technology and it provides an impetus for students
and staff to pursue new research directions. Investigation and development of
standardized methods for improving the overall quality of research associated
with artifacts, fossils, and other items are already underway at UM. However,
the capabilities offered by this instrumentation permit this research to grow to
its full potential. The ability to perform high resolution 3D scanning in-house
allows UM scholars to be on the leading edge of three dimensional object imaging
and analysis based research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant transforms 3D
imaging research and the education capabilities currently available at the UM
and thus offers a range of broader impacts. The faculty and researchers involved
in this grant project are committed to diversity and have a reputation for
working with a diverse student body that includes underrepresented populations
such as Native Americans, women, non-traditional, and special needs students.
Involvement with research projects utilizing technological equipment fosters
interest and encourages these students to seek careers in the science and
technology fields by offering better opportunities for advancing their
education. Acquisition of the Breuckmann SmartScan 3D Scanner allows UM the
ability to capture unique and fragile artifacts in a high precision digital
format that can be made readily available for educators and researchers through
digitally rendered files. This increases the availability of special materials
and allows pieces to remain safe while exact replicas are in use, bolstering
K-20 outreach efforts by producing items that can leave the laboratory.