* 1429188
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical-Emission Spectrometer for use in Paleoclimatic, Hydrogeologic and Geochemical Studies at SUNY Geneseo
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Benjamin Laabs, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2016
* USD 73,496.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award funds the acquisition of geochemical
instrumentation at SUNY Geneseo which will augment the analytical capabilities
of a department with a proven record of success in undergraduate research,
thereby enhancing the education of the next generation of geoscientists. Three
faculty in the Department of Geological Sciences have well-established,
undergraduate-friendly research programs that will immediately benefit from the
expanded analytical capabilities. The instrumentation will provide high-
resolution chemical analysis of rock, sediment and water samples to support
ongoing research, and will enable new collaborative research in areas such as
geomorphology, petrology, anthropology, and ecology. The research that will
benefit from the acquisition is (1) providing key insight to the magnitude,
timing and pace of climate changes during the last glacial-interglacial
transition in the western U.S. (2) establishing a detailed characterization of
ground and surface water chemistry in a region that is targeted for high-volume
hydraulic fracturing of the Marcellus Shale for extraction of natural gas; and
(3) establishing the impacts of slag on soil and water chemistry in western New
York State and the Adirondack State Park, important agricultural and
recreational regions. Research in these areas includes field and laboratory
components carried out by faculty and undergraduates, in keeping with the
tradition of cultivating critical thinking and problem-based learning in the
Department of Geological Sciences. This instrumentation will be incorporated
into classes reaching more than 300 students per year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds the acquisition of an
Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) to support
research in paleoclimatology, hydrogeology, and geochemistry at SUNY Geneseo.
For research in paleoclimatology and related fields, the ICP-OES will be used by
the Cosmogenic Nuclide Preparation Lab, which prepares samples for measurement
of cosmogenic Beryllium-10 inventory of surficial deposits and landforms. For
hydrogeologic studies, the ICP-OES will enable new research on water quality in
areas of upstate New York targeted for high volume hydraulic fracturing. For
geochemical studies, the ICP-OES will be used for measuring the concentrations
of metal and rare-earth elements in slag, a byproduct of smelting, and in soils
and water in environments affected by the disposal of slag. Additionally, the
ICP-OES will augment the analytical capabilities of ongoing research in the
Departments of Anthropology, Biology and Chemistry at SUNY Geneseo, and provide
opportunities for new research in these departments. Acquisition of the ICP-OES
also provides new opportunities for collaborative research between the
Department of Geological Sciences and other institutions within and beyond New
York State.