* 1429359
* MRI: Acquisition of a small angle X-ray diffractometer for in situ measurements of liquid to solid samples over a wide range of temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Kai Landskron, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 345,289.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
grant will enable the acquisition of a state-of-the-art versatile X-ray
diffractometer to fill a critical gap in Lehigh University's
microscopy/spectroscopy materials characterization infrastructure enabling
unique, comprehensive materials characterization for seamless correlation of
material structure and function. The versatility of the instrument for
complementary interrogation of a wide range of biological, organic and inorganic
sample types should facilitate multi-disciplinary efforts of researchers
spanning Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Materials Science, Chemistry,
Bioengineering, Mechanical Engineering, Earth and Environmental Science, and
Physics, among others, and enhance educational opportunities for students. By
enabling one-stop materials characterization unique to the region in which
Lehigh University is located, the X-ray diffractometer should impact numerous
regional start-up companies to well-established industries as well as colleagues
at 4 or more local non-PhD granting, but research-active, colleges and
universities. The new capabilities for unique and comprehensive insight into
materials structure and function will enable a wide range of cutting edge
science and engineering aimed at solving Grand Materials Research Challenges
within the broad arenas of energy, the environment, and health. Development and
deployment of complementary interactive educational X-ray modules will impact
domestic and international students enrolled annually in Lehigh?s Microscopy
Summer School and a range of middle school, high school, and undergraduate
students in educational outreach programs at Lehigh. All of these programs place
concerted focus on the recruitment of women, underrepresented minorities, and
persons with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will
support acquisition of a state-of-the-art, uniquely configured Anton Paar
SAXSpace X-ray diffractometer that has simultaneous and continuous small- and
wide-angle capabilities and multi-collimated (line, point) X-ray beam
configurations suitable for probing even weakly scattering isotropic and
anisotropic samples of a wide range of compositions (e.g., solutions, gels,
powders, films) and temperatures. Capabilities for in situ tensiometry, grazing
incidence small- and moderate wide-angle thin film studies, and biologics
analysis uniquely equip this single instrument for comprehensive, non-
destructive, and high-resolution multi-scale (i.e., molecular to meso-scale)
insight into a diverse range of biological, polymeric and inorganic samples that
will augment, integrate and create new, transformative materials analysis
distinct from existing state-of-the-art microscopy, spectroscopy, and proximal
probe tools at Lehigh. This unique, complementary insight will help establish
transformative synthesis-structure-properties relations aimed at efficient and
rational materials design. This should enhance active research spanning: (i)
Functional, Meso-structured and Meso-porous Inorganic Materials, (ii) Organic,
Inorganic, and Hybrid Films, Buried Interfaces, and (iii) Biological and Hybrid
Materials, through specific interdisciplinary projects in applications as
diverse as catalysts for biomass-to-chemicals conversion, photocatalysts for
low-cost liquid fuel production, bioactive glass scaffolding for hard tissue
regeneration, mechanics of biomimetic materials and multi-functional
nanocomposites, protein and cell membrane phase behavior for biomimetic toxin
sensing, and novel therapeutics design, among others.