* 1429757
* MRI:  Development of a Solar Photometric Instrument: Cartesian Full Disk Telescope-3 (SOPHI - CFDT3)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Gary Chapman, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 538,852.00

The main thrust of this 3-year MRI project is to develop a second-generation of
photometry program at the San Fernando Observatory (SFO) that is built upon the
strong foundation laid by the original program. This would yield photometric
studies of the Sun, which is a powerful tool for modeling and understanding
solar variability. The current solar cycle 24 demonstrates that solar
variability is still unpredictable, and therefore requires continued
measurement. While absolute solar radiative flux is measured from space, solar
images from ground-based telescopes are used to decipher information about the
photospheric and chromospheric sources of variability. The SFO and California
State University at Northridge (CSUN) are well suited to continue to carry out
long term photometric observations, while keeping costs low and employing
undergraduate and graduate students, as well interested faculty. The resulting
data product will be a uniform photometric record of daily solar images in
multiple wavelengths, eventually at least 50 years long, which will yield
information needed to study active region contributions to solar irradiance
across two or more Hale magnetic cycles. The models to be developed with the new
CFDT3 data will be used to: (1) provide support for space-based irradiance
monitors; (2) characterize past and future variations in the amount of solar
power reaching Earth; and, (3) gain deeper understanding of the physical sources
of the Sun?s irradiance changes. The SFO/CFDT photometry program records full-
disk solar images at multiple wavelengths on all sunny days (about 65% of the
year), and maintains an archive of metadata describing solar variability.

The broader impact of the SFO?s photometry program is four-fold: (1) maintain a
fundamental scientific data set; (2) support space-based solar irradiance
monitors; (3) generate secondary data of interest to the larger scientific
community; and, (4) fulfill an educational mission. Using the new data from
CFDT3, the project team will reconstruct changes in the Sun?s total and spectral
radiative output. These reconstructions are a valuable tool for the solar
irradiance research community: not only do they provide scientific information,
but they also allow the identification of discontinuities in the space-based
irradiance record that can help bridge gaps between spacecraft missions. The
analyses of solar variability are applicable to the study of other Sun-like
stars. A major impact is educating undergraduate and graduate students in
observational solar physics. California State University at Northridge is
designated as an Hispanic Serving Institution and Asian American Native American
Pacific Islander Serving Institution. Its pool of students reflects the ethnic
diversity of its geographic area. CFDT3 is a hands-on instrument that will
entice and encourage students to explore and consider Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) careers. Its accessibility allows for its
integration into CSUN?s Physics and Astronomy curriculum at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. Public outreach efforts through CSUN planetarium
presentations expose the ethnically diverse population of the San Fernando
Valley to the possibilities of scientific research.