* 1429941
* MRI: Acquisition of Bit Error Rate Tester (BERT) to Facilitate Rapid Deployment of High Speed FPGAs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sedig Agili, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2017
* USD 448,651.00

The goal of this proposal is to enhance the research initiatives at the Center
for Signal Integrity, Penn State University, Harrisburg (PSH) and advance them
to the next level. Signal integrity is defined as the engineering field that
analyzes electrical interconnects, such as USB and High-Definition Multimedia
Interfaces (HDMI), with the goal of improving the design, reliability and
performance of computer systems. Harrisburg, Central Pennsylvania, is known as
the Connector Capital of the World,where there are more than twenty-five
electrical connector companies that deal with designing and producing
interconnects for very high transmission rates. Among them are some of the
world's biggest players. The Center for Signal Integrity is focused on the
research and development of new signal integrity applications with the goal of
helping this local connector industry to remain globally competitive. Note that
the impact of the electrical connector industry in Central Pennsylvania's
economy is valued over 8 billion dollars. Within the Center, undergraduate and
master students have the opportunity to get involved in research and training,
and hence have better chances to access internships and employment in local (and
national) companies dealing with signal integrity applications. The proposers
are targeting to acquire an advanced Bit Error Rate Tester (BERT) and its
required accessories that will be used for research and training in support of
the local industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A BERT system is used to verify and
characterize high-speed serial data transmission circuits, interfaces (such as
USB and HDMIs) and systems. There are several needs for the specialized BERT
test equipment requested in this proposal. First, at 10 Gigabits per second
(Gb/s), and above, the measurement challenges are stringent. For instance, at
that high speed the duration of the bit pulses becomes shorter, indeed below the
picosecond range; hence, it becomes extremely difficult to measure jitter. In
addition, the instrument intrinsic jitter, at this sub-picosecond range, needs
to be taken into account; as a consequence, the measuring equipment's jitter
must be significantly less than the jitter to be measured. This piece of
equipment will complement the testing capacity that the Center for Signal
Integrity possesses. This funding will elevate the Center capabilities to the
next level, since it is becoming well-known in the signal integrity community
which in turn helps to attract good master students and collaboration interests
from other universities and industry. In addition, this proposal will open more
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate research and develop courses to
train the local workforce in the usage of the equipment. The Center will be also
collaborating with the University of South Carolina to provide measuring access
to their graduate Signal Integrity program. Furthermore, the requested equipment
will be used by the Radio Frequency (RF) Wireless group at PSH. Students at
Harrisburg Area Community College and Elizabethtown College will be provided
access to learn new measuring skills with a high-end BERT. This project will
enhance the partnership with local connector companies to test Field
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) solutions to their research and development
teams. The proposers are also integrating research in undergraduate education.
For example, Dr. S. Agili and Dr. A. Morales founded the Center for Signal
Integrity at PSH, involving undergraduate students, such as rapid prototyping in
FPGA, advanced jitter analysis, de-embedding techniques and Monte Carlo
simulation for random errors in S-parameters measurements. The proposers are
also the PI and Co-PI for an NSF STEM proposal (Award # DUE-1154516) aimed to
increase the pool of qualified STEM students, targeted to attract and retain
academically-talented and financially needy students of under-represented
groups.