* 1429120
* MRI: Acquisition of COMET, A Cognitive RadiO Multimedia NEtwork Testbed for Multimedia Communication Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Dayalan Kasilingam, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 274,494.00

This project, building a Cognitive RadiO Multimedia NEtwork Testbed (COMET),
investigates research challenges focused on QoE (Quality of Experience)
requirements of multimedia applications, supporting new diverse approaches to
QoE. The instrument will be used to develop cutting edge protocols and
algorithms for the efficient use of limited wireless spectrum in a variety of
multidisciplinary multimedia applications to address the challenging
multidimensional scientific and engineering problems associated with the field.
The protocols and algorithms will be applied to fundamental scientific questions
in a wide range of wireless multimedia topics. The COMET platform will help
develop methodology and techniques for efficient use of spectral resources and
address critical issues related to energy, bandwidth, computing, and reliability
for wireless multimedia applications. The work enables the verification and
refinement of existing protocols and algorithms, and the development of new ones
for different applications. The instrument directly services five
projects:&lt;br/&gt;- QoE-driven Cross-layer Design for CR Multimedia
Networks,&lt;br/&gt;- Cognitive Radio (CR) Infrastructure-based EV Micro-Grid
for Future Power Grid Systems,&lt;br/&gt;- Personalized Health Monitoring for
Multimedia eHealth,&lt;br/&gt;- Smart Autonomous Fault-Tolerant Environments
(SAFE) of Cognitive Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks, and&lt;br/&gt;-
Networked Distributed Source Coding for Multimedia Sensor
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument plays a crucial role in training
the next generation of engineers and scientists. Students gain experience in
various aspects of multimedia communication and wireless. Undergraduates are
integrated into respective research programs, in harmony with the REU site
program and college-level undergraduate research incentive program. Training is
also offered to a broader body of students at the institution and beyond, and
underrepresented students are sought. An undergraduate research program on CR
multimedia network is established as well, while disseminating the novel
principles and methods of multimedia communication developed.