* 1429699
* MRI: Acquisition of a National CyberGIS Facility for Computing and Data-Intensive Geospatial Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Robert Pennington, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,787,335.00

Collaborative, interactive, and scalable knowledge discovery, in the form on
processing and visualizing massive amounts of complex geospatial data and
performing associated analysis and simulation, have become essential to
fulfilling the important role of the emerging and vibrant interdisciplinary
field of CyberGIS -- geographic information science and systems (GIS) based on
advanced cyberinfrastructure -- in enabling computing- and data-intensive
research and education across a broad swath of academic disciplines with
significant societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports these
activities by establishing the CyberGIS Facility as an innovative instrument
equipped with capabilities that include high-performance data access with large
disk storage, cutting-edge computing configured with advanced graphics
processing units, and visualization supported with fast network and dynamically
provisioned cloud computing resources. The CyberGIS Facility represents a
groundbreaking advance in the broad context of advanced cyberinfrastructure and
geospatial sciences and technologies. The Facility enables researchers to solve
a diverse set of major and complex scientific problems (e.g., climate and
weather predictions, emergency management, and environmental and energy
sustainability) in multidisciplinary, bio, engineering, geo, and social sciences
that would otherwise be impossible or difficult to tackle. Extensive advances in
various education and training efforts (e.g., new courses, cross-disciplinary
curricula, and online learning materials) help to produce a next-generation
workforce for fostering CyberGIS-enabled discoveries and innovations. Facility
users represent a wide range of disciplines and conduct leading-edge research
sponsored by various agencies and organizations (e.g., NSF, Environmental
Protection Agency, National Institutes of Health, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and U.S. Geological Survey), which highlight the impact that
this project has in enabling broad and significant scientific advances.