* 1429308
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer with a Multinuclear Probe and a Sample Changer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Wendy Cory, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 319,800.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Justin Wyatt from the College of Charleston and colleagues Timothy Barker, Wendy
Cory, Marcello Forconi and Brooke Van Horn will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer equipped with a multinuclear probe and a sample changer. This
spectrometer will allow research in a variety of fields such as the study of
biologically and environmentally relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate students at the College of Charleston and
will involve the South Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) confirmation of the structure of small molecule anticancer
agents with improved sensitivity in 1D/2D NMR experiments; (b) analyzing
conformational and structural features of small molecules containing silicon;
(c) utilizing improved sensitivity to monitor polymerization kinetic
experiments; (d) using NMR water suppression techniques to characterize the
products of reactions between fluorobenzonitriles and cysteine in biological
systems; (e) evaluating regiochemistry of hydroxymethylation products of
derivatized hetereoaromatic compounds for drug development; and (f)
characterization of pharmaceutical degradation products of environmental
concern.