* 1429241
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced X-Ray Diffraction System to Support Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Gregory Druschel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 374,989.00

Non-technical: This NSF-Major Research Instrumentation award for an advanced
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) system, with materials structure and size analysis
capabilities down to atomic scale, fulfills critical research and educational
needs at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI). The XRD
system enhances IUPUI's shared instrumentation profile, and supports faculty and
students across many schools and departments by providing capabilities for a
range of interdisciplinary scientific discovery and workforce training. This
instrumentation significantly broadens investigator ability to characterize the
properties of solid materials, especially of nanoscale-size, for fundamental
research projects that provide the basis for applications in Earth Sciences (ore
and energy deposits, water quality, and minerals impacts on human health),
Nanotechnology (new materials development for energy, industry, and biomedical
applications), and Biophysical research (biological membrane function in
biomaterials including amino acids, detergents, and pharmaceuticals). Supporting
the development of the nation's 21st century science and engineering workforce,
this instrumentation is used in both key coursework across several disciplines
and is central to educational outreach programs for K-12 students and teachers
across Indiana and the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Characterization of
solid state material structure and size is a critical research need for an array
of IUPUI researchers. The advanced X-ray diffraction (XRD) system supports
growing research efforts in many fields by providing high resolution and high
throughput diffraction data, the ability to acquire data on samples contained in
a controlled temperature and atmospheric chamber, and the capability of
gathering small angle X-ray scattering information for both solids and thin
films. These advances make quantification of many nanoscale material properties
possible, support 22 major ongoing projects and open new avenues of
interdisciplinary research for at least 20 faculty and their associated research
groups at IUPUI. Current faculty research areas include: Earth Sciences,
understanding mineral distribution and reactivity linked to human health and
characterizing mineral transformations key to water quality, ore and energy
materials, evolution of earth and life through time, and structural geology in a
range of temperature, pressure, and atmospheric conditions; Energy Storage and
Photovoltaic Technologies, for advanced energy applications; Nanomaterials, for
industrial and biomaterials applications (e.g., implants and ceramic materials);
and Biophysics, investigating the molecular arrangement of proteins and lipids
within biological membranes. The system enables scientific activities including
detailed analysis of samples from environmental and geologic settings coupled
with the ability to characterize mineral assemblages at varying temperature and
atmospheric conditions to probe mineral reactivity. Nanomaterials
characterization via both high resolution XRD and small-angle X-ray scattering
is greatly enhanced, with added ability to determine pore size, crystallinity,
and structural variations key to development of new materials. Assessing the
fundamental properties of lipid membranes is also made possible through XRD and
small-angle X-ray scattering capabilities that can measure molecular
correlations at small length scales to address domain formation, a structural
feature considered relevant to functions of biomembranes. In addition to its
impact on research, the system enhances educational offerings and student
training across disciplines at IUPUI. The instrumentation resides in shared
research facility, which expands the user base to other academic investigators
and local industry.