* 1429352
* MRI: Acquisition of 4G LTE and WiMAX Wireless System to Facilitate Multidisciplinary Research Efforts and Enhance Undergraduate Research Training
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Yunsheng Wang, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 143,920.00

This project, acquiring 4G long term evolution (LTE) and WiMAX wireless system,
enables research projects aiming to develop a real-time wireless video
surveillance network to evaluate delay tolerant-base content sharing system, to
utilize localization and tracking using sensor data, and to enhance health
monitoring. The instrument expands the overlapping areas of surveillance
networks, content sharing systems, wireless sensor networks, robotics, virtual
reality, and health monitoring, specifically fostering research collaboration in
these areas. The overall goals for this work include &lt;br/&gt;- Training
undergraduate and Master?s students in wireless networks research, &lt;br/&gt;-
Developing hand-on laboratory-based course modules, and &lt;br/&gt;- Engaging in
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Already, the number of devices exceeds
the number of wired Internet connected devices, and the gap continuous growing.
This acquisition allows researchers to utilize the strength of wireless
networks. The wireless video surveillance network is a sensor network where each
node is equipped with camera framing a video scene of the region of interest.
High bandwidth of 3G LTE and WiMax can support real-time observation of people
and vehicles in a busy environment. On the other hand, the increase in
multimedia content makes providing good-quality services in wireless networks a
challenging problem. 4G LTE and WiMAX systems have a high bandwidth that can
provide reliable service. The instrumentation allows the researchers to
configure the 4G LTE and WiMAX wireless system, measure the link performances,
(such as RSSOI (receive signal strength indicator), CINR (carry to interference
plus noise ratio); and bandwidth on different locations. Additionally, different
applications will also be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
supports new undergraduate laboratory classroom modules and STEM recruiting and
outreach efforts. The instrumentation can be used in courses such as High Speed
Network to provide a quantitative exercise in network configuration and testing.
The institution also strives to increase representation of underrepresented
minorities within the student population trough mechanisms such as AIM
(Academically Interested Minds). The students gain experience in various aspects
of multimedia communication and wireless and,in harmony with the REU site
program and college-level undergraduate research incentive program,
undergraduates will be integrated into respective research programs. Training
will also be offered to a broader body of students at the institution and beyond
and underrepresented students will be sought. While disseminating the novel
principles and methods of multimedia communication developed, an undergraduate
research program on the topic will also be established.