* 1429956
* Workshop: Statistical Mechanics Foundations of Complexity - Where Do We Stand?; Santa Fe, NM; May 8-10, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Stefan Thurner, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2015
* USD 16,025.00

During the past decade substantial advances have occurred in the area of
statistical physics, both in the conceptual and analytical framework and its
applications. The three-day workshop "Statistical Mechanics Foundations of
Complexity - Where Do We Stand?" hosted by the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) on May
8-10, 2014 will bring together researchers from physics, computational science,
biology, and network theory to discuss foundations, recent methodological
developments and applications in the field of statistical physics. The aim is to
bring together people with experience in a variety of novel mathematical methods
with people with insights in specific complex systems. The central question of
the workshop will be to critically assess the achieved theoretical progress, and
to discuss the validity of the new technology in real-world applications of non-
equilibrium physical, biological, etc. processes. The development of new
statistical methods has an impact on problems including mathematical
understanding of collective economic behavior, herding, opinion formation,
financial markets, evolution, and the dynamics of innovation. The workshop is
also an opportunity to encourage people outside physics to familiarize
themselves with the new theoretical developments and potential applications. It
will be an excellent educational opportunity for student and postdoctoral fellow
participants to experience cross-disciplinary collaborations. The mixed
composition of the participants will stimulate new research ideas.