* 1429176
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Scanning Probe - Raman Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Junghyun Cho, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 418,011.00

This project supports the acquisition of a combined scanning probe-Raman
microscope, which provides non-destructive imaging of materials structure,
physical properties and molecular composition. This instrumentation is critical
to fundamental research in engineering, materials science, physics, chemistry
and other fields, enabling advances ranging from the design of new materials and
devices to the identification of the origins of human disease. The combined SP-
Raman microscope will enable high-resolution Raman techniques and will remedy a
deficiency in the research and scientific training infrastructure at the State
University of New York at Binghamton, which does not have a Raman facility. The
proposed instrument will support fundamental research and education efforts on
small-scale systems, materials, energy, and biomedical science. The fundamental
knowledge from these projects will advance solar energy applications and next
generation manufacturing and materials design and will help to broaden the
participation of female and underrepresented groups in research. A new course on
scanning probe and Raman microscopy will be developed for students in the
University?s engineering and science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined
scanning probe-Raman microscope is a state-of-the-art research tool used to
characterize structural, physical and chemical properties of materials at sub-
micron scales. The sharp scanning probe synergistically enables high-resolution
Raman techniques such as TERS (tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy), which are
essential for the proposed research plan. The research activities enabled by
this instrumentation bring together 15 faculty members from the Mechanical
Engineering, Bioengineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Physics and
Chemistry Departments and form the basis for collaborative research projects and
mentoring for junior faculty. This instrumentation will also be shared with
industry and other academic institutions for their research and development
through the University?s Small-Scale Systems Integration and Packing Center
(S3IP). The new knowledge gained through this research will have a
transformative impact on advancing fundamental science and engineering and
enabling new technologies.