* 1429687
* MRI Consortium:  Acquisition of a Sensofar S-NEOX: Dual Technology 3D Optical Profiler
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Todd Otanicar, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 136,029.00

The surfaces of structures and materials tell researchers important stories
about how these items interacted with the environment or how the environment
interacts with them. Understanding the patterns that the environment leaves on a
surface can lead to new ideas about climate, prehistory, and can influence the
development of new engineering materials. The instrument requested in this
project, an optical surface profilometer, is a cutting-edge scientific tool that
enables the measurement of these surface patterns with nanometer resolution.
This new instrument will be used to develop a broad-based collaborative research
program across colleges within The University of Tulsa (TU) and among other
institutions of higher education in Oklahoma, including the University of
Oklahoma and Oklahoma State University. The requested instrument will help to
develop a regional center for research on surface wear on a broad range of
materials such as tooth enamel, stone tools, ceramics, and coatings at TU.
Graduate students and undergraduate students will be the primary operators of
this instrument and access to this tool will give them valuable experience with
cutting-edge research equipment. This type of experience is critical to train
and inspire our future scientific and engineering
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that this instrument will support
spans topics from anthropology to mechanical engineering. Projects include
imaging use wear on teeth to determine the diets of prehistoric animals,
analysis of wear patterns on ancient tools to investigate how they were used and
constructed, and the analysis of surfaces on advanced engineering materials that
have been subjected to environmental exposure. One of the unique projects
leverage a comprehensive collection of artifacts housed at TU that contains both
lithic and bone items, all with experimental use wear. In addition, TU is
affiliated with the world-renowned Gilcrease Museum, which has a significant New
World archaeological collection, which will provide ample objects for study.
With the anticipated opening of the Gilcrease Helmerich center for education and
research in fall 2014, the instrument will be an integral part of TU's public
outreach and community education, and will help to improve public understanding
of science, technology, archaeology, evolution, and climate change. Some of the
specific results that will be produced using the requested instrument include
the following. By studying wear on the teeth of fossil mammals, researchers can
infer what type of diet these animals ate. From this data, one can test
hypotheses regarding the importance of diet as a selection process in evolution
and reconstruct paleoecology to ask questions about climate change. The analysis
of wear on stone tools and ceramics, both in modern and archaeological
assemblages, will provide information on how these tools were manufactured, used
and discarded. This provides insight into human social structure, trade and
transport as well as cultural and ethnic identification. Modern materials are
subjected to environmental degradation. Understanding this process, and how to
prevent it, is vital to modern industry. By investigating the surfaces of these
materials it is possible to better understand the degradation processes and work
to improve materials to be resistant to degradation.