* 1429544
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Multi-Disciplinary Research in South Dakota
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Brianna Mount, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Allen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) is a technique which
allows users to measure concentrations of rare elements with superior
sensitivity. With many applications in a wide range of scientific fields, this
fast, multi-element technique has become an indispensable tool in trace
elemental analysis. This award will be used to establish an ICP-MS at Black
Hills State University (BHSU) that will provide high sensitivity analysis
capabilities for researchers in South Dakota and surrounding areas. The ICP-MS
will be used by researchers in many disciplines including Physics, Chemistry,
Geology, and Engineering. Undergraduate students will be involved in sample
preparation, operation, instrument maintenance, and data analysis. This will
expand BHSU's program of undergraduate research in the Black Hills region and
throughout the state of South Dakota and increase the exposure of undergraduate
students to state-of-the-art instrumentation. ICP-MS labs and training will be
incorporated into Analytical Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, Hydrogeology,
Volcanology, Mineralogy and Petrology classes serving a combined estimated 90
students per year. BHSU's close proximity to six of the nine Indian reservations
in South Dakota results in a large enrollment of American Indian students, many
of whom will benefit from the acquisition of the ICP-
MS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this ICP-MS, BHSU will be capable of screening the
radio-purity of materials used in rare-event physics experiments at the Sanford
Underground Research Facility (SURF). The ICP-MS facility will also be used in
support of SURF projects by characterizing the germanium crystals grown at the
University of South Dakota and at the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology, and in the study of ancient metamorphosed basalts in and near SURF.
Additional geological applications include petrogenesis studies of volcanic and
metavolcanic rocks, paleoenvironmental analyses, research of biotic responses to
past climate change and analyses of the incorporation and impact of trace metals
and organic compounds derived from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill on coastal
molluscan species in the Gulf of Mexico. Assessing the toxicity of nanomaterials
for renewable energy generation, evaluating lanthanide dopant concentration in
upconversion nanomaterials and the determination of complex ferrite compositions
and impurities in attrition milled and surface functionalized metallic and
intermetallic nanopowders are among the chemistry applications.