* 1429252
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Energy X-ray Tomography Scanner
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Mandar Dewoolkar, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 276,793.00

MRI: Acquisition of a High Energy X-ray Tomography Scanner for Multidisciplinary
Research and Education &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to acquire a versatile, robust, high
energy, and high resolution X-ray microtomography (micro-CT) system that
facilitates nondestructive mapping of the internal structure of a variety of
materials enhancing multidisciplinary research and education at the University
of Vermont (UVM). Since the introduction of computer-based X-ray tomographic
imaging in the medical services field about 40 years ago, X-ray computed
tomography is now applied to the nondestructive study of various natural,
historic and engineered materials in the fields of engineering, geology,
materials science, biology, and geo-energy, among others. This state-of-the-art
technology provides non-destructive, high resolution, 3D imaging of materials
that enables researchers to tackle many contemporary, previously intractable,
fundamental and applied research questions related to infrastructure security,
safety, health, and energy, with direct benefits to the society. The instrument
will support research and educational activities of eighteen investigators from
diverse fields of civil, environmental, mechanical, electrical and bio
engineering, plant and soil science, geology, historic preservation, medicine
and materials science. With this initial set of users and research applications
for the instrument, it is believed that the impact of the acquisition of this
micro-CT will be substantial for providing powerful new capabilities for
researchers and their students and will thus lead to new on- and off-campus
research and training collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The micro-CT allows
researchers to examine the effects of loading, temperature fluctuations, fluid
injections and how the fluids are absorbed by different materials. It will
enable the UVM researchers to perform transformative basic and applied research
and education related to: transport, mechanical and thermal behavior of a
variety of porous media (soils, rocks, building materials); characterization of
geological materials; characterization of plant and soil community structure;
and materials research ranging from historic to smart materials and bio and bio-
inspired materials. The instrument will also enhance curricular offerings across
the campus. Educational modules based on the results obtained using the micro-CT
will be incorporated into courses such as Materials Engineering, Soil Mechanics,
Groundwater Hydrology, Geo-energy Systems, Physics of Flow and Transport through
Porous Media, Microstructures (Geology), Biomechanics, Transport Processes, and
Fundamental of Soil Sciences and Soil Water Movement, among others.