* 1429661
* MRI: Development of a Direct Detection Energy Loss Spectroscopy System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Mitra Taheri, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 870,676.00

MRI: Development of a Direct Detection Energy Loss Spectroscopy
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Characterizing dynamic processes and
reactions---how atoms move--is necessary to tackle key scientific issues in
energy, medicine, and nanotechnology. To address this need, a multidisciplinary
team of researchers are developing a new ultrafast spectroscopy system based on
direct-detection technology. This state-of-the-art system enables dynamic
studies of electronic and structural behavior in a wide range of materials and
represents the first time in situ electron energy loss spectroscopy is being
introduced to the electron microscopy marketplace, thus creating far-reaching
and interdisciplinary impacts in the field of electron microscopy. Drexel's
central location among many of the nation's top institutions ensures exposure to
myriad universities, laboratories, and users. The development team boasts
various collaborations (both in the US and internationally), which gives the new
system automatic visibility. Opportunities for education and outreach include
leveraging the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) program to recruit minority students to train and be educated within the
context of electron microscopy and to take advantage of Drexel's renowned co-
operative engineering education program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Energy
loss spectroscopy is particularly useful to probe electronic states, band
structure, and chemistry, and to improve contrast in materials. While
significant advancements in electron optics have permitted fine probe analysis
of structure and chemical bonding at the atomic level, the next frontier in
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) relies on imaging dynamic processes and
reactions beyond standard video frame rates. Key developments in post column
energy filters and direct detection cameras have enabled experiments at fine
temporal and spatial scales; while these developments have advanced research
individually, it is clear that the combination of direct detection technology
with energy filtered imaging and spectroscopy would have substantial benefits.
To date, these techniques have not been combined due to the inherent mismatch
between the low-dose requirements of the direct detection applications and the
very high dynamic range of electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). This
instrument development activity integrates a direct detection camera system and
a high resolution spectrometer to allow for in situ EELS to be performed at low
electron doses and high speeds. This unprecedented combination boosts the
analytical sensitivity of inelastic scattering techniques and yields
compositional and electronic structure mapping at sub-nanometer to atomic
spatial scales, and high-speed (4000 frames per second) detection at low
energies, permitting quantitative time-resolved data acquisition for rapid
processes. The combination of expertise of energy filtering systems and energy
loss spectroscopy with expertise in in situ and ultrafast TEM provides insight
into key processes and bridges gaps in the understanding of mechanisms in
various disciplines, with direct and specific impacts on (1) charge mediated
properties in oxide and semiconductor heterostructures (2) ion transfer in
energy storage materials, and (3) assembly mechanisms in biomedical and soft
materials.