* 1429294
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instrument for Data-intensive Applications with Hybrid Cloud Computing Needs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,408.00

This project aims to acquire a supercomputer cluster that will in turn enable
data-intensive research in many diverse fields such as bioscience, geoscience,
imaging, and vision. Specifically, the acquisition responds to the need to
transform campuses' supercomputer resource provisioning practices with
federated, hybrid cloud services that can seamlessly orchestrate the
provisioning of local and remote resources (e.g., cyber-enabled scientific
instruments, public clouds) to meet data-intensive research and education needs
of users. The project focuses on application workflows considering connectivity
and communications necessary for interdisciplinary research and education
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supercomputer cluster augments
existing facilities (e.g., Science DMZ 'network instrument' connected to the
Internet2 Innovation platform, Transmission Electron Microscope, Federated-IAM
'entitlement service') and the core on-campus supercomputer resources. The
project leverages advanced tools for central processing units and graphics
processing units (CPU/GPU) as well as network visualization from existing funded
projects for configuration of experiments with the instrument to develop 'custom
templates' for diverse data intensive web-based applications. These custom
templates will abstract the high-level policy and performance throughput
requirements of data-intensive applications and 'personalize' them to lower-
level control specifications implementable in an on-demand manner by
virtualization technologies such as OpenStack and OpenFlow. Furthermore, the
investigators will assess how the next-generation supercomputing user service
models with custom templates can be composed to allow campus IT staff to
sustainably and seamlessly support hybrid cloud use cases in research and
education. Specifically, the instrument services&lt;br/&gt;- Hybrid Cloud
Computing,&lt;br/&gt;- Bioinformatics and computational biology, &lt;br/&gt;-
Multi-modal data analytics, and &lt;br/&gt;- Next generation HPC user
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation supports 16 researchers and
their external collaborators in diverse data-intensive science fields such as
bioscience, geoscience, imaging, and vision. It also supports the delivery of
high-performance computing and Big Data analytics courses to more than 500
students at this institution and those around it. Participation of
underrepresented and underserved groups will be accomplished utilizing the
current NSF REU site as well as the institution's EPSCoR activities. Best
practices to streamline the engineering/operations of hybrid clouds for data
intensive applications, technologies/tools, policies and service models will all
be disseminated. The instrument supports undergraduate and graduate courses and
various other education and training activities, including REU programs. The
proposed projects advances computational science research, research training,
and curriculum development.