* 1429062
* MRI: Development of multifunctional scanning probe microscope for nanofabrication and nanomaterials research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Eric Garfunkel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 459,296.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities program (CRIF), The Divsion of
Material Research (DMR) and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(OMA), Rutgers University-New Brunswick will develop a scanning probe microscope
(SPM) with an electrochemical station and optical microscope capable of doing
dip-pen nanolithography (DPN). Scanning probe microscopy methods are among the
most powerful and versatile classes of microscopic tools available. They can be
used for simple topographic imaging, more sophisticated chemical, physical,
biological and mechanical characterization, and for nanolithography and
nanomanipulation. There is a growing need for new multifunctional SPMs that can
benefit multiple fields. To this end, the development proposed will involve the
design, acquisition, and integration of various components to make a
multifunctional SPM instrument. The plan is to develop a new type of SPM
instrument equipped with a dip-pen nanolithography module, an optical
microscope, an external electrical/electrochemical instrument and a
temperature/gas/liquid controller to allow the analysis of various bio/nano
materials. The newly-developed multifunctional SPM will also be used for
demonstrations in laboratory classes and for K-12 laboratory experiences hosted
at Rutgers. Access to the SPM will be made available to faculty and students at
the numerous colleges in the neighboring area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as studies of inorganic-organic hybrid materials, multi-functional
materials, and nanomaterials for organic sodium ion batteries. The system will
be used to investigate optical antennae, semiconductor ferroelectronics and
graphene film production. It will also be used in bio-nano research including
cell-cell and cell-substrate interactions, cell migrations, stem cell
differentiations, protein misfolding, enzyme characterization/optimization, and
biopolymer fabrication while maintaining an in vivo-like environment. By using
the SPM tip as an electrode and combining it with an electrode holder and probe
station, the electrical properties of target materials (e.g., conductance,
resistance, capacitance, defects) can be analyzed precisely. The proposed system
will also be available for analyzing the electrochemical characteristics of
samples such as the corrosion, redox phenomenon, and deposition using different
electrochemical techniques.