* 1429563
* MRI: Acquisition of an Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope for Engineering and Natural Sciences Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Hemali Rathnayake, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 193,695.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funding to the Western
Kentucky University to acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) for
education and research at undergraduate and graduate levels. The instrument will
support a broad range of cutting-edge and innovative research projects spanning
multiple disciplines of natural sciences and engineering. Additionally, the
instrument will allow the integration of a hands-on training and research
component into the curriculum for various undergraduate courses. The new
instrument will allow students, researchers and educators to obtain high-
resolution images of a wide variety of samples ranging from complex micro-
features in electronic and aerospace materials to organic nano-particles and
biological species. The new instrument will also impact the research experience
and education of Gatton Academy Math and Science high school students, as well
as secondary and middle school students from minority and underrepresented
groups in Appalachian counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scanning electron
microscope with extended capabilities including secondary and backscatter
imaging, high and low vacuum control, and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer
analyzer will impact a number of research projects from multiple disciplines
including advanced manufacturing, mechanical engineering, geology, chemistry,
and biology. The focused research and education areas include: (i) analyzing
dimensional accuracy, surface finish, and crater sizes of micro and nano
features machined using advanced manufacturing processes, (ii) surface
morphology characterizations of nanostructures and their thin films, (iii)
characterization of antibiotic coated gold nanoparticles for antimicrobial
applications, (iv) characterization of structural and physical properties of
advanced nanocarbon-based materials for energy-related applications, (v)
morphological characteristics of stoneflies (Insecta, Plecoptera), and (vi)
chemical, mineralogical (diagenetic) and morphological analysis of rocks and
minerals from oil and gas reservoir. The high vacuum mode of the scanning
electron microscope will enable imaging and analysis of micro and nano scale
features in metallic and electronic materials. Low vacuum mode will be used for
characterizing not only inorganic and organic nanoparticles, but also biological
systems in various environments such as wet, dry, oily, porous, out-gassing,
hydrated, or contaminated. In addition, the instrument will support a number of
courses on electron microscopy; materials characterization; mechanical
properties of materials; geology; and earth sciences. Overall, the new
instrument will impact the research productivity of a core group of researchers
to continue building a multidisciplinary, comprehensive program in materials
science and advanced manufacturing.