* 1429229
* Research on Innovation and Creativity in Higher education in Engineering and Science (RICHES) for Community Colleges
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Gisele Ragusa, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

There is a critical need for more students with engineering and science majors
to enter into, persist, and graduate from postsecondary institutions. Increasing
the diversity in engineering and science is also a profound identified need.
According to national statistics, the largest groups of underrepresented
minority students in engineering and science attend America?s public higher
education institutions and in particular the community colleges. Recent research
has indicated that students from these populations who are strong problem
solvers, and who understand how to seek assistance and navigate college
campuses, are most likely to persist to degree completion. Accordingly, this
Research in Engineering Education (REE) project entitled: Research on Innovation
and Creativity in Higher education in Engineering and Science (RICHES) for
Community Colleges, intends to study a sample of non-traditional college
students enrolled in science and engineering programs in urban community
colleges to determine: (a) the types and frequency of support practices they
utilize, (b) how such practices influence their achievement, persistence and
transfer status to four year colleges and universities, and (c) how in turn
their propensity for innovation and creative problem solving affect such choices
and persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research
project are: (1) to explore the informal and formal instructional and support
practices used with non-traditional students in community colleges to inform
persistence, (2) to understand whether such practices are effective in offering
non-traditional students a program that enables them to stay in engineering and
science majors and to transfer to a four year college or university, and (3) to
determine if students? propensity for innovative problem solving influences use
of pedagogical practices and ultimately, transfer persistence. RICHES studies an
area and group of students that have been historically understudied, community
college students in engineering and science, and builds upon the researchers?
current studies of STEM pathways and students? propensity for innovation, both
of which are research areas recognized as areas that engineering education must
cultivate in students. This project has broad impacts because it has great
potential to transform instructional and support practice for non-traditional
students and those who are typically underrepresented in engineering and
science. It contributes to the development and improvement of educational
opportunities for the preparation of a new generation of scientists and
engineers who will play a critical role in maintaining U.S. leadership.