* 1429999
* CRCNS US-German Data Sharing: DataGit - converging catalogues, warehouses, and deployment logistics into a federated 'data distribution'
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Yaroslav Halchenko, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 690,400.00

Contemporary neuroscience is heavily data-driven, but today's data management
technologies and sharing practices fall at least a decade behind software
ecosystem counterparts. Distributed version control systems, such as Git,
facilitate collaborative software development, and turnkey distributions, like
NeuroDebian, free researchers from tedious and unreliable maintenance tasks.
Likewise, neuroscientists will need to incorporate recent technological
developments to access, manage, and contribute back to the ever growing array of
scientific data more efficiently. Making a rich collection of disjoint datasets
available through a simple unified interface can transcend limitations of
individual studies and revolutionize how scientific data are managed,
distributed, and shared across all fields of science. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Yaroslav O. Halchenko of Dartmouth College,
along with Dr. Michael Hanke of the University of Magdeburg (Germany), will
develop DataGit, a suite of data distribution tools. DataGit will employ
software for data tracking and deployment logistics to unify access to many
existing neuroimaging data hosting portals, such as crcns.org, openfmri.org and
humanconnectome.org. DataGit will make it easy to access existing data and to
share new or derived data with full support for distributed version control,
data integrity protection and authenticated access to original data hosting.

Making data management as easy and as versatile as source code management will
further the efforts toward open and fully reproducible science. Uniform access
to federated collections of data will promote the visibility and accessibility
of neuroscientific data inside and outside the field, far beyond the scope of
any individual data-sharing effort. The benefits from the proposed developments
will translate directly to educators' aims in the classroom. Through integration
with software distributions, uniform access to software elements and datasets
for online training materials will enable educators to teach not only from
textbooks but also through hands-on replication of state-of-the-art original
publications. In addition, giving any researcher the ability to easily deploy
complex heterogeneous analysis pipelines will be instrumental in translating the
achievements of flagship efforts, such as the Human Connectome Project, into
accessible tools for clinical applications. Consequently, even more researchers
will be able to tackle even larger challenges to benefit society by improving
our understanding of the human brain.

A companion project is being funded by the German Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF).