* 1429373
* MRI:   Acquisition of a laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS) for research in the marine, earth and environmental sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Justin Ries, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This award from the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Major Research
Instrumentation program supports acquisition of an inductively-coupled plasma
mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) and a laser ablation (LA) sample introduction system
to be used for the elemental and isotopic analysis of a broad range of natural
materials investigated in the marine, earth and environmental sciences. This
investment by the NSF will support researchers working within various
disciplines at Northeastern University (marine science, environmental science,
global change, geology, chemistry, biology, osteology, public health,
engineering), as well as at other regional institutions. Specific research
projects that will be enhanced by acquisition of LA-ICP-MS at Northeastern
include the reconstruction of past seawater temperature and acidity from coral
cores, experiments on marine organisms that require chemical labelling of their
shell or skeleton, research investigating metal incorporation in carbonate
minerals, investigations of fish population structure and connectivity using
chemical fingerprinting of the ear-bones ("otoliths") of fish, and numerous
other projects investigating marine ecosystems, shell and skeletal production,
materials synthesis, drug discovery, and environmental toxins. Instrument use by
junior, mid-level, and senior faculty, and their postdoctoral associates,
graduate and undergraduate students, and technical staff, will provide critical
educational and instrument training opportunities for users with varying levels
of expertise across a range of scientific disciplines. Acquisition of LA-ICP-MS
will be particularly valuable for the career development of several young
faculty who are developing novel research projects and are poised to take full
advantage of the mass resolution, sensitivity, and substrate versatility
afforded by LA-ICP-MS. Faculty and staff at Northeastern have established an
excellent record of involving students at all levels of scientific research, and
this emphasis on student involvement will be fully integrated with the
management and operation of this instrumentation.

The LA-ICP-MS system to be acquired through this award combines key
technological capabilities that will facilitate analytical research at
Northeastern and beyond. These capabilities include (1) high precision and
accuracy; (2) broad mass range (6 < atomic mass < 260, > 70 elements); (3)
substrate versatility (liquids and solids), including in-situ measurement of
solid substrates via laser ablation at < 5 micron spatial resolution; (4) ultra-
low detection limits (ppq-to-ppm); and (5) rapid, simultaneous analysis of
multiple isotopes (> 20) afforded by the system's high sensitivity, rapid
adjustment of magnetic field strength, and minimal sample preparation
requirements. The analytical versatility of LA-ICP-MS is required for the broad
range of research projects of multiple early career, mid-level, and senior
researchers at Northeastern. These projects include investigating temporal
trends in carbonate mineralogy, developing a multielemental paleothermometer and
B/Ca-based paleo-pH proxy to reconstruct recent oceanic change from coral
skeletal geochemistry, isotopic labeling of carbonate shells and skeletons in
ocean acidification experiments, investigating trace element partitioning in
synthetic and biogenic carbonates, elemental fingerprinting of fish otoliths to
investigate population structure and connectivity, and numerous other projects
in the fields of marine ecology, biomineralization, bone pathology, materials
synthesis, nano-engineering, drug discovery, and toxicology. These projects are
at the forefront of their respective fields, yet their ultimate success,
especially for the early career scientists, hinges on ready access to the
proposed instrumentation. Although no single mass spectrometer is perfectly
suited for all of the described research activities, LA-ICP-MS is the one
instrument system that is most readily adaptable to each of these applications.