* 1429189
* MRI collaborative: Development of the LSU/FSU Split-Pole Spectrograph System at the FSU Accelerator Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Jeff Blackmon, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 203,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will enable the installation of a
large acceptance, high-resolution magnetic spectrograph at the John D. Fox
Accelerator Laboratory of Florida State University (FSU) and the development of
a suite of state-of-the-art auxiliary detectors around it. This instrument will
allow precision measurements of certain nuclear properties, which determine the
energy release and time scale of stellar explosions and studies of the physics
of unbound atomic nuclei in general. This instrument reclaims the capability to
perform such precision measurements in the USA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative MRI award will fund the installation of a large-acceptance, high-
resolution Enge split-pole spectrograph (SPS) at the accelerator laboratory at
FSU with the purpose of studying the physics of resonant nuclear states that
impact nuclear astrophysics and nuclear structure. The SPS became available upon
the cessation of operations at the Wright Nuclear Structure Laboratory at Yale
University. This project will install the 32-tonne instrument at FSU and augment
its research capabilities by upgrading its focal plane detectors and developing
a new Silicon detector array, in parallel at Louisiana State University (LSU),
for efficient spectroscopy of unbound resonances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
properties of un-bound nuclear states, or resonances, have become a focal point
of present day nuclear science as they present the doorway through which stars
and stellar explosions build up the elements and release energy. The LSU/FSU
collaboration previously developed the Array for Nuclear Astrophysics and
Structure with Exotic Beams (ANASEN) for high-efficiency studies of such
reactions using beams of radioactive nuclei. A new opportunity for advancing our
understanding of nuclear reactions with astrophysical importance stems from the
unique combination of high-precision spectroscopy performed with the SPS with
the existing program of high-sensitivity studies with radioactive beams
currently being performed with ANASEN.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed SPS
system also creates an important discovery potential for the physics of exotic
nuclear states, studied through a systematic investigation of particle orbitals
beyond the binding limit. The interaction of nuclear orbits across shell
closures is of importance to the physics of exotic nuclei at the limits of
binding. The modification of nuclear properties through the presence of extended
wavefunctions will be studied through a detailed spectroscopy of un-bound
resonances, studying the presence of the Super-radiance mechanism in the
presence of competing particle-decay channels. Again, the research at the SPS is
not only complementary, but important to current and future studies with
radioactive beams at FSU and the future Facility for Rare isotope Beams
(FRIB).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed program around the SPS is a
complementary effort and aims to address a lack of experimental opportunities
with stable nuclear beams within the U.S. scientific program. Operated by a
collaboration of two vibrant research groups, the SPS has the potential to
become a national resource in the education of the next generation of
scientists.