* 1429015
* Portable Multi-Channel Intensity Interferometer
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Elliott Horch, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

In the continual effort to obtain better images of objects in the universe, the
emphasis has generally been centered on orbiting observatories or ever-larger
ground-based facilities with laser correction of atmospheric turbulence. Both
are expensive endeavors with physical limitations. A quite different approach,
intensity interferometry, has a significant history in radio astronomy, but was
last seriously used for the optical regime in the 1970's using the simple
detectors available at the time. Dr. E. Horch of Southern Connecticut State
University (SCSU) has recognized that today's very sensitive, extremely fast
solid-state detectors motivates that the technique be re-examined, as it would
offer the possibility of obtaining separations of orbiting binary stars, stellar
diameters, and even complete stellar images using a small array of inexpensive,
modest-sized telescopes and commercially available instrumentation. Indeed, the
SCSU project is being promoted as an activity well-suited to student involvement
at a small undergraduate university.

Intensity interferometry for astronomy utilizes the Bose-Einstein correlation of
bosons (and therefore photons) to provide information on the angular size of the
radiating source. For telescopes with somewhat less than 1-m aperture
distributed over the SCSU campus, Dr. Horch predicts that an angular resolution
of 0.1 milliarcseconds can be achieved down to a visual magnitude of ~3.5,
allowing detailed inspection of about 200 stars. For comparison, the Sun moved
to a distance that yields this apparent magnitude would have an angular diameter
of 2 milliarcseconds. Moreover, the effect can be monitored in several wavebands
simultaneously through the use of Single Photon Avalanche Diode (SPAD) arrays
that have quantum efficiencies near 0.5 and time response of ~0.1 nanoseconds,
and the data recorded using GPS technology.

Funding for the development of a modern two-telescope prototype of an intensity
interferometer array for the optical is being provided by NSF's Division of
Astronomical Sciences through its participation in the Major Research
Instrumentation program.