* 1429971
* Belmont Forum - European Joint Programming Initiative Collaborative Research: Sustainable Management of Agro-ecological Resources for Tribal Societies
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Brent Sipes, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,894.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and The Joint Research Programming Initiative on
Agriculture, Food Security and Climate Change (FACCE-JPI). The Belmont Forum is
a high level group of the world?s major and emerging funders of global
environmental change research and international science councils. It aims to
accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. This group developed a funding framework to support
multilateral research projects that address global challenges in ways that are
beyond the capacity of national or bilateral activities. Each partner country
provides funding for their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need
for funds to cross international borders. This approach facilitates effective
leveraging of national resources to support excellent research on topics of
global relevance best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that
global challenges need global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together
the Belmont Forum and JPI-FACCE have provided support for research projects that
seek to deliver knowledge needed for action to mitigate and adapt to detrimental
environmental change and extreme hazardous events that relate to food security
and land use change. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to
cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that bring together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve
soil and water resource management to help increase agricultural productivity in
rural areas. The project will investigate different agriculture techniques and
technologies that can help make agricultural production systems that are
resilient to environmental changes and provide rural farmers with tools for
self-reliance. This project seeks to investigate novel ways to increase farmer
access to agricultural technologies and information; to link farmers to markets
and promote the efficient flow of goods and services through strengthened value
chains; and to create a framework for other areas to adopt resilient solutions
for food security and land use management.