* 1429155
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogenic, Aberration-Corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Advanced Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Melissa Hines, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,698,364.00

Nontechnical: This award supports the acquisition of a first-of-its-kind
electron microscope that allows materials to be studied in their natural
environment using an electron beam that can be focused down to a subatomic spot,
producing three-dimensional images of their structure and chemistry. While
traditional electron microscope studies are limited to only materials that can
survive in a hard vacuum comparable to that of outer space, this new instrument
will, for the first time, allow researchers to take snapshots of both solids and
liquids, and more importantly see the processes that occur at interfaces between
solids and liquids stabilized by snap freezing. Understanding such interfaces
has a wide-ranging impact, from enabling scientists and engineers to design more
durable batteries, more efficient catalysts for automotive fuel cells, to better
retain nutrients in soil. To meet the huge demand for this capability both
across campus, and also from industries and universities across the country,
this instrument will be available as part of Cornell Center for Materials
Research (CCMR) to researchers and students across campus as well as from other
universities, industry and national labs. The microscope will also provide
hands-on research opportunities for undergraduates, particularly under-
represented minorities and women as part of the CCMR Research Experience for
Undergraduates program, offer middle school girls the opportunity to experience
the excitement of science as part of the Expanding Your Horizons program, and
support K-12 teachers development through CCMR's Research Experience for
Teachers program, and through MicroWorld, a microscopy-based activity that will
be adapted to meet the challenges of the Next Generation Science Standards. This
instrument will have broad impacts on science research and training by providing
unique characterization capabilities of materials and devices and by educating a
new generation of electron microscopists, which will lead to major scientific
and technical advances in broad areas of research that are critical to the
fulfillment of the nation?s research agenda, and the maintenance of the
country's competitive position in critically important fields of science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Recent advances in
electron microscopy design have opened a new era of atomic resolution imaging
and spectroscopy inside solids. Liquid/solid interfaces have yet to be imaged at
high spatial resolution, but play a critical role in a range of biological,
chemical and physical processes from catalysis to electrochemical energy storage
to the formation of biominerals. With the ability to study liquids snap-frozen
in a vitreous state, this cryo-STEM, combining the low-vibration cryo-stages
from biology with the resolution-enhancing aberration-correctors from materials
science, will enable presently unfeasible structural and spectroscopic studies
of electrode/electrolyte interfaces in batteries and fuel cells, organic/mineral
interfaces in breast cancer tumors and calcified aortic valves, and
liquid/mineral complexes in soils. More generally, this class of "hard/soft"
interfaces between minerals and liquids or soft tissue has not been explored at
high spatial resolution, as the methods for studying the "hard" and "soft"
components have been incompatible. Operating at cryogenic temperatures will also
allow users to gain unprecedented insights into the macromolecular organization
of cellular environments at nanometer resolution and to access a new range of
emergent electronic states and phases in artificially engineered materials and
strongly-correlated systems. With the ability to capture the early stages of
nucleation at interfaces, long unanswered questions in fields across multiple
disciplines from biomineralization to energy conversion and storage, complex
electronic materials and carbon sequestration using soils can be addressed.