* 1429794
* MRI:  Development of a high precision ion microscope for geosciences applications
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kevin McKeegan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,696,316.00

The funding of this proposal will support the development of a new high-
resolution, high-sensitivity ion microscope to serve as the prime instrument of
the UCLA/NSF national, multi-user facility for secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS) research in the geosciences. The UCLA laboratory has served as a world-
class facility for in situ microscale isotopic analyses of geologic materials
for 18 years. The Principal Investigators will continue their programs of
research training for graduate students (both at UCLA and elsewhere) and young
postdoctoral scholars. In addition, they will continue their popular and
effective outreach and inreach workshops for SIMS training of the next
generation of geoscientists. The Principal Investigators and UCLA scientists and
students continue to be involved in synergistic activities both locally and
nationally, including professional activities and K-12 education and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research tool of the UCLA National
Ion Microprobe Facility has been the CAMECA ims 1270, the first commercial
large-radius SIMS built by CAMECA instruments in consultation with UCLA
scientists 23 years ago. Although the ims 1270 has been upgraded over the years,
it is no longer state-of-the-art, and in several important research areas the
ability to innovate and to undertake new types of investigations is limited by
the instrument's technical capabilities. The PIs propose to partner with two
instrument manufacturers (CAMECA, Oregon Physics) to develop a new ion
microscope that will have (1) high brightness ion sources, (2) improved lateral
spatial resolution, (3) improved mass resolving power, (4) improved throughput
speed and sample capacity, (5) improved detector sensitivity and linearity
leading to higher precision and accuracy in isotopic analyses, and (6) improved
reliability. Although this development will be done cooperatively with two
commercial entities, UCLA scientists and engineers will accomplish the overall
design and implementation.