* 1429910
* EAGER: Automatically Generating Formal Human-Computer Interface Designs From Task Analytic Models
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Matthew Bolton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,976.00

The concurrent nature of human-computer interaction (HCI) can result in
situations unanticipated by designers. Usability may not always be properly
maintained or human operators may not be able to complete the task goals that a
system was designed to support. This can result in poor adoption of the system,
decreased productivity with its use, or unsafe operating conditions.
Mathematical tools and techniques called "formal methods" exist for modeling and
providing proof-based evaluations of different elements of HCI including the
human-computer interface, the human operator's task analytic behavior, and
usability. Unfortunately, these approaches require the creation of formal models
of interface designs, something that is non-standard practice and prone to
modeling error. This project will show that a formal-methods approach can be
used to automatically generate formal human-computer interface designs that are
guaranteed to adhere to usability properties and to support human operator
tasks. Specifically, a system that uses the L* machine learning algorithm will
be created that will generate formal interface designs using task analytic
behavior models and formal representations of usability properties.

The researchers will implement an interface generation system, test its
performance with a suite of benchmark examples, and evaluate its ability to
generate an interface for a realistic application. To implement the generator,
the researchers will first construct an oracle system capable of accepting or
rejecting interface state transition sequences based on analyst-specified task
models and usability properties. This oracle system will be connected to an
implementation of the L* algorithm that will progressively learn a formal
interface model by observing how generated sequences of interface state
transitions are accepted or rejected by the oracle. Artificial test cases that
exploit the different features of the system will be used to generate interface
designs, and formal verification will be used to check that the designs exhibit
the intended properties. The system will be used to generate the human-computer
interface for programming a patient controlled analgesia pump, a medical device
that automatically delivers pain medication to patients intravenously. The
generated interface will then be compared against the formal interface design
standard that exists for these devices.

The automatic generation of human-computer interface designs from task analytic
models and usability properties constitutes a novel approach to user-centered
design. By using this method in the creation of interfaces, designs will be
guaranteed to always exhibit certain properties. This will potentially help
ensure that designs will be accepted by users, improve the associated system's
efficiency, and facilitate safer operation. The formal representation of user
interfaces that result from the implementation of this method will also permit
HCI designers to pursue formal analysis and verification of other interface
properties, and will facilitate the automated generation of test cases for
usability verification and certification purposes.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research has the potential to significantly change
the way human-computer interfaces are designed. By guaranteeing that generated
interfaces are always usable, this research could improve the usability and
safety of user interfaces across many domains. The performance guarantees of the
generated designs could allow development and testing times to be reduced, thus
decreasing development and software costs. This work will also enhance the
education and research experience of UIC's diverse engineering student body. The
computational resources acquired for this work will be made available to student
for research projects and study results will be incorporated into the curriculum
of the PI's graduate and undergraduate courses. Project results will be
presented at conferences by student researchers and published with open access
in high quality journals. A dedicated website will be used to rapidly
disseminate results and tools produced during this effort.