* 1429143
* Major Research Instrumentation: Development of Epitaxial Growth System for Few Layer Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Roland Kawakami, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 750,036.00

Non-technical: Semiconductor technology today is used for many applications
including computation, communication, energy conversion, and sensing. Most
semiconductor devices used today are built from near-perfect rigid 3-dimensional
crystalline solids. However, recent work on a new generation of layered
2-dimensional (2D) materials has generated great scientific and technological
interest. These materials consist of single atomic or molecular 2D layers that
can be placed on arbitrary substrates such as flexible plastics, or transparent
glass while offering performance that is comparable to more expensive electronic
materials. 2D semiconductors could have significant impact on technology by
enabling low cost flexible and transparent electronics and optoelectronics. They
could also enable lower power computation and biological and chemical sensors.
This project will enable the development of unique equipment and techniques for
synthesis of these 2D semiconductor materials. The material synthesis techniques
developed would help the electronics industry as well as equipment
manufacturers. The project will help to educate several graduate students and
researchers on the details of developing a new growth system, new tools for in
situ characterization, and the broad applications and science of 2D materials.
The research team will organize annual workshops on 2D layered material epitaxy
where researchers from other universities will be invited to share their
experiences on development of growth systems for 2D semiconductors, and also
share information about the new tools developed under this MRI
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: One of the main challenges in the area of
2D semiconductor research today is the synthesis of electronic grade material.
This activity directly addresses the most important challenge by attempting to
develop a dedicated molecular beam epitaxial growth system for the synthesis of
2D layered materials. Since the growth and characterization methods needed for
2D materials are quite different from those of 3D crystals, this system will be
unique in having a suite of synthesis and characterization capabilities. The MBE
system will be specifically developed to help understand and control the complex
chemistry and physics of the 2D metal-dichalcogenide epitaxy process. The
research team will build upon early work and focus on the synthesis of 2D
(monolayer) materials and complex heterostructures by MBE. In collaboration with
an instrument manufacturer, a variety of source materials and source types to
develop a broad set of technology solutions for growth of 2D layered
semiconductors will be developed. The project will investigate in situ real time
monitoring and feedback during growth, to enable automatic growth of arbitrary
single layers and heterostructures. The ultimate aim is to develop a robust,
reproducible MBE-based growth methodology appropriate for further research
(electronic/optical properties and device development), as well as future
commercialization.