* 1429718
* MRI: Development of a High-Resolution Gamma Ray Spectrometer for Time Resolved Temperature Measurements of Confined Positronium.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 459,453.00

Broad significance. &lt;br/&gt;Positronium is an exotic matter-antimatter atom
composed of an electron bound to its antiparticle, the positron. Scientists at
the University of California Riverside will develop a new type of instrument
that will measure the particles of light (photons) that are emitted by the
positronium. The instrument (spectrometer) will have capabilities beyond those
commercially available and will allow scientists to measure the temperature of
large bursts of positronium atoms as a function of time. The new spectrometer
will be the enabling technology leading to the production and observation of a
dense gas of cold positronium in the "Bose-Einstein condensed state". This
unusual state of matter will be a concentrated energy source which may lead to a
variety of applications, including a new type of laser. The spectrometer will be
used in a variety of applications in collaboration with scientists from around
the world who need to measure radiation damage on short times scales, obtain
information about the structure of materials, and measure the densities and
temperatures of plasmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument is a high angular resolution, multi-detector
two-gamma annihilation angular correlation spectrometer that will measure the
velocity distribution of positronium atoms annihilating in the singlet state.
The individual detectors will have time and double-pulse resolutions much less
than the ~100 ns annihilation lifetime of positronium, enabling the efficient
measurement of the temperature and thermalization rates of large bursts of
positronium atoms as a function of time after their formation in micro-cavities
and porous materials. The primary function of the proposed instrument will be to
measure the amplitude of the low momentum component of a dense positronium gas
as it undergoes a phase transition into the Bose-Einstein condensed (BEC) state.
The use of the penetrating annihilation gamma radiation as a diagnostic allows
external access to the momentum profiles of annihilating electron-positron pairs
deep within the apparatus required for these experiments. The measurements will
be unaffected by local conditions in the positronium-forming target, such as
wall or inter-particle interactions, which would not be the case for optical
spectroscopy. The combined capabilities of the proposed spectrometer will
benefit other positronium applications using dense cold positronium not related
to the BEC. In particular, measuring the thermalization rates of positronium
would aid in the positronium characterization of porous materials such as
zeolites and low-k dielectrics, and the ability to measure low momentum
annihilations at short time scales may be useful for evaluating damage to
materials used in fusion reactors.