* 1429620
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometer for research and undergraduate research training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Colin Robins, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 279,838.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award provides for the acquisition of
geochemical instrumentation which will serve faculty and undergraduate student
needs within the Claremont University Consortium (CUC), providing rapid and
cost-efficient instrumentation to analyze chemical composition in a wide range
of rock, soil, sediment, seawater, and biological materials. This
instrumentation will substantially accelerate activities within the research
programs of faculty as well as foster interdisciplinary collaboration. The ICP-
OES will expand the analytical facilities of the Environmental Science, Biology,
Chemistry, and Geology programs and will strengthen collaborative teaching and
research among the students and faculty in diverse disciplines from separate
institutions. Acquisition of the instrumentation will directly serve a diverse
group of undergraduate STEM and non-science majors through integrated lab work
in courses and individual student research training. In-house instrumentation
will greatly enhance students? ability to directly and clearly connect first-
hand scientific training and research to real-world concerns with scientific,
environmental, and/or social benefits. The instrument will be housed at the W.M.
Keck Science Department of Claremont McKenna, Pitzer, and Scripps Colleges, and
faculty at each of the five Claremont Colleges (including Harvey Mudd and
Pomona) will use the complete analytical system to train an economically and
socially diverse group of STEM and non-science undergraduates on analytical
instrumentation, data acquisition, processing, and interpretation. Training in
geochemical analysis will help foster success for graduates who go on to work in
industry or conduct graduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
award funds the acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission
Spectroscopy (ICP-OES) instrument, coupled to a laser ablation (LA) inlet system
and microwave digester. The LA-ICP-OES and microwave digester will allow
researchers to generate paleo-reconstructions of seawater temperature and
elemental cycling from the skeletons of long-lived organisms to understand
variability within our climate and ocean systems, trace the progression of
ancient mining and human movements with trace element time series derived from
speleothems and fossil teeth, constrain the compositional suitability of barite
in soils for Ar/Ar geochronology to help generate a new partial chronology for
Pliocene-Holocene climate records in the desert Southwest, analyze feldspar and
hornblende to unravel crystal growth stages and mineral responses to changing
magmatic and metamorphic conditions and in analyses to understand cycling of
nutrients during the Cambrian explosion. Additional users will also incorporate
analyses by ICP-OES into their research and teaching programs. Academically, the
instrumentation will be used to measure soil chemical compositions in the core
course required of all non-science environmental analysis majors and minors at
Claremont, and in an upper division soil science course. Senior thesis students
and upper level science students at all five CUC colleges will use the
instrumentation to measure heavy metals in a variety of materials to determine
product origins and interpret potential consumer health impacts. Similarly, the
instrumentation will support a pilot group-thesis project to measure suspended
sediments in rivers in Costa Rica. Thus, this ICP-OES will provide hands-on
undergraduate training through both structured laboratory activities and
original student-faculty research.