* 1429952
* Collaborative Research: Inventories of Primary Productivity by In-situ Mass Spectrometry in the Upper Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Strawn Toler, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2017
* USD 149,986.00

Production of organic matter from carbon dioxide (specifically by photosynthetic
organisms) and respiration of organic matter back to carbon dioxide (by a wide
variety of organisms, including photosynthesizers) are very nearly in balance
over much of the ocean -- but not quite. In some regions remote from land, more
carbon is produced through photosynthesis than is respired back to carbon
dioxide; in others, just the opposite is true. Figuring out which is exceedingly
important because in regions where photosynthesis exceeds respiration, there is
a net production of food for marine life as well as a net removal of carbon
dioxide (a powerful greenhouse gas) from the atmosphere. Conversely, oceanic
regions where respiration exceeds photosynthesis are zones of net food
consumption and release of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. In practice, the
problem is that the differences, one way or the other, are so small that it is
difficult to distinguish between the measurements themselves and noise (that is,
scatter) in the data. Resolution of this problem requires new technology that
can make the necessary measurements with very high precision in the ocean itself
rather than in a bottle of sampled seawater. In this project, the investigators
will attempt to do just that using a sophisticated instrument normally found
only in an analytical laboratory -- a mass spectrometer, a device capable of
making ultra-high-precision measurements of changes in the amount of dissolved
oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other substances associated with photosynthesis and
respiration in the marine water column. The investigators will support graduate
students to participate as integral members of the research team. There will
also be public educational outreach to secondary school students offering them
the opportunity to engage with the project to gain first-hand experience seeing
how the basic sciences can be used to solve oceanographic
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team of investigators will
evaluate one facet of these methodological concerns using in-situ mass
spectrometry to better constrain net community production (NCP). The UMIMS is a
fast-response Underwater Membrane Inlet Mass Spectrometer that can be deployed
in autonomous and remotely-operated vehicles. In this application, UMIMS will be
deployed aboard a SeaSoar tow vehicle to make high resolution vertical sections
of the excess dissolved oxygen (O2) over argon (Ar) budget, a promising measure
of NCP in the surface ocean. Profiles with the UMIMS can provide the capacity to
resolve processes throughout the mixed-layer and euphotic zone that affect the
NCP budget. In the near term, the team will utilize the capabilities of the
UMIMS to make accurate and simultaneous mixed layer profiles of O2 and Ar and
compare measurements of NCP from the UMIMS with measurements from the
conventional shipboard O2/Ar budget from underway seawater. These comparisons
will be used to determine the limitations of both methods and the degree to
which they can resolve the ambient physical processes leading to non-stationary
exchange. In the long term, the researchers expect to make the technological and
methodological advances necessary to deploy the UMIMS on Lagrangian floats and
sea gliders. As such, this project is expected to make a significant step toward
measuring near-continuous time and space series observations of the oceanic
metabolic balance and the biological pump, similar to the way Argo floats
measure temperature and salinity today.