* 1429454
* MRI Consortium: Development of a Time Projection Chamber to Measure Neutrino Interactions in the LAr1 Near Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bonnie Fleming, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2019
* USD 564,500.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model has
succeeded in classifying all of the elementary particles known into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
has been recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions, for example why there is a preponderance of matter
over antimatter in the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the primary areas
to search for answers to such open questions about the universe, how it came to
be and why it is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of
neutrinos and to use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of
science beyond the Standard Model. Neutrinos are elementary particles that
barely interact with anything else in the universe. They have no electric charge
and were once thought to be massless. Moreover, the Standard Model predicted
that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were
distinguishable through the different interactions that they would undergo
whenever they would interact with matter. But recent measurements have totally
changed our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and
because they do, they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed
measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino measurements,
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard
Model. There have also been possible hints in various experiments of new types
of neutrinos (called sterile neutrinos), and building the critical instruments
to clarify such "hints" is one of the main thrusts of the work in this
project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The work proposed here is to
develop a Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LAr TPC) for the LAr1-ND
Experiment. This detector technique is powerful in that it allows the
experimenter to distinguish between electrons and photons, important for the
understanding of the character of neutrino interactions and neutrino
oscillations. At Fermilab, the LAr1-ND experiment, along with a companion
experiment called MicroBooNE, should significantly increase the physics reach
toward answering the important question of whether hypothesized "sterile"
neutrinos exist and resolving the anomalies in recent neutrino
experiments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research program will
serve as an invaluable proving ground for LAr TPC technology and in the
reconstruction and analysis techniques that will be needed to make future
experiments a success. The construction effort at the three collaborating
institutions Yale, Syracuse and Chicago will enable students and postdocs at
each institution to participate and acquire invaluable hands-on experience with
advanced detector technology that is a vital component of training scientists in
the field of high-energy physics.