* 1429710
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP) Solid-State NMR Instrument with Unprecedented Sensitivity for Studies of Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Bradley Chmelka, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,171,588.00

Nontechnical: Recently developed dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy instrumentation provides new opportunities
to measure the compositions and structures of technologically important solid-
state materials at the level of their atoms. Such capabilities yield new
insights that are central to the design, development, and engineering of novel
solid-state materials with promise for far-reaching societal or industrial
impacts. Specific materials and applications under investigation include high-
performance and low-carbon-footprint cements, catalysts for converting biofuels
and natural gas to high-value liquid products, organic photovoltaic thin films
and nanoscale semiconductors for solar energy conversion, battery and fuel cell
materials for electrochemical energy generation and storage, and bio-inorganic
solids for sustainable structural materials. Use and understanding of state-of-
the-art DNP-NMR instrumentation by students contribute to their education and
training across the chemical, physical, materials, and biological sciences. The
analyses and applications provide interdisciplinary training that prepares
students to address continually-changing energy, environmental, and other needs
of society in the broadest of terms. Independent or collaborative access to the
integrated DNP-NMR spectrometer by researchers at other regional, national, and
international universities extend user base and benefits of the instrument
beyond UCSB, in particular to regional partner groups at UC Berkeley, UC Irvine,
UCLA, UC Riverside, and Cal Poly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The DNP-NMR
instrumentation provides an unprecedented combination of both high signal
sensitivity and high spectral resolution for measuring molecular surface species
that govern the functions of materials for a broad range of energy, structural,
and environmental applications. Among the critical problems and challenges to
improving the properties of such materials is the insufficient sensitivity of
conventional methods, including NMR, especially for the detection of dilute or
surface species. Integrated DNP-NMR measurements provide dramatic NMR signal
enhancements of 2 orders of magnitude, resulting in time savings of up to 4
orders of magnitude over that achievable with previous state-of-the-art
capabilities. The DNP-NMR instrument represents a breakthrough in molecular
characterization that opens new opportunities to characterize and understand
heterogeneous functional solids. The scope and goals of the research notably
include materials with industrially relevant compositions, synthesized under
industrially relevant conditions, and/or materials with low-surface areas or
dilute or low-natural abundance species (e.g., 13C, 15N, 29Si, 77Se). The
resulting DNP-NMR spectra and analyses are without precedent in the technical
literature and enable, for the first time, the molecular-level characterization
of complicated compositions and structures of material surfaces that till now
have been entirely infeasible by conventional high-field NMR spectroscopy. Such
solid-state DNP-NMR capabilities are expected to enable broad and transformative
advancements in the materials and chemical sciences and become a standard for
molecular characterization of complicated heterogeneous materials, whose surface
functionalities are crucial to their properties, but whose molecular origins
have previously been exceedingly challenging to establish.