* 1429232
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope for In Situ Microscopy Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Tolou Shokuhfar, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

Non Technical: In order to address many challenges in energy, health, climate
change, and nanotechnology, scientists need to study the underlying chemical or
physical reactions at scales down to a few atoms. Fortunately with the
advancement of electron microscopy techniques, it is now possible to visualize
such atomic or subatomic scales in specimens with great accuracy. On the other
hand, the development of micro and nano fabrication techniques has allowed the
use of specialty-made specimen holders that enable the application of liquid/gas
or electrical/mechanical fields in the electron microscopes for real time
monitoring (or in situ studies). In this project, a high-resolution transmission
electron microscope will be combined with advanced in situ specimen holders.
This combination allows the study of materials that are relevant to rechargeable
batteries, medical sciences, small-scale electronics, and energy technologies.
The new instrument is located in a shared user facility allowing full access to
on-campus and off-campus researchers. New courses and hands-on training
workshops are planned to educate the graduate and undergraduate students about
the newest developments in the field of electron microscopy and its applications
for materials analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project
seeks funding for the acquisition of a high resolution transmission electron
microscope (HRTEM) for in situ electron microscopy of materials under electrical
field, mechanical loading, electrochemical conditions, high temperatures, and
liquid/gas environments. This instrument substantially impacts the research
projects that are national priorities such as energy storage, nanomaterials
synthesis, biomineralization, photovoltaics, graphene, and nanoelectronics.
Examples of the research projects that can be enabled with the use of the HRTEM
are: (1) study of lithiation/sodiation reactions in cathodes and anodes; (2)
biomineralization and crystallization processes in ferritin particles; (3) phase
transitions and resistive switching in strongly-correlated materials; (4)
mechanical/electrical probing of heterojunctions; and (5) mixing state
mechanisms of aerosol nanoparticles. In addition, the new TEM substantially
enhances the interdisciplinary research and teaching efforts carried out by
Michigan Tech faculty and students. Furthermore, this instrument in conjunction
with our in-situ TEM holder capabilities would place Michigan Tech at the
forefront of in situ high-resolution electron microcopy in the Northern Midwest
region. The undergraduate and graduate students gain hands-on training on
advanced imaging techniques and spectroscopy mapping practices as part of the
new microscopy courses. To engage college/precollege students in scientifically
stimulating ideas related to electron microscopy, several outreach activities
for underrepresented and community college undergraduate students are planned.