* 1429735
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Cryoprobe for a 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Vy Dong, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 272,812.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
James Nowick from the University of California Irvine and colleagues Vy Dong and
Christopher Vanderwal will acquire a cryoprobe (broad band and fluorine observe,
BBFO) that will be installed on a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer. This attachment will
greatly increase the sensitivity of the spectrometer at a fraction of the cost
of new spectrometer and will allow research in a variety of fields such as those
that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well
as the study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research by postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students at the University
of California at Irvine and will also impact outreach activities involving K-12
programs that target schools with predominantly minority
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) developing mechanisms
and metal-catalyzed methods; (b) catalytic hydroacylation; (c) designing
molecules and materials that capture carbon monoxide; (d) synthesizing linked
aza-phenanthrenes; (e) developing new approaches for stereoselective formation
of quaternary carbon stereocenters and fragment coupling; (f) synthesizing
batrachotoxin and its analogues; and (g) chemical synthesis of complex bioactive
natural products.