* 1429216
* Lookit: Online interface for large-scale developmental studies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Laura Schulz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 07/31/2017
* USD 369,999.00

Studies of how infants learn and how their cognitive abilities change across
development are important endeavors being undertaken at many universities across
the country. This research depends largely on parents who have the time and
resources to travel with their children to campus research laboratories to
volunteer to participate in studies. These volunteer parents are invaluable
contributors to research, however they represent only a small segment of
society. Many families have dual-earner parents, lack easy transportation to
campuses, or live far away from any research university, limiting their
opportunities to participate in studies. This limits the size of the pool of
volunteers and also the generalizability of the research results. The goal of
this research project is to develop a tool for online testing that can take
place in infants' homes at parents' convenience and to test the tool to ensure
that results commonly found in laboratory studies can be replicated through
online testing.

The online laboratory that Dr. Schulz and her research team propose to develop
will be accessed through a website called "Lookit". The site will allow families
all over the world to participate in scientific research about cognitive
development. Families will access Lookit through their web browser and can
choose among available 5-10 minute studies. Parents who choose to participate
will give verbal authorization via webcam and their children's responses
(ranging from looking behavior to pointing to verbal responses) will be
recorded. At the end of the study, parents can choose whether to transmit the
video files to a secure server in the MIT Early Childhood Cognition Lab. Lookit
will thus enable large-scale participation. The web platform will be validated
by replicating six established developmental findings children 4 months through
5 years of age. Once validated, the tool will be made generally available to the
cognitive development research community.

Lookit will reduce many traditional barriers to research, including the
difficulty of running studies involving large sample sizes, narrow age ranges,
special populations, and socioeconomically diverse populations. Lookit will also
provide a new outlet for STEM education and outreach: a resource page will
provide information about cognitive development in a format accessible to the
layperson.