* 1429259
* MRI: Acquisition of a next-generation sequencing instrument for interdisciplinary research in the NC Museum of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Julie Urban, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 190,708.00

This project describes the acquisition of a next-generation sequencing
instrument (Illumina MiSeq) to expand the research and outreach capabilities of
researchers in the new wing of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural
Sciences (NCSM), the Nature Research Center (NRC). DNA sequencing technologies
have advanced rapidly in the last decade, and this MiSeq instrument allows
researchers to obtain many DNA sequences simultaneously. This MiSeq instrument
will facilitate the two-fold mission of the NRC?s Genomics & Microbiology
Laboratory (G&M Lab) to: 1) conduct primary research in the natural sciences
that serves to discover and document biological diversity, and 2) bring research
scientists and their work into the public eye, to better prepare science
educators and students, and inspire a new generation of scientists. This
instrument will serve the recently expanded user community of museum and
visiting researchers studying genomics, systematics, biodiversity, conservation,
ecology and evolution of amphibians, reptiles, insects, primates, and bacteria
in North Carolina and across the world. This research and inclusive training
opportunities will engage faculty, museum curators and visiting scientists as
well as postdocs and students at nearby universities such as North Carolina
Central University, which as an historically black college/university serving a
large minority community. The MiSeq instrument will provide a means for Museum
visitors and students to experience next-generation sequencing technology
affecting their daily lives.

This instrument will be used by NSF and NIH-funded investigators, and other
researchers to increase the scope and depth of current projects, and will allow
for new genetic dimensions to be added to ongoing projects. Furthermore, this
instrument will provide researchers and students with hands-on experience with
state-of-the-art DNA sequencing, bioinformatic analysis and data interpretation.
Research projects using the MiSeq include 1) using primate genomics to link
genotype to phenotype through gene expression analyses and skin microbiome
studies, 2) investigating planthopper relationships and their multiple
endosymbionts, 3) conducting phylogenomic studies of threatened Asian
amphibians, and 4) conservation genetics of hatchery augmented fishes.
Techniques include sequencing the 16S ribosomal RNA region from microbes on
human and non-human primate skin, conducting gene expression analysis from
animal blood and tissue, sequencing whole bacterial genomes, conducting RADseq
for population level analyses, and sequencing targeted genetic loci. These
research and training activities will foster synergistic activities in research,
training and education among diverse areas of scientific study in the NCSM.
Additionally, many of the projects using this DNA sequencing instrument have
Citizen Science components where the public participates in the acquisition
and/or analysis of data. Offering cutting-edge research opportunities made
possible using state-of-the-art instrumentation such as this sequencing
instrument is critical to broadening diversity and competitiveness in the
natural sciences in North Carolina and the nation.