* 1429058
* MRI: Acquisition of Geophysical Instruments for Archaeological Research and Student Training at the University of Southern Indiana
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Michael Strezewski, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 29,877.00

Geophysical instruments are routinely used in archaeological research to measure
different properties of the soil. These instruments can "see" beneath the
surface without excavation or disturbance to the site and are used in
archaeology for locating intact deposits, revealing information about site
organization, and aiding in the placement of excavation units. The University of
Southern Indiana (USI) will utilize NSF-MRI funds to purchase a resistivity
meter, which is one of most common methods of geophysical prospection used in
the Midwest. This instrument will significantly add to the university's ability
to produce high quality research and well-trained and employable
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator is currently engaged
in a number of research projects that will be greatly facilitated by the
acquisition of this instrument. Primary among these is a planned multi-year
program of research at Mann, a pre-contact Native American site, dating to A.D.
100-500. Mann is, without a doubt, the most significant site of this time period
in the state of Indiana and one of the most important in the midcontinent as a
whole. The site is remarkable for its sheer size (430 acres) and the presence of
many large earthen mounds. However, the singularly distinctive characteristic of
the Mann site is the presence of dense and widespread habitation areas in
association with large-scale earthwork construction, a combination of traits not
seen elsewhere in the Middle Woodland. Despite the site's unique character,
there has been relatively little archaeological research performed at Mann.
Recently, the State of Indiana has acquired portions of the site with the goal
of preservation in mind. Now that this window of opportunity has opened up, USI
is ready to undertake much-needed research at this important site. Geophysical
survey at Mann will allow the State to better develop plans for the
interpretation and preservation of the site and will assist in developing future
land acquisition priorities should the opportunity arise for the purchase of
additional parcels. Finally, teis instrument will also be integrated into the
teaching/training of USI's undergraduate students. These courses will give
anthropology students hands-on experience with cutting-edge instruments used in
archaeology and prepare them for future work in the field. Results of the
research will be made available to the public through online distribution of the
resulting data and reports, and a series of public lectures geared toward a lay
audience.