* 1429114
* Understanding the Communicative and Social Processes of Engineering Ethics in Diverse Design Teams
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* William Oakes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 01/31/2018
* USD 300,709.00

Within engineering design teams, engineering educators are concerned not only
with how individual students develop ethically, but also how ethical decision-
making emerges during team interactions and becomes integrated in design
solutions. These ethical decisions often do not present themselves as
traditional dilemmas, but are issues that are confronted in the everyday process
of design, and are influenced by the cultural and disciplinary backgrounds of
the members and the ethical climates of the team and the organization. This
project seeks to understand how everyday ethical decision-making is integrated
in the processes and interactions of diverse engineering design team and their
recognition of the long-term design consequences of the solutions they produce.
This study combines social network analysis with structuration theory to examine
the structure of project teams while also examining the institutional and
contextual factors that contribute to team climate, and to the development of
group norms that affect team interactions.

Intellectual Merit: This study builds on prior NSF funded work and a broad
literature from engineering education and the social sciences to address the
compelling issue of ethical awareness and ethical reasoning within diverse
design teams. Design is a central function of engineering and ethics is often
learned within undergraduate design courses where many ethical decisions are
made through smaller more frequent design decisions and involve interactions
with team members. This project examines how everyday ethical decision-making is
integrated systematically in the design processes and interactions of diverse
design teams. The well-qualified research team will guide the study with an
ambitious yet realistic research strategies, clear goals and objectives, and
strong, multi-disciplinary evaluation and dissemination plans. Broader Impacts:
The findings of this research have potential impacts across engineering
education, as well as society. Today's technology provides the engineering
community with an enormous opportunity to positively impact society if applied
appropriately. Today's global society adds complexity to the social and ethical
issues that need to be addressed by designers and professionals as technology is
applied to address needs. Better understanding the development of ethical
reasoning within diverse design teams as they make design decisions can greatly
enhance the way engineers and other technical professionals learn key attributes
called for by ABET, the NAE's Engineer of 2020, and industry stakeholders. The
findings of this study can be used to inform curriculum, assessment, and
pedagogical strategies that enable educators to guide students' ethical
development across engineering. The project also introduces cross-disciplinary
research methods from communication into engineering education.