* 1429526
* MRI: Development: A Distributed Visual Analytics Sandbox for High Volume Data Streams
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ryan Benton, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2019
* USD 515,998.00

This project, designing and developing an instrument that can support visual
analytics on high volume, high velocity data streams, aims to offer an easy to
use software interface for researchers to develop visual analytics applications
that need a combination of stream processing, deep analytics, and visualization
capabilities. The instrument provides the computational capacity and tight
interconnection of systems to handle both real-time in-memory stream system
processing and complex analytics, along with dedicated visualization processing.
The instrument under development:&lt;br/&gt;- Offers a customized computational
system design expected to offer up to an order of magnitude performance over
existing systems offered by commercial hardware vendors of business intelligent
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;- Advances knowledge and understanding in building highly-
scalable big data platforms for decision makers or deals with big data generated
from internet of things, and dynamic social networks that represent
transportation routes, paths of disease outbreaks, social community networks,
financial transactions, and recommendation graphs.&lt;br/&gt;- Supports data
mining and analytical needs of the Center for Visual and Decision Informatics
(CVDI) and specific research projects to develop visual techniques on sensor
data streams, and builds upon the experimental cloud infrastructure established
in the Center for Advanced Computing Studies (CACS) Lab for InterNet Computing
(LINC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The real-time stream processing and analytics
system comprises tightly interconnected processors with Remote Memory Access
(RDMA) capabilities, low-latency Solid State Drive (SSD) with Infiniband
Interconnect to support distributed in-memory data stream pre-processing, and
analytics. The deep analytics nodes comprise data nodes that can handle
efficient batch processing and the visualization processing node with high-end
graphics cards to support visualization of massive data sets and advanced
visualization venues. Supporting knowledge discovery and decision making
requires a powerful computational infrastructure; without it, visual analytics
on large complex dynamic graphs constructed from networks of sensors, mobile
phones, social networks cannot be realized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
supports applications in many areas such as: disaster response, public safety,
public health, cyber security, ecommerce and financial sectors. GENI (Global
Environment for Network Innovations)-based connectivity to Lousiana's Optical
Network Initiative (LONI) and Internet2 facilitates partnerships with
researchers across other campuses nationwide and the US Ignite Community. The
instrument will serve and be used by students for big data research and
education. Utilizing the Louis Stokes-LA Alliance for Minority Participation
(LS-LAMP), the project also facilitates participation of underrepresented
students, thus increasing more participation in STEM areas. Furthermore, the
instrument enables productivity for many researchers and educators.