* 1429512
* Faculty Development in Space Physics at the University of Minnesota
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Ronald Poling, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,497,250.00

Space scientists are becoming ever more valuable to our society as we rely more
heavily upon technical systems sensitive to conditions in the space environment,
such as global positioning systems and high-speed communications networks.
Communications, navigation, and energy production and distribution are
significantly affected by Space Weather, and the climatology of the near-Earth
space environment. The ability to forecast disturbances which may impact these
technologies hinges upon detailed knowledge and understanding of the connected
Sun-Earth system, comprising the disciplines of solar physics, heliospheric
physics, magnetospheric physics and aeronomy. This project is funded under the
Faculty Development in Space Sciences program, the aim of which is to ensure the
health and vitality of solar and space physics on university teaching faculties.
Through the creation of new tenure-track faculty positions within the
intellectual disciplines that comprise the space sciences, research topics in
solar and space physics will be integrated into basic physics, astronomy,
electrical engineering, geoscience, meteorology, computer science, and applied
mathematics programs, and lead to the development of space physics graduate
programs capable of training the next generation of leaders in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a new tenure-track faculty
position in the School of Physics and Astronomy of the University of Minnesota,
with the purpose of expanding the breadth and depth of the research and teaching
expertise within the Space Physics group. Building on a long history of
innovation and excellence in space physics research and education, the new hire
targets an experimental space scientist to continue and further strengthen the
group?s unique and highly successful national standing in this area. Synergies
enabled by the opening of a new Physics and Nanotechnology building, the
expertise of the space physics technical staff in design and building of space-
based instrumentation, and an experienced machine shop provide a distinct
advantage to the new faculty member in taking on a leadership role in new
programs involving spacecraft, CubeSats, suborbital rockets, or balloons. The
addition of a new junior faculty member in space sciences will allow for more
regular offerings of space physics courses and the development of one or more
new classes, designed to meet the needs of space physics and astrophysics
graduate students, physics majors, astrophysics majors and aerospace engineering
students. In addition to enhancing the training of young researchers entering
the field at this institution, this will also greatly aid the successful, high
quality recruitment of the same. The additional hire will further strengthen and
grow existing partnerships with several departments and institutes and will also
be encouraged to pursue new partnerships broadly with the space sciences
community. The School of Physics and Astronomy has a long history of successful
outreach programs, designed to interest and excite children (and educators)
about physics, to educate the public about interesting research or directly
involve them in research, and to involve high school teachers and undergraduates
in research. All faculty members are expected to participate and contribute to
these programs and the new faculty member will also be encouraged to develop new
activities for relevant programs. Funds are included in the budget for this.
Utilizing several established and successful departmental and institution wide
programs the project will work to ensure a strong focus on increasing diversity
in the recruiting both of students into the program and of the new faculty
member.