* 1429807
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shake Table for Research on Seismic Stability of Rock Masses
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Mary MacLaughlin,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2019
* USD 314,012.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is for the acquisition of a one-
ton capacity shake table to be used predominately for research on the stability
of rock boulders and slopes during seismic loading. As evidenced by the large
number of structures destroyed and the number of people killed and injured
during the Christchurch series of earthquakes, rockfalls and rock slides are
serious potential dangers during earthquakes. The shake table will be used to
investigate the mechanisms causing rock falls and slides with the objectives of
identifying potential hazardous areas and developing methods of mitigating these
hazards. Additionally, the shake table will be used for research on methods of
isolating structures from seismic ground motion through base isolation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one-ton shake table will be acquired. The
shake table will be delivered with the equipment to allow 1-D shaking, but could
be expanded to allow 2-D shaking in the future. A unique feature, designed to
allow data collection involving systems of multiple rock blocks, is a high-speed
side-view video camera synched to the machine control system. Historically, a
significant volume of shake table research has been done in the fields of
structural engineering and structural dynamics, and soil mechanics and (soil)
slope stability; much less has been done using rock or rock-like materials, as
proposed here. Research activities to be enabled by the shake table include: 1)
Response of Blocky Rock Systems to Seismic Loads, 2) Use of Precarious Blocks to
Provide Estimates of Historic Shaking, and 3) Development/Testing of Inexpensive
Infrastructure Base Isolation Systems, among others. The shake table will
significantly enhance the research capabilities of Montana Tech, a primarily
undergraduate institution. Use of the shake table will be incorporated into labs
in two undergraduate engineering courses.