* 1429690
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) for Research to Evaluate Nano-scale Properties of Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Hashim Ali, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 272,360.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will fund the acquisition of an
atomic force microscope (AFM), the sole state-of-the-art AFM device in Northeast
Arkansas. It will be used to support ongoing multi-disciplinary materials
research, education, and training programs at Arkansas State University at
Jonesboro (ASU-J). The AFM device will empower faculty members, researchers, and
students (graduate and undergraduate) of ASU-J to expand their collaborations in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) research, instruction,
and training in characterizing materials for engineering, chemical, and
biological applications. The requested equipment will also assist ASU-J faculty
expand their ongoing outreach activities through internships and training
sessions with local high schools to motivate and recruit underrepresented
student groups into STEM majors.

The requested AFM system will be used in several ongoing research projects in
collecting nano-scale data in the fields of sustainable and alternative paving
materials, the nature of small electromagnetic particles, energy harvesting and
efficient operation of power plants, physiochemical properties of atmospheric
particles relevant to global warming, and semiconductor/photovoltaic materials.
Furthermore, test results obtained from the AFM system will be used to validate
those obtained from mathematical and molecular dynamics simulations. In
particular, the AFM will be used to: (i) evaluate atomic level mechanistic
properties and interfacial strength through nanoindentation, and examine
nanoscale dispersion characteristics of multifunctional asphalts modified with
different additives, (ii) fabricate microfluidic channels for molecular level
identification of biological and plant species, (iii) evaluate physical
properties of aerosol particles in the atmosphere, (iv) test corrosive inner
surface and ash deposits on outer layers of specimens taken from post-boiler
equipment in coal-fired power plants, (v) quantify micro-particle (e.g., toner)
adhesion to flat substrates, (vi) profile and visualize bioinformatic images and
gene expressions toward developing scalable algorithms based upon granular
computing concepts, and (vii) synthesize and characterize optoelectronic
materials and semiconductor devices, for example, solar cells. The outcomes of
this project will assist in building a strong collaborative materials research
group to study novel materials through fundamental science approaches.