* 1429948
* Using an Ecological Framework to Examine Reporting of Abuse During Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sheryl Kubiak, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 359,073.00

The U.S. Department of Justice (2012) estimates that there are between 149,200
and 209,400 incidents of sexual victimization annually in prisons and jails,
incurring an estimated cost of $52 billion. Yet, less than 8% of those
experiencing sexual victimization during incarceration report it to correctional
authorities. This project addresses the question, what are the predictors of
reporting and do they differ based on the reporting mechanism?

The goal of this project is to provide relevant social science evidence that
will inform both legal policies and institutional practices by: 1) assessing the
processes and outcomes associated with reporting externally and pursuing
litigation; 2) identifying and understanding the individual- and system-level
factors that influence prison reporting; and, 3) assessing processes and case
outcomes for those who did report to prison authorities. Data to be analyzed are
from 474 women, and their legal files, involved in a class action suit based
upon experiences of sexual victimization during incarceration. Multiple methods
will be used to understand decisions regarding reporting including the barriers,
consequences, and benefits, including a survey, review/analysis of archival
legal data, case review, and process mapping. The archival review design is
advantageous in that it allows for the collection of victimization information
without re-traumatizing or endangering vulnerable individuals, maximizes
partnerships between social science researchers and legal practitioners, and
uses existing data that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to obtain.
The ecological framework underlying this research incorporates various levels of
social ecology (individual, micro, meso, macro), providing theory that
illuminates individual level behavior, as well as the unique aspects of the
prison system and policy that inform institutional practices. Examining the
processes and outcomes of both internal and external reporting mechanisms can
assist prisons nationally in assessing their own institutional practices toward
sexual victimization, potentially reducing risk and costs.