* 1429267
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) for Multidisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Susan Farhat, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 552,650.00

ABSTRACT

Non-technical

The project involves acquisition of an X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
instrument at Kettering University to support materials research, integration of
research and education, and outreach programs. With the development of new
degree programs at Kettering, new initiatives in innovative materials research
have been launched with participation across disciplines and involving external
industrial and academic partners. The XPS provides much-needed capabilities to
enable the projects to significantly advance their objectives and make important
contributions. On-campus availability of XPS also strengthens integration of
teaching and research, with incorporation of the equipment in classes spanning
physics, chemistry, chemical engineering, electrical engineering, and industrial
engineering. Additionally, this equipment significantly enhances the unique
undergraduate research experience at Kettering. Kettering has a long history of
outreach activities for local youth, in which faculty members open research
laboratories and equipment, including characterization instruments such as XPS,
and create engaging demonstrations that highlight the relevance of such
technologies in everyday life.

Technical

The instrument is a Physical Electronics X-Tool model, designed specifically to
reach a wider audience by adding automatic and easy-to-use features, without
compromising full capabilities to obtain elemental identity and quantification,
chemical states, depth profiles, and chemical surface mapping. The research
activities supported by the XPS equipment are addressing a multitude of
scientific problems across disciplines, including advanced coatings to improve
medical implants, improvement of materials for dentistry and orthopedics,
materials to improve disease treatment and imaging, lightweight materials for
transportation, enhancement of battery technology for electronic vehicles,
development of protective coatings, materials for energy storage to address
increasing energy demand, and membranes to improve biogas production, among
others. While the specific objectives vary by project, general goals and scope
include development of innovative materials and coatings, process
characterization, and tailoring the materials to meet the objectives. The data
from the XPS is evaluated to determine and quantify the links between the
process parameters, the material chemical properties, and the application
performance.