* 1429556
* MRI:  Acquisition of a CNC Micro-Milling Workstation to Enhance Multidisciplinary Research and Teaching at Texas A&amp;M International University and Texas A&amp;M Kingsville
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Sang-Chul Nam, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 171,736.00

PI: Kim, Namwon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1429556&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI: Acquisition of
a CNC Micro-Milling Workstation to Enhance Multidisciplinary Research and
Teaching at Texas A&amp;M International University and Texas A&amp;M
Kingsville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The new capabilities of
the instrument will create an immediate and lasting impact on their ability to
recruit high-quality faculty members. As Villanova hires its next generation of
faculty members, it will be offer access to leading-edge equipment. The emphasis
on nanomaterials fabrication and development necessitates the upgrading of their
experimental facilities to attract leading researchers and educators who can
make an immediate impact as they join this dynamic group. The PI and co-PIs are
all dedicated to improving opportunities and access for under-represented
minorities in engineering and the sciences and two of the principals on this
grant are female STEM faculty members. The five PIs combined are advising 16
graduate students, 7 of whom are women, and are working with 19 undergraduate
students, including 5 women. Bryn Mawr College was established in 1885 as the
first institution in the US to offer Ph.D. degrees to women and the
undergraduate program remains all-female, featuring 1300 women, 26% of whom are
majoring in math or science. The Villanova College of Engineering also features
one of the highest percentages of female students studying engineering, at
almost 1/3 of the engineering school enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The requested workstation will serve as a vehicle to draw
undergraduate and graduate students into multidisciplinary science and
engineering research at TAMIU and TAMUK, which are two main institutions
providing STEM programs to historically underrepresented minority students in
South Texas. The workstation will broaden the capability of manufacturing and
enhance the quality of the undergraduate research opportunities. Specifically,
the new micro-manufacturing equipment will enable students to conduct research
in a variety of emerging research areas, including microfabrication,
microfluidic devices, and bio-micromechanicalelectrical systems (bio-MEMS),
which are relatively new to students in South Texas. The PI and co-PIs are well
trained in the new areas from highly research oriented institutions and they are
all on the frontier of their research fields and very active in publishing and
attending professional conferences to disseminate and share their research
findings. They will also continue to make research experiences available any
time of the year for motivated students by integrating the use of the
workstation into the courses, workshops as well as senior projects and encourage
them to publish scientific research.