* 1429265
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Perfit, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 904,540.00

Non-Technical: This research contract centers on the acquisition of a new high-
resolution electron probe microanalysis system with an integrated electron
backscatter diffraction detector. This instrument will be the only one in the US
and only one of three in the world with the capability of performing
simultaneous crystallographic and chemical mapping at the sub-micron scale, and
will permit trace elemental analysis with superb accuracy in a user-friendly
environment. The instrument will have regional and international accessibility
making it a multi-use, multi-institutional piece of state-of the-art equipment.
This research program brings together a unique set of 15 researchers from 7
Florida state universities (University of Florida, University of North Florida,
Florida State University, Florida A&amp;M University, University of Central
Florida, Florida International University and University of South Florida) that
have one commonality: the need to understand the connection between chemistry
and structure at the sub-micron scale. The central theme of this instrumentation
program with regards to teaching, education and outreach is lowering
institutional barriers. A multi-pronged approach has been developed to execute
this objective: 1) a remote access system, 2) K-12 education modules developed
for teachers to help them integrate microscopy into their classroom curricula,
3) partnerships with the on-campus NSF REU program to expose talented
undergraduates to advanced microscopy techniques, where selection will be based
on talent and focused on increasing diversity of women and underrepresented
groups, 4) continuing education programs, and 5) strategic partnerships with 2
minority serving institutions and 5 emerging Hispanic serving institutions
provide fertile ground and access to underrepresented groups to increase the
impact of the proposed education and outreach initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This electron probe microanalysis system
produces a small spot size with high spatial resolution on the nanometer scale.
The uniqueness of the instrument can be highlighted in its use in transforming
research in 4 critical areas. These areas include: 1) revealing the fundamental
connections between microstructure, chemistry and microtexture in light element
structural alloys, 2) understanding chemical diffusion in metallic and oxide
systems to develop a unified theory for thermal diffusion while gaining deeper
insight into the relationship between chemistry and structure in functional
oxides, and 3) mapping phase boundaries in nanoprecipitation dispersion
strengthened systems, and 4) robust and accurate measurement of minor and trace
element with high spectral resolution needed for geological materials. The key
features of this instrument that create maximal impact are the ability to
perform: 1) trace elemental analysis with superb accuracy in a user-friendly
environment, 2) quantitative mapping of light elements to show their true
concentration distribution and advanced spectral resolution to avoid peak
overlaps that are common with light elements, 3) fine-scale microstructural,
chemical and crystallographic analysis, and 4) research and teaching by logging
in online to remotely view and control the instrument.