* 1429428
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single-Crystal Microsource Diffractometer for Interdisciplinary Materials Research and STEM Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Thomas Pekarek, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 407,491.00

Non-technical: The acquisition of a single-crystal X-ray diffractometer at the
University of North Florida (UNF) is expected to benefit the entire Northeast
Florida region, through research and educational collaborations with several
primarily undergraduate institutions, research universities, community colleges,
and local high schools. The team's research projects span many STEM disciplines,
including chemistry (inorganic/materials chemistry, organic/organometallic
chemistry, and chemical education), condensed matter physics, and the general
area of materials science and engineering. The pedagogical impact of this
instrument is also extensive because of its incorporation in a) both the
chemistry and physics undergraduate curricula (i.e. in advanced labs and in
various undergraduate research projects), b) outreach activities both for the
general public and for high school students, and c) teachers' education events
on the UNF campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Single-crystal X-ray
diffraction (SC-XRD) is the ultimate structural characterization method for
chemical compounds and solid-state materials, providing information about bond
lengths and angles and the 3D picture of molecules and extended systems. For
solid-state materials it probes missing bonds, structural changes, and
anisotropy, which is important information for understanding/tweaking the
materials' properties. Pressure-induced structural changes are probed with SC-
XRD under pressure, with applications in macroscopic post-synthetic properties
manipulation in materials. As such, the team uses SC-XRD in interdisciplinary
investigations of a) magnetic and correlated materials, b) multiferroics, c)
high temperature superconductors, d) molecular magnets and polynuclear clusters,
and e) organic/organometallic compounds as drugs and catalysts. Enhancement of
these efforts is expected from the microfocus x-ray source and/or the SC-XRD
under pressure (&lt;50 GPa) capabilities of the instrument. Incorporation of SC-
XRD in the chemistry and physics curricula and through undergraduate research is
expected to enrich the experiential learning opportunities offered to UNF
undergraduates and expose them to modern materials research. This facility is
projected to benefit the entire Northeast Florida, through research and
educational collaborations with at least three primarily undergraduate
institutions and two research universities. Additionally, incorporation of SC-
XRD in teachers' education events and field trips to UNF is poised to expose
local high school teachers and students to cutting edge research and strengthen
UNF's bonds to the community.