* 1429782
* MRI: Development of an Advanced Bio-Imaging Instrument: Enabling 3D quantitative multifunctional sensing at the nanoscale
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Rafael Piestun, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 668,842.00

An award is made to the University of Colorado at Boulder to develop next-
generation optical nano-imaging instrumentation to expand research and research
training in criticalareas of science and engineering. The project will transform
the microscopy capabilities at the University of Colorado at Boulder by
generating a multi-functional nanoscope with unique characteristics. The
instrument will be shared by investigators in the BioFrontiers Institute and
departments in the colleges of Engineering and Arts and Sciences. Wide
availability of next generation optical nanoscopy is critical to ensure emerging
interdisciplinary research activities. This platform will bring together
physicists, electrical engineers, biological engineers, biochemists, molecular
biologists, cellular biologists, computer scientists, and mathematicians to work
together on developing methods for increasing resolution and advancing modern
microscopy in biologically relevant problems. The equipment will be the center
of interdisciplinary research and a focus for the development of new ideas and
technologies that cross traditional departmental boundaries. Furthermore, the
platform will provide state-of-the-art optical imaging capabilities to the
community through the BioFrontiers core facility.

The project will advance understanding of nanoscale phenomena both at the
subcellular level and within different types of materials, bringing about
improvements in bioscience and advanced instrumentation. Current bioscience
research is strongly dependent on the investigators ability to characterize sub-
cellular structure and function at the nanoscale. Emerging optical microscopy
techniques enable imaging of cellular details and macromolecular structure
previously unimaginable. Remarkably, fluorescence nanoscopy is compatible with
live cells and able to multiplex labeling with high molecular specificity. While
these techniques promise to create a revolution in biological research, current
incarnations present significant shortcomings: limited field of view and depth
of field, limited acquisition rate unsuitable for fast live cell phenomena, need
for significant light dosage creating photo-damage, and unsuitability for deep
imaging. The project is set to overcome these shortcomings by an integrated
design of techniques such as point-spread function engineering, single-molecule
localization microscopy, fast structured illumination, and adaptive microscopy.