* 1429212
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Next Generation Sequencing System for Genomics Research and Training at the University of Massachusetts Lowell
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Graves, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 417,570.00

An award is made to the University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML) to acquire a
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) system, which will provide UML faculty,
students, staff and external community partners with current genomics
instrumentation and training. The system centerpiece, an Illumina NextSeq 500
Desktop Sequencer, will significantly advance UML infrastructure for conducting
innovative genomic-level research in biological engineering, evolutionary
biology and environmental sciences. The Illumina instrument and associated
equipment will meet an acute need for modern infrastructure to support genomics
research and training at UML, where previously there was no DNA sequencing
instrument on campus. The Illumina machine will also be incorporated into
student-centered research, experiential coursework and outreach activities at
UML to broaden participation in cutting-edge research and expand opportunities
for students in professional training for biotechnology careers. Numerous UML
students enter the regionally important biotechnology workforce, and the awarded
Illumina instrument will strengthen the local economy by exposing students to
modern sequencing technology. The award will enrich education at UML with the
development of an NGS learning module that will be implemented into several
undergraduate and graduate courses. A workshop dedicated to the use and
application of the Illumina instrument will be developed for faculty, students
and external users. An annual NGS research and educational symposium at UML will
facilitate collaborations and attract new users of the instrument. The
University of Massachusetts Lowell serves an ethnically and economically diverse
student body and faculty employing the NGS system will recruit underrepresented
minority and female students for participation in research involving use of the
Illumina instrument. In addition, UML undergraduates in a Service Learning
Genomics course will devise presentations on NGS and genomics to high school
students. Accordingly, societal benefits of the project will include raising
scientific literacy of the public, lowering barriers to scientific
participation, and strengthening the regional economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will establish a new Genomics Core Facility at UML, where there are &gt;40
faculty and students conducting genome-focused research. The NGS system will
considerably advance research in diverse disciplines, and projects employing the
new Illumina instrument include those aimed at understanding: 1) trace element
cellular metabolism; 2) venom evolutionary genomics; 3) microbial community
structure; 4) metazoan phylogeny; 5) NGS assembly software performance; and 6)
transcriptional control of immune cell development. These studies will utilize
the Illumina instrument to perform a spectrum of techniques including: 1)
targeted genome re-sequencing; 2) whole-transcriptome sequencing; 3)
quantification of genome-wide expression levels; 4) sequencing of microbial DNA
amplified from environmental sample; and 5) chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing to determine genome regulatory regions and DNA-protein interactions.
Thus, the award will significantly expand research opportunities for UML faculty
and students and enhance the intellectual environment supporting biological
research.