* 1429164
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Molecular Structure Analysis at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Paul Spiegel, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Paul Spiegel from Western Washington University and colleague John Gilbertson
will acquire an X-ray diffractometer. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules.
The studies described here will impact a number of areas, including organic and
inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will
be an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training not
only at Western Washington University but also at neighboring institutions from
the Seattle area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) determining the
structure of circularly permuted hemoglobin constructs for the development of
recombinant blood replacements; (b) studying the immune response to hemophilia
treatment; (c) determining the structural biology of engineered protein
complexes; (d) determining the structure of small molecule inorganic complexes
for the application of carbon dioxide reduction; (e) structure determination of
organic fluorophores with extended pi systems for use in solar energy
conversion; (f) structural analysis of quantum dot ternary nanocrystals for the
application of optical and electronic properties; (g) microscale X-ray
diffraction analysis of core-shell nanocatalysts for hydrotreating applications
to petroleum-based feedstocks; and (h) structural studies of the villin/gelsolin
family of cytoskeleton regulators.