* 1429810
* MRI: Development of a Multi-Photon Microscope with Adaptive Optics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Yi Zuo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 503,798.00

An award is made to the University of California Santa Cruz to add long-
wavelength excitation light (1,550 nm) and adaptive optics (AO) into a
commercial multiphoton microscope (Olympus) for live deeptissue biological
imaging. Adaptive optics has provided diffraction-limited images for large
ground-based telescopes by correcting for the blurring caused by the atmosphere.
They propose to re-apply similar adaptive optics techniques in multiphoton
microscopy to obtain diffraction-limited images from deep within living
biological tissues. This development will provide biologists with new imaging
capabilities, similar to advantages adaptive optics provided to astronomers,
enabling them to obtain the highestresolution deep-tissue images in neurobiology
to study brain development and synapse plasticity in the nervous system, in cell
biology to study cell cycle events, and in developmental biology to study stem
cells, chromatin remodeling and the cytoskeleton. The research activities in
this project include opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
participate in a multidisciplinary research team consisting of optical
physicists, electrical engineers, and biologists, contributing to their training
as the next generation of instrumentalists and advanced users. The research
activities and instrumentation will be integrated into teaching at the
undergraduate and graduate levels through hands-on projects in engineering and
science courses at UCSC, a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), and through an
NSF sponsored outreach program, the California State Summer School for
Mathematics and Science(COSMOS), a summer residential program for high school
scholars with demonstrated interest and achievement in math and science. They
will also work in a partnership with all ten UC campuses and three affiliated
national labs (LANL, LBNL, and LLNL) and industry to broadly disseminate the
technology to the biological research community. Such improvements will benefit
society by greatly advancing our fundamental understanding of life processes at
the cellular and sub-cellular levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity
more than doubles the depth (&gt;1,500nm) of diffraction limited imaging (738
nm) into dynamic live tissue (AO frame rate &gt;1 Hz) where many fundamental
cellular processes occur, such as neuron growth, organization and synapse
formation. For example, by increasing the imaging depth from 500 um to 1,000 um,
they can reach the deeper cortical layers to see if synaptic reorganization
during development and under pathological conditions follows similar rules as in
the superficial cortical layers, were synapses are constantly remodeling in
living animals. By increasing the imaging depth beyond 1,000 um they can reach
the Hippocampus, the site for learning and memory. This will allow studies of
how synapses reorganize during learning and how they encode for long-lasting
memory.