* 1429448
* MRI: Development of a Microfluidic Instrument for High-throughput Production of Asymmetric Vesicles to Support Membrane Biology Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Chiarot, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 294,000.00

An award is made to the State University of New York at Binghamton to develop a
high throughput microfluidic instrument for constructing customizable vesicles
with asymmetric lipid distributions. Such vesicles are superior to existing
liposomes because they can be tailored to exactly replicate natural membranes
and are therefore more physiologically relevant. The innovations provided by the
instrument will have a broad impact on fundamental biofilm and membrane biology
research. In particular, the physiologically relevant vesicles will enable
studies that are impossible with current liposome technology. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project provides an excellent training
opportunity for students at all levels. Biologists and engineers often do not
possess even the most fundamental skills in the others' discipline, limiting the
ability to take on important research questions. This gap will be addressed by
providing students with the opportunity to develop their interdisciplinary
skills while contributing to the objectives of this project. Students at all
levels will integrate with their cross disciplinary colleagues in the planning
and execution of experiments and receive training in the laboratory techniques
used by their research counterparts. To support interdisciplinary skills
development in the wider community, a website will be created that provides
instruction on protocols relevant to microfluidics, biofilms, and general
laboratory practice. This website will be targeted to individuals with no
background in the relevant discipline. It will also be used to disseminate the
new instrument. This project will assist in establishing the formation of a
Biofilm Microfluidics Initiative at SUNY Binghamton, which will tackle
fundamental questions in the biofilms community with the aid of novel
microfluidic tools.

The instrument will produce physiologically relevant synthetic vesicles to
enable fundamental membrane biology research. The capabilities of the instrument
will be demonstrated by using the synthetic vesicles to study the role of outer
membrane vesicles in biofilm formation. Bacterial biofilms are ubiquitous in
nature and have a large impact on human health and industry. It is imperative to
understand the processes that contribute to the development of biofilm structure
so that they can be exploited to control biofilm growth. This objective would
not be achievable using traditional liposomes because they do not adequately
mimic natural vesicles. Therefore they cannot be used to study complex phenomena
where subtle differences in lipid composition and architecture are important.
Emerging technologies are unable to synthesize uniform, unilamellar, asymmetric
vesicles with controlled size at high throughput. The ability of the instrument
to produce synthetic vesicles possessing all of these features is a paradigm
shifting advancement in membrane biology and biofilm research. Long term, the
vesicles built using the instrument have the potential to be used in vaccine
development and as delivery vehicles for antimicrobial agents. As part of the
instrument development, important fundamental issues relevant to microscale
multiphase fluid flows will also be addressed. These include: flow focusing and
interfacial stability, timescales for lipid self assembly, and emulsion
kinematics.