* 1429674
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Angel Valdes, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2017
* USD 203,208.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This National Science Foundation (NSF)-funded
project is enabling Cal Poly Pomona to purchase and install a Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) and attached capabilities including Energy Dispersive
Spectroscopy (EDS). This high quality and user-friendly instrument will support
the research of faculty from across the university and will be available to
local industry through sponsored projects and the surrounding community through
outreach programs. Equally importantly, access to this cutting-edge research
instrument will be of enormous benefit to the predominantly undergraduate
student population of this Hispanic-serving institution and for K-12 and
community college outreach efforts. It is to be noted that the campus community
currently does not have a functioning scanning electron microscope (SEM) capable
of meeting its diverse needs. This instrument will be utilized by the research
team to train several project students across the university and also to
incorporate it into their current courses as well as to offer courses centered
on the instrument, e.g., Scanning Electron Microscope Techniques
(Bio-578).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several science
and engineering problems will be studied using the SEM/EDS, e.g., morphology and
compositional profiles for engineered coatings, imaging of advanced biomedical
alloys, corrosion of metallic alloys, microscopic morphology of sea slugs,
characterization of non-woven nanofibers, surface analysis of pharmaceutical
powders, etc. The PI, Dr. Vilupanur A. Ravi, will use the SEM to characterize
coatings on nickel. The goal of this NASA-sponsored project is reduce the
sublimation rate of nickel for deep space power applications. In preliminary
studies, applying aluminide coatings to nickel has shown promise in lowering the
sublimation rate of the bare metal. The SEM will be used conduct detailed
microstructural characterization of these aluminide coatings applied to nickel
substrates of different geometries using novel approaches. In another project,
one of the co-PIs, Dr. Yong Gan, was recently funded through NSF (CMMI Grant No.
1333044) to explore high efficiency thermoelectric energy conversion composite
materials. He will use the SEM to generate high resolution images of new
nanotube and nanocomposites to achieve his thermoelectric conversion
efficiencies. An electrically conducting polymer based composite nanofiber
containing bismuth telluride nanoparticles as the high thermoelectric power
generating component, and titanium oxide nanotube for tuning the electrical and
thermal transport behaviors is under investigation. Another co-PI, Dr. Angel
Valdes will utilize the SEM to obtain morphological information on sea slugs as
part of a NSF sponsored project (DEB-1355190). This project will allow Dr.
Valdes and collaborators to combine genetic, anatomic, ecological and
developmental studies to describe numerous new species of sea slugs. Modeling
will then identify factors that determine how species are distributed, and what
makes some sea slugs more ecologically and evolutionary diverse than others.
Anti-cancer compounds have been isolated from some sea slugs and others have
served as biological control agents for invasive algae, but taxonomic
uncertainty has limited the potential for their use in these roles. To fully
leverage an improved understanding of this biodiversity resource, this project
will train the next generation of taxonomists, develop web-based resources, and
provide new insight into factors that govern diversity in marine ecosystems.