* 1429648
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) for high-precision isotopic research of the Earth's mantle, crust and oceans
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Bradley Hacker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2019
* USD 524,244.00

This award will provide funds to acquire a modern Thermal Ionization Mass
Spectrometer (TIMS) instrument. The TIMS instrument will form an integral
component of research into fundamental Earth processes and will be an invaluable
tool for teaching a variety of core principles to undergraduate and graduate
students, including techniques for sample preparation, mass spectrometry, and
data interpretation and analysis. Existing instrumental facilities have a strong
history of supporting external users and providing teaching and training in
sample preparation, metrology and engaging the scientific community through
short-courses. The new TIMS instrument will serve students and faculty in Earth
science, geography and archaeology, and will provide training and data to
collaborating researchers, students and postdoctoral fellows from at least eight
different colleges and universities in the region, many of which are
undergraduate and/or Hispanic-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
TIMS instrument will transform institutional research capabilities for making
high-precision isotopic measurements to carry-out NSF-funded research addressing
themes including the timescales of metamorphism and melting of continental
crust, the ages and origins of mantle reservoirs, time-scales of early-Earth
differentiation, magmatic processes at mid-ocean ridge systems, and
reconstruction of changes in ocean circulation and climate variability ranging
from millennial to geologic time scales. The arrival of the new TIMS instrument
will coincide with completion of a new, dedicated clean laboratory facility and
a separate, climate-controlled instrument room. All five principle investigators
on this award currently have NSF-funded research (Earth Sciences, Ocean
Sciences, Polar Programs) that will make immediate and extensive use of the new
TIMS instrument.