* 1429113
* MRI: Acquisition of an Intuitive Multi-Touch Scanning Electron Microscope to Enhance Research as well as Undergraduate Student Research and Natural Science Courses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kim Finer, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 161,039.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will fund the acquisition of a
multi-functional scanning electron microscope (SEM) to support research and
teaching initiatives at Kent State University at Stark. The JEOL SEM will
accommodate innovative faculty research projects that span multiple disciplines,
and deliver novel, hands-on research opportunities for the undergraduate
students in our expanding science program. Researchers, educators, and students,
including those at neighboring K-12 school systems with underrepresented groups,
will have the opportunity to explore insect structures, bacteria, fossils, and
minerals at the micro-scale with high-resolution, 3D images produced by the SEM.
In addition, the remote control capabilities of the SEM will enhance science
courses by allowing students to watch SEM usage in real time during lectures,
via computers installed in the classroom.

The user-friendly SEM and additional hardware and software accessories include
Energy Dispersive X-ray Microanalysis system (EDS) for quantifying elemental
properties of structures and minerals and 3-D image software for topographical
analysis. It will accommodate faculty research and provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students. In particular, current and future
interdisciplinary research projects include the examination of 1) convergent
evolution in insect mouthparts, particularly butterflies and flies, to study
structure and function relationships associated with fluid uptake mechanisms, 2)
changes in cuticle (shell) structure and composition of fossilized decapods
(i.e., lobsters, shrimp) over evolutionary time, 3) dental microwear patterns
(i.e., scars on teeth) of extinct vertebrates to better understand their ecology
and feeding habits, 4) surface microtopography and chemical reactivity of
minerals associated with human health, and 5) the physical relationship between
the filamentous form of Agrobacterium and plant transformation. The acquired
images will be uploaded to pre-existing NSF-funded databases for public access.
The SEM, with its real time remote control functionality, will integrate into
existing undergraduate courses, including Evolution and General Microbiology,
and new courses, such as Virology and Principles of Microscopy. The SEM also
will supplement K-12 science courses through workshops for teachers to acquire
their own images and learn the remote control usage. This instrument aquisition
will be a highly valued addition to the new science building at Kent State
University at Stark and will enrich and provide unique opportunities of inquiry
to our vibrant, growing research programs.