* 1429250
* MRI: Acquisition of X-ray Irradiatior and Dosimetry System to expand the research capabilities at NMSU
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Immo Hansen, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 182,035.00

Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Gamma rays are ionizing radiation that are
particularly hazardous to biological systems. As a research tool, they are often
used to damage cells for mechanistic, basic research that seeks to define
cellular response pathways. Further, irradiation is a common source of gene
mutagenesis, allowing for the identification of genetic targets for
investigation as well as screening for enhanced properties with commercial
benefits. Additionally, irradiation is used to kill living organisms and cells
both therapeutically and for the sterilization of food and medical equipment.
The acquisition of a X-ray Irradiator and Dosimetry System to carry out
irradiation experiments will substantially impact the research capabilities of
New Mexico State University, enhance the career development of faculty of
several scientific fields, and provide training and educational opportunities
for both graduate and undergraduate students. NMSU is a comprehensive land-grant
institution dedicated to teaching, research, and service. NMSU is identified as
a Hispanic-Serving Institution and women earn more than half of all
undergraduate and graduate degrees awarded. Faculty members from two colleges,
five departments and one inter-college program will benefit from the
availability the equipment provided by this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research impacted by the
acquisition of a X-ray Irradiator and Dosimetry System include the study of DNA
damage and repair mechanisms, insect stress physiology, sterile insect
technique, developmental biology, plant physiology, and plant breeding
(including algal biofuels). Investigators include established researchers with
well-funded programs and early career faculty that depend on critical research
infrastructure to lay the foundation for their career development. Projects take
advantage of the irradiator's ability to generate free radicals and cellular
oxidative damage in a variety of model organisms. The instrument is ideal for
many users due to features, such as 1) a broad dynamic radiation dose range; 2)
a sample compartment large enough for a variety of applications; 3) a safe,
self-contained housing; and 4) requires no infrastructure modifications.