* 1429765
* MRI: Acquisition of a Near Ambient Pressure X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy System to Enable Active Near-Surface and Interface Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,10/31/2017
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 10/31/2017
* USD 648,109.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Conventional X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
provides fundamental information on chemical, molecular, electronic, and
compositional properties of surfaces and interfaces under ultra-high vacuum
conditions. Near ambient pressure XPS (NAP-XPS) significantly extends the depth
and breadth of scientific inquiry of conventional XPS by enabling analyses in
the presence of a background gases near atmospheric pressures. The NAP-XPS
system will enhance interdisciplinary research and education programs throughout
the scientific and engineering communities at Oregon State University (OSU) and
the Pacific Northwest. The system will be operated and managed as part of the
Oregon State University Materials Synthesis &amp; Characterization (MaSC)
Facility, an open user resource for researchers from all academic, government,
and industrial laboratories. In partnership with Saturday Academy and the
Education Partnerships Program at OSU, the principle investigators will offer
for middle school students and teachers new summer science camps and workshops
covering current topics in energy and materials research. These efforts will be
extended to public informal education programs, encompassing the latest research
advances in Materials, Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, Community, and
Sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary
research in materials, devices, and processing provides the knowledge base to
advance activities in many scientific and engineering fields, including
materials synthesis, catalysis, energy conversion, electronic devices, and bio
and environmental sensing. The detailed chemical, molecular, and compositional
understanding of surfaces and interfaces enabled by the NAP-XPS provides unique
insight into complex systems and guides improvements in material, device, and
processing sciences. The NAP-XPS has capabilities that are not available
elsewhere in the Pacific Northwest. The instrument will enable measurement of
XPS spectra covering pressure ranges over 11 orders of magnitude (5x10-10 to 20
mbar) and sample temperatures between 200 and 723 K. This system will enhance
collaborative projects and programs across material science, chemistry, physics,
chemical engineering, and electrical engineering. Areas of research include the
synthesis and study of model catalytic, optical, piezoelectric, and electronic
materials prepared by solution and vacuum-based methods; determining the role of
partial pressure and temperature on adsorption state of probe molecules on model
catalytic systems; evaluating thermal-stimulated processes for state-of-the-art
directly patterned inorganic hardmasks; spectroscopy of electronic and
optoelectronic devices including band-alignment for interfaces related to solar
cells and metal-insulator-metal diodes; and functionalization and defect
passivation of thin films and nanomaterials for electronic and optoelectronic
applications.