* 1429404
* MRI: Development of Augmentarium: High Performance Visual Computing Infrastructure with Adaptive Displays
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Amitabh Varshney, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2019
* USD 699,999.00

This project, developing Augmentarium, enables visual understanding of a number
of applications in science, engineering, and medicine. Once completed, this
instrument is expected to be a stable shared-used cyberfacility that uses the
emerging technologies of programmable-robot-mounted projector-camera pairs for
high-performance computing and scientific applications with extensive
visualization needs. The developed instrument provides unprecedented
capabilities to visualize locally high-resolution images with lower-resolution
context, new interaction modalities, and projection-based augmented reality. The
Augmentarium development will proceed with close involvement of domain experts
in a number of areas including Astronomy, Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences,
Biology, Materials Science, Computational Fluid Dynamics, Aerospace Engineering,
Electrical Engineering, and Computer Science. It is also anticipated that this
will attract and involve a number of international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects that can directly benefit from the proposed
instrument include:&lt;br/&gt;- Understanding Large-Scale Astronomy
Data&lt;br/&gt;- Multiscale Instabilties and Mixing Processes in the Atmosphere
and the Oceans&lt;br/&gt;- Large Scale Characterization of Stem Cell Colonies
and Material Properties&lt;br/&gt;- Large Scale Simulations in Fluid Dynamics
and Macromolecular Reconstruction via Fast Multipole Accelerated
Algorithms&lt;br/&gt;- Real-Time Data Visualization for Cyber
Security&lt;br/&gt;- Analysis and Visualization of Large Streaming
Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrumentation is expected to advance
the state of the art in a broad range of scientific and engineering disciplines,
such as astrophysics, modeling of cosmological processes, modeling and
simulation of biological systems, climate change, computational engineering,
materials science, and high performance computing. The proposed infrastructure
will be used for education and research training by the different research
groups affiliated with the main research areas. The facility will also be used
to operate a summer program designed to interest students in computing,
particularly those from groups under-represented in computing. This
cyberfacility will also reach out to the Women in Engineering Society, the
Association of Women in Computing, and the Society of Black Engineers at the
University of Maryland to encourage participation in computational science
projects that will make use of the new facility.