* 1429615
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-ToF/ToF-MS Instrument for Chemical and Biological Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Donald Jarvis, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,999.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation program (CRIF), the University of Wyoming
will acquire a time of flight mass spectrometer with matrix assisted laser
desorption ionization technology and a liquid chromatograph (MALDI-TOF-LCMS). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex matrices. A laser impinging on the inert matrix embedded with the
sample, vaporizes and ionizes the sample. The ions pass into the mass
spectrometer where the masses of the parent ion and its fragment ions are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows identification and
determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An instrument
with a liquid chromatograph provides additional identification power by
separating mixtures of compounds before they are mass analyzed. The acquisition
will strengthen the research infrastructure at the University and regional area.
High school, undergraduate and graduate students from rural areas, including
Native Americans, Hispanic/Latinos, women, and first-generation college students
in Wyoming and surrounding Frontier states will benefit from training with this
modern analytical technique.

The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) developing analytical methodologies for the
rapid and precise analysis of biological and synthetic samples; (b) deciphering
of protein folding dynamics and anti-freeze protein function; (c) developing
photocatalytic organic materials; (d) developing glycosylated proteins; (e)
elucidating cell messaging pathways; (f) studying fundamentals of evolutionary
cell biology; and (g) developing clean energy sources.