* 1429826
* MRI: Acquisition of a Big Data Compute Cluster for Interdisciplinary Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michael Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2016
* USD 548,476.00

An award is made to the University of California, Riverside (UCR) to acquire a
highly scalable Big Data compute cluster dedicated to long-term support for
data-intensive NSF research. By freeing and expanding currently overbooked
research compute resources, the proposed compute cluster will have a significant
impact on training and educating graduate and undergraduate students, including
a high percentage from populations traditionally underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. Based on URM enrollment, UCR has been designated by the Dept. of
Education as an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). The availability of adequate
computing and its beneficial impact on research programs will serve to attract
outstanding students to a large number of undergraduate and graduate programs,
including successful NSF-Funded REU and IGERT programs. New courses planned in
conjunction with system acquisition will train students in parallel computing
concepts and offer expanded access to integrate Big Data computing into their
research projects. The Big Data compute cluster of this project also will
support several smaller biotechnology companies in California that already use
IIGB's computer facility. Future users from external research institutions,
minority-serving colleges and industrial partners, particularly start-ups, will
be actively recruited to gain access to IIGB's computing resources. Combined
with UCR's diverse ethnicity and research mission, this investment will benefit
a wide array of research directions and technology-based economic development
initiatives at UCR, an institution that serves as an important driver of
economic development in California's Inland Empire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to enable Big Data driven research at UCR to address
grand challenge questions in a highly interdisciplinary environment. Questions
include: How do different organism groups adapt to, and defend themselves
against extreme environmental conditions or pathogens? How can more efficient
and selective small molecules be developed to accelerate discovery-oriented
chemical biology and genomics research? How can this knowledge translate into
improved stress and pathogen tolerance, for example in crops to respond to
global climate change and feed a growing world population? Recent advances in
high-throughput and monitoring technologies offer, for the first time, novel
methods to address these challenges systematically, comprehensively, and with
unprecedented resolution. The new Big Data compute cluster substantially
strengthens UCR's high-performance compute infrastructure and provides a
critical enabling resource for UCR researchers from a broad spectrum of research
specializations, including environmental science, chemical genomics, evolution,
statistics, computational biology, and genome biology of multiple organism
groups. Since this research relies on high-throughput and computational modeling
approaches, its success and future growth is critically dependent on high-
performance computer resources to manage and process large and rapidly
increasing data sets. The system will be managed by experienced personnel in the
Research Compute Facility of the Institute for Integrative Genome Biology
(IIGB). The IIGB facility serves a broad user population distributed across
departments from more than 50 research groups with 160 active users. The
requested computing system therefore will reach a maximum number of NSF-funded
investigators at UCR and constitutes a cost-effective investment of NSF and UCR
funds.