* 1429727
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy for Materials Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 650,000.00

PI: Nguyen, Trung V. Proposal: 1429727 Title: MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy for Materials Research

Significance An X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) system with more advanced
capabilities will enhance the research capability and the STEM human resources
development of KU as well as other institutions in Kansas and neighboring
states. Students, educators, and researchers from local and regional community
colleges and institutions with a high percentage of representation of under-
represented groups will be contacted and encouraged to apply for free access to
the new instrument. Leading-edge research facilities and broad access policy
will be instrumental in recruitment of top-quality faculty and students,
including those from under-represented groups and/or from families in rural
Kansas and Midwestern states that are first-generation STEM students. Finally,
the alternative energy and health focused research areas of the users identified
in this proposal are expected to have major national and global societal
impacts, aided by the XPS system.

Intellectual Description While bulk properties of materials play an important
role in selection and use in many applications, a wealth of functionality
depends on interface or surface interactions. A slight variation in surface
elemental composition and properties may make a material inactive or active or
only marginally active. This phenomenon applies across a broad spectrum of
applications, ranging from the foundation of catalytic reactions in the
manufacture of chemicals and fuels, chemical and biological sensors, energy
conversion devices like solar cells, batteries, and fuel cells, to physical,
chemical, and biological reactions and interactions at interphases and
interfaces of materials such as in dental reparation, drug delivery, tissue
restoration, and regeneration. As the size of a material approaches nano-scale,
its bulk properties change and approach that of its surface properties.
Obtaining reliable information on the surface and near surface elemental
compositions, and electronic and chemical properties of nano-materials, is
crucial in technology areas such as catalysis, corrosion resistant alloys,
energy storage systems, biomaterials, and biomedical and optoelectronic devices.