* 1429407
* MRI: Acquisition of  a UV-visible-near IR microspectrophotometer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Joseph DeSimone, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 322,581.00

Non-technical summary: Understanding and harnessing the remarkable properties of
materials, whether for medicine, energy, or information technology, requires
instruments that can accurately probe a material's structure and properties. As
technologies advance and materials reduce in size, the tools used to interact
with and study materials must also miniaturize. Spectrophotometers, instruments
that employ light to probe materials, are essential tools in virtually every
area of materials research, and yet the light beams that are emitted from most
spectrophotometers are millimeters across rather than micrometers. This project
addresses regional and national needs for advanced instrumentation with
miniaturized (micro) light beams via the acquisition of a
microspectrophotometer. This instrument provides unprecedented capabilities for
focusing light into microscopic (less than one micrometer) regions of a material
and quantitatively analyzing its structure and properties. This instrument
merges five traditionally distinct measurement techniques to yield rich insight
into the physical and chemical properties of microstructured and nanostructured
materials. This new research capability enables studies with applications that
span across multiple areas of research, including 3-D printing, solar cells, and
cancer diagnostics. Education of high school, undergraduate and graduate
students is advanced through hands-on training and access to the
microspectrophotometer. The instrument will be a focal point for classes and
training activities for students that explore material properties, surfaces, and
light-matter interaction. The location of the instrument in a shared instrument
facility with a strong track record of providing broad access enables
educational and research activities that positively impact regional
universities, government, non-profit users, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: Advancements in research on
nanomaterials, biological materials, and their composites are placing increased
demands on traditional light-based spectroscopies?especially those that lack the
focusing optics needed to resolve nano-to-micrometer scale variations in
structure, composition, and properties. The major research instrumention
acquired in this project a microspectrophotometer, which combines five
traditional spectroscopies into a single platform by using the magnifying optics
of a high-powered microscope. The instrument performs transmission, reflection,
fluorescence, polarization, and Raman spectroscopies, enabling a single region
of a single material to be probed in series by each technique. By employing
quartz optics, the usable spectrum extends from 300 nm to 2100 nm, which creates
new opportunities to explore small band-gap materials such as those of interest
in solar cells and fiber optic communications or to explore label-free detection
in cellular diagnostics. The principal objectives of this program are to
establish a microspectrophotometer in a shared instrumentation facility in the
Chapel Hill Analytical and Nanofabrication Laboratory, to exploit the
instrument's capabilities in the fields of electronic and photonic materials,
soft matter, and biomaterials, and to use the instrument as a platform for
educating a diverse body of students from UNC Chapel Hill and neighboring
institutions.