* 1429518
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster to Support Multidisciplinary Big Data Analysis and Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Long-zhuang Li, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,038.00

This project, acquiring a High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster--the Corpus
Christi High Performance cluster (CCHP)--supports large-scale data analysis and
modeling research and research training across a broad variety of science and
engineering technology disciplines in coastal and environmental studies. The
CCHP cluster enables research projects ranging from computer science, life
science, geographical information systems (GIS), remote sensing, to atmospheric
science. These include:&lt;br/&gt;- Higher order tensor decomposition for big
data,&lt;br/&gt;- Population Genomics of non-model species,&lt;br/&gt;-
Geospatial crowdsourcing for natural disaster response,&lt;br/&gt;- Large-scale
analytics of airborne and satellite remote sensing data and UAS
imagery,&lt;br/&gt;- Global weather and climate
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCHP contains compute nodes, GPU (graphical
processing unit) nodes, and shared network storage, connected through InfiniBand
switches in a fat tree topology to support high bandwidth low latency data
communication (critical for HPC applications) while providing massive parallel
computation on graphics processor cores. Moreover, the on-board Gigabit Ethernet
ports with switch connection can support large data sets transmission which
enables research in real time simulation and modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCHP enables exploring parallel processing to process real
large data sets in the higher order tensor decomposition, which is a basis for
many data mining tasks including clustering, trend detection, and anomaly
detection. This cluster is a necessary computational tool for biologists to use
statistics effectively to realize the promise and power of societally relevant
hypotheses in massively parallel nucleotide sequencing. The GIS researchers can
utilize the CCHP cluster to advance geospatial crowdsourcing solution in case of
natural disaster by providing quicker and more accurate geometric information.
The cluster also enables remote sensing scientists to identify the relationship
between environmental conditions, including land cover and use and rates of
freshwater inflow, and attack the problems caused by the low accuracy of
acquired unmanned aerial systems (UAS) images for precision agriculture.
Furthermore, processing much longer time series of the global model and
satellite data record, atmospheric scientists will be able to easily expand
their research projects from regional to global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
impact of the CCHP cluster will be felt in many domains, especially on coastal
and environmental studies that impacts society in general, impacting weather and
climate model reliability and prediction skills in ecology, evolution,
fisheries, conservation, and genetics. Moreover, curriculum materials obtained
from the projects serviced by the instrumentation will enhance education and
student learning at all levels, including K-12. These will impact existing
courses and contribute to the creation of new ones.