* 1429972
* SBIR Phase II:  Controlled Drug Release from and Degradation of Hydrogels
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Gary Ashley, ProLynx LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,134,469.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an improvement in public health and quality
of life through improved methods of medicinal therapy. The technology developed
in this project is aimed at improving the effectiveness of existing therapeutic
drugs while facilitating their use by patients in need of treatment, as well as
enabling the development of promising new therapeutic agents and regiments that
otherwise would not be useful due to the required frequency or complexity of
their administration. As an example, if successful this technology will take a
drug requiring daily injection (or multiple injections every day) and convert it
to a form that requires injection only once-weekly. The anticipated societal
impact is increased patient compliance together with an improvement in the
effectiveness of the treatment, and thus an overall improvement in patient
quality of life. The replacement of existing treatment regimens by more
convenient and effective ones is expected to have a substantial commercial
impact, as is the enablement of new therapeutics to treat currently untreated or
ineffectively-treated conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
aimed at developing a platform technology based on the controlled release of
drugs, particularly peptides and proteins, from an injected depot. Current
methods are either incompatible with peptides and proteins due to their mode of
manufacture or chemical reactivity, or do not provide the precise control over
release and degradation rates that are needed for optimum therapeutic
efficiency. The methods proposed will develop a biodegradable hydrogel matrix
that is readily injected, that releases a bound drug in a highly controlled
manner, and which subsequently dissolves in a highly controlled manner. The
hydrogel matrix provides a protein-friendly environment, and use of
?Ò-eliminative linkers results in precise control of release and degradation
kinetics. Technology development will be focused on the chemistry of drug
attachment for generalized peptides/proteins as well as the chemistry for the
hydrogel matrix itself, but will be exemplified using specific therapeutic
peptides having existing therapeutic applications, such as exenatide and GLP-1
that are of immediate applicability to the treatment of Type 2 diabetes and
obesity. Concomitantly, methods for the in vivo analysis of hydrogel behavior
will be developed, and tolerability of the hydrogel matrix will be assessed.