* 1429068
* MRI: Acquisition Of A Dual-Energy, 3-D X-Ray Microscope With Sub-Micron Resolution, Tunable Field Of View, and Phase Contrast
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Elise Morgan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 419,999.00

PI: Morgan, Elise F. Proposal: 1429068 Title: MRI: Acquisition Of A Dual-Energy,
3-D X-Ray Microscope With Sub-Micron Resolution, Tunable Field Of View, and
Phase Contrast

Significance 3-D X-ray microscopy (XRM) has recently emerged as a non-
destructive imaging modality with unprecedented versatility for study of
numerous types of materials and structures. Newly developed XRM systems overcome
key limitations of older systems, including the rigid trade-off between specimen
size and image resolution (fixed field of view), inability to consolidate image
data obtained from multiple beam energies, and reliance on absorption contrast
as the only mode of imaging. As a result, XRM is now viable for a host of new
and diverse applications in engineering and natural sciences. The XRM instrument
for which funds are requested in this proposal is extremely well suited for
fostering the integration of research and education. This instrument generates
rich data sets via user-friendly software and hardware interfaces. These data,
which include high-resolution 3-D renderings, cross-sectional views, and
quantitative structural measures, are amenable to research projects and class
assignments for students at multiple levels.

Technical Description The research activities that will use this instrumentation
address fundamental physical and biological phenomena in biomechanics, tissue
engineering, skeletal and evolutionary biology, microfluidics, earth science,
complex fluids, and high-temperature materials. Currently, these research
activities use multiple methods, most of which are 2-D and/or destructive, to
quantify microstructure and composition. The requested XRM instrument would add
a new and profoundly enabling dimension to this existing armamentarium. This
instrument generates rich data sets via user-friendly software and hardware
interfaces. The data includes high-resolution 3-D renderings, cross-sectional
views, and quantitative structural measures.