* 1429345
* MRI: Development of an Instrument for Acquisition, Management, and Analysis of Super-resolution Aerial Imagery
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Abraham Kandel, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 414,000.00

This project, developing an initial demonstration prototype, aims to make a
first step towards an Instrument that will enable intelligent decision-making in
disaster mitigation, greatly benefiting society at large. The enabled research
will benefit applications in environmental monitoring, transportation,
education, agriculture, urban planning, and public health and safety. This
project will contribute to further broaden the mission of education,
recruitment, retention and mentoring by engaging more minority students in
research, by reaching out to local schools, media, and the Internet, and by
engaging the students with industrial collaborators. Prior work on the TerraFly
web-based data dissemination tools in this minority-serving and internationally-
geared institution affords the researchers and students experience in
disseminating large projects to a broad audience, leveraging coverage received
by worldwide media.

Specifically, the project identifies the required datasets, allowing researchers
to specify geographical and temporal selection and the multiple data types to be
mashed up, and the analytical functions that may be developed or uploaded by the
user. The Instrument will be built on top of TerraFly, inheriting its modules of
Data Store, Mapping, High Performance Query, API, Spatial Join, Rooftop
Geocoding, Data Drilldown, and Spatiotemporal Visualizer. The eventual
Instrument will be an integrated system, comprised of: a server farm; a massive
database containing contributed and created datasets; a fleet of balloon-borne
aerial platforms streaming multi-spectral imagery and environmental
measurements; modules for batch and ad-hoc data analytics and knowledge
extraction; and a TerraFly extension to display and query super-resolution
aerial imagery in the context of thousands of other datasets. The present
Demonstration Prototype of the Instrument will include a large database
containing sample contributed and created datasets; acquisition of imagery from
several balloon-borne sensors, and a TerraFly extension to display and query
super-resolution aerial imagery in the context of several other datasets. While
the Demonstration Prototype will involve only several balloon-borne sensors in
the airspace of the Institution, a design will be elaborated to prevent any air
traffic and environmental problems in the broader deployment of untethered
balloons in the eventual Instrument. The Demonstration Prototype will acquire,
load, store, analyze, process, create, and serve geospatial data, including:
traditional raster and vector geospatial data, sample geo-projected video
streams, high-resolution data contributed by NASA, sample super-resolution
aerial imagery contributed by committed industrial partners, and sample analyzed
geo-referenced documents. Under prior funding, the TerraFly Geospatial Data
Management project pioneered a number of technologies that became role models
for later deployment by major mapping providers. The proposed Prototype is of an
Instrument that would deploy an order-of-magnitude sharper aerial imagery, which
will enable vast new applications and analytics. Due to its non-invasive low-
altitude super-resolution sensing and automatic knowledge extraction, the
Instrument will enable multi-disciplinary research of twelve groups.