* 1429390
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra Small-Angle X-ray Scattering Instrument for Multidisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Vikram Kuppa, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 04/30/2016
* USD 275,000.00

Non-technical: Manipulating and measuring the morphology of materials on
multiple length scales has emerged as a key strategy for addressing the
prominent technological problems confronting mankind today including grand
challenges of affordable solar power, clean water, better designed medicines,
and carbon sequestration. Access to equipment capable of investigating
engineered materials systems on length scales from nanometers to micrometers is
crucial, not only for scientific progress, but also for education and training.
Such instruments of scientific discovery are necessary for both basic and
applied research. These tools engender new skills in students, equipping the
next generation with the skills necessary for rational materials design.

Technical: The complex problem of relating synthesis protocols and process
variables to morphology and final properties is fundamental to materials
research. It is most appropriately resolved by scattering techniques, which
capture three-dimensional structural information (including bulk and buried
structures) in reciprocal space. The goal of this project is to acquire an
ultra-small-angle X-ray scattering (USAXS) instrument to investigate materials
relevant to a range of multidisciplinary applications, including organic solar
cells, passivating metallic films, nanostructured membranes, carbon nanotubes,
nanoparticles and catalysts. The common theme in these research activities is
the need to accurately explore hierarchical structure from the nano- to the
meso-scale, since correlations between multiple length-scales give rise to
unique functionalities that determine performance. The USAXS project meets this
need by quantitatively probing critical length-scale domains, and complements
existing resources such as wide-angle scattering, pinhole small-angle
scattering, light scattering and x-ray reflectivity. The project thus transforms
materials-related research at the University of Cincinnati and various other
users in the south-west Ohio region (Miami University, Procter & Gamble,
Environmental Protection Agency, Clopay Plastics) by providing scientists with
quantitative structural data covering length scales from 5 nm to 1 micrometer.