* 1429329
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Ambient Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Eric Block, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 153,322.00

The Chemistry Department at the State University of New York at Albany (SUNY-
Albany) will acquire a ambient high resolution time-of-flight mass spectrometer
with this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program. Mass
spectrometry is a basic tool used by chemists and biological scientists to
identify and characterize materials and chemical species. The instrument
provides an accurate measurement of the mass and fragmentation patterns as the
ions are analyzed in the mass spectrometer. An ambient ionization mass
spectrometer forms the ions outside the mass spectrometer under ambient
conditions and usually requires little sample pretreatment. This important
analytical tool will advance the research of students at all levels. It will
also be used to train undergraduate students in laboratory course work. The
instrument will be used in the institution's B.S./M.S. Forensic Chemistry
program, and an applied MS program in Organic Chemistry which is heavily
patronized by students working at area biotech companies. The instrument will be
available to serve educational institutions in the New York State Capital
District including six undergraduate colleges. It will also be a resource for
the research-oriented Albany Medical College and Albany College of Pharmacy and
Health Sciences.

This acquisition will be used in a diverse body of research, especially in areas
such as (a) investigations of metal complexation of bowl-shaped
heterocorannulenes; (b) synthesis and structural investigations of volatile
heterometallic molecular precursors to energy-related materials; (c) tracking of
plant-derived volatile organosulfur compounds (VOSCs), and their environmental
fate; (d) investigations of fluorinated compounds; (e) developing applications
of hybrid nanomaterials for diagnosis and treatment of major diseases; (f)
studies of modified RNA systems of both biological and evolutionary
significance.