* 1429263
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Psychophysiological Recording System (including EEG) to Enhance Interdisciplinary Research, Education, and Training
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jeffrey Sable, Christian Brothers University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 56,561.00

Electrical activity from the brain provides insights into many aspects of human
experience, including mental processes about which individuals may or may not be
aware. In addition, electroencephalography (EEG, which is the measurement of the
brain's electrical activity from the surface of the head) provides students with
an accessible introduction to neuroscience research through active learning and
experimentation. Small, primarily undergraduate institutions provide a unique
setting for novel, cross-disciplinary EEG research because of close interactions
among students and faculty, heavy responsibility given to undergraduate
students, and the unique and novel research collaborations this environment can
afford. An Advanced Psychophysiological Recording System (APRS), supported by
this NSF MRI award, will enable the investigators to record EEGs from the whole
head of one or two individuals at a time, as well as recording other
physiological activity (e.g., arousal, muscle activity). The investigators will
initiate three core research projects that focus on using the APRS (primarily
for measures of brain activity) to test hypotheses about emotion, attention,
perception, memory, and the relationships among them. Students will see first-
hand how the brain responds to activities they do every day, such as texting,
recalling personal memories, and attempting to multi-task. Each project will be
executed as a collaboration among faculty and students, leading to concrete
scientific contributions (e.g., research presentations and publications). Beyond
these core projects, faculty members will integrate the APRS into various
courses to provide unique and innovative research-based experiences with the
potential for generating novel research data and inspiring students (and
faculty) to consider new applications of psychophysiological methods and to
develop cutting-edge research projects. The APRS will enable interdisciplinary
course activities and student research projects that will foster student
training and productivity in basic research, as well as efforts to promote
postdoctoral training in research with undergraduates and applications for
additional external support for undergraduate research. Because of the large
number of women and racial/ethnic minorities at the awardee institution, the
placement of the APRS instrument and the collaborative use of the system will
provide unique opportunities for women and minorities that are underrepresented
in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core research goals of the project are
to complete studies of (1) effects of emotion and cognitive workload (i.e.,
mental effort) on brain responses related to automatic attention, (2) brain
activity related to interactions between emotion and personal memories, and (3)
the role of emotion in brain activity related to computer-mediated communication
(e.g., texting). In addition, faculty will integrate research with education by
incorporating APRS-based research into research methods and independent research
courses in psychology and neuroscience, by initiating student projects to detect
subtle patterns in complex brain activity (engineering) and identify patterns of
brain activity related to connecting with literary characters (languages and
literature). Ultimately, deeply engaging undergraduate students in original
scientific research with the APRS will be a critical component of each research
project.