* 1429247
* MRI: Acquisition of a GCMS to enhance undergraduate research training in the natural sciences at Virginia Wesleyan College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kevin Kittredge, Virginia Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,438.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities program (CRIF), Virginia
Wesleyan College will acquire a gas-chromatagraph and mass spectrometer analyzer
(GC/MS). Gas chromatagraphy is a powerful technique employed to separate complex
mixtures into individual components for further identification. This analysis
will be performed in the mass spectometer where the separated components are
injected for determination of their masses to aid characterization. The
spectometer ionizes the components into a parent ion and smaller fragment ions
and measures each of their masses. This highly sensitive technique allows
detection and determination of the structure of the molecules in a complex
mixture. The instrument will be used by undergraduate research students to
advance their research projects and by students in laboratory courses using
modern instrumentation. It will prepare them for technical careers and advanced
educational opportunities.

The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education especially in areas
such as (a) investigating the potential of natural products (specifically sea
sponge toxins) for possible use in pharmaceuticals; (b) evaluating green
chemistry practices for the development of pharmaceutical feedstocks; (c)
evaluating and characterizing metal ion coordination materials for use as
sensors; (d) evaluating the effectiveness of environmental pollution reduction
measures; and (e) investigating plant evolution through the examination of the
plant sterol pathway.