* 1429315
* MRI: Acquisition of an Acoustic Wave Glider
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Roger Rulifson, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 281,393.00

The Acoustic Wave Glider manufactured by Liquid Robotics, is a mobile, unmanned,
quiet, ocean surface vehicle for the study of marine soundscapes and detection
of acoustically tagged marine animals. The glider is powered by batteries
recharged by solar photovoltaic panels and propelled by wave action, so that
long unmanned missions can be achieved at very low cost. The glider can travel
along programmed transects for months-long deployments collecting meteorological
and ocean data and recording and identifying species that make sounds in the
ocean soundscape, including both the natural (geophony and biophony) and
anthropogenic (anthropophony) sounds. Some of the species that can be studied
with the acoustic sensors on this glider include the endangered Atlantic
sturgeon, red drum, striped bass, groupers, bluefin tuna, sharks, endangered
right whales and bottlenose dolphins. The instrument package on the glider will
allow multiple and simultaneous measurements of the ocean environment (waves
using a Datawell MOSE-G1000 wave sensor; currents using a Teledyne RDI Acoustic
Doppler Current Profiler; temperature, salinity, depth and dissolved oxygen
using a Sea-Bird CTD+DO sensor; and turbidity and phytoplankton abundance using
a Turner C-3 pumped fluorometer) and near-surface weather (air temperature,
rainfall, wind speed using an Airmar 200WX Weather Station) during missions. An
acoustic tag receiver (Vemco VR2C sensor) will be used to detect and track
acoustically tagged animals, and a recording hydrophone and analysis system
(Decimus PAMBuoy sensor) will record sounds produced by marine animals and
classify them.

The glider will be used to monitor areas for the presence of sound-producing
animals, to avoid noise and other impacts to threatened species in shipping and
transportation corridors, to identify and protect fishing areas, and to assess
impacts to areas proposed for wave and wind energy development, sand mining
areas, and oil and gas leases. Data reports will be relayed from all the glider
sensors to land-based computers via satellite and mobile phone modems in near-
real-time for analysis, mapping and archival. Our overarching objective with the
Acoustic Wave Glider is to document ocean habitats and biologic communities in
continental shelf and slope waters to determine static communities (e.g., reefs)
and migratory pathways of highly mobile species (e.g., fishes, marine mammals,
sea turtles). Secondary objectives include providing data to oceanographers on
environmental conditions during normal conditions and storm events to enhance
storm prediction models. Storms and rainfall events can be analyzed for their
impacts on ocean communities through acoustic analysis of organism responses.
Storm events often cannot be sampled by vessels due to danger to life and
equipment, but wave gliders are specifically designed to survive and report
ambient ocean conditions, even during storm sea states and hurricanes. The
glider will be featured at public displays of research at the NC aquariums,
including static displays and interactive touch screens of glider tracks are
planned. Scientific forums, seminars, and other public events will be scheduled,
and glider users will be encouraged to write public interest articles about
mission results for news media and magazines. The results of studies based data
collected with the glider will be presented at scientific meetings and published
in peer-reviewed journals.