* 1429658
* MRI: Instrument Development: Additive Rapid Prototyping Instrument (ARPI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Yip-Wah Chung, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 461,632.00

MRI: Development of an Additive Rapid Prototyping Instrument for Advanced
Manufacturing Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing (AM)-- the
process of making a three-dimensional object from a digital computer model-- has
the potential to revolutionize the way things are made. It enables design-driven
and personalized manufacturing and the production of complex parts and
structures. This rapidly evolving technology is being used by companies in
industries ranging from healthcare to national defense but with current AM
processes there are limitations in the accuracy and quality of the parts that
can be made. This Major Research Instrumentation award will support the
development of an integrated Additive Rapid Prototyping Instrument with multiple
AM operations and real-time advanced sensing and control functions. This will
enable fundamental research on the fabrication of products from different
materials with intricate features and enhanced mechanical properties. This award
advances the frontiers of AM and fundamental multidisciplinary research and
education and promotes technology transfer to enhance the competitiveness of the
US manufacturing sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significant feature
of this instrument will be its ability to realize multi-physics, multi-material
and multi-scale processes for improved accuracy, surface finish, and properties.
This multi-functional modular system will perform laser-engineered net or powder
bed fusion, with subsystems for accuracy and property enhancements, and process
monitoring, operating in a common command-and-control environment. The
instrument will integrate several processing energy sources with computer
numerically-controlled precision and high-speed high-sensitivity
instrumentation. The dominant scientific and technological challenges to be
addressed are the realization of the integrated system and the understanding and
modeling of hybrid processes and process chains in such an environment.
Incorporation of sensors and instrumentation for in situ real-time measurements
of relevant physical process parameters as a function of time and position will
be crucial to the understanding of interactions that take place between
processing energy sources and the workpiece. This fundamental knowledge provides
a key stepping stone in advancing the frontiers of additive manufacturing.