* 1429468
* MRI: Acquisition of a III-Nitride MOCVD for Nanophotonics and Nanoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Raymond Phaneuf, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,129,160.00

This project involves the acquisition of a chemical vapor deposition system for
the growth of semiconductor materials to advance the frontier of advanced
photonic and electronics devices. This equipment will help to establish a new
Laboratory at the University of Maryland (UMD) which will serve as a resource
center for the broad community of researchers working in the field of
semiconductor materials and devices. The strategic location in the National
Capital Region will leverage the existing expertise at UMD and nearby
institutions to provide many users and collaborators. The research enabled by
this acquisition will lead to higher efficiency devices that will reduce power
consumption in data centers and will ensure secure communication networks.
Collaboration with nearby Norfolk State University will permit several of their
professors and students to participate in the planned research. The PIs will
involve students from local high schools to take part in research summer
programs. Workshops will be organized in the Washington area to energize
collaborations between local universities, government laboratories and local
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work to establish a
metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) system will serve as the center
for preparation of III-nitride semiconductor materials and devices. The system
will be used by researchers at UMD and nearby institutions to address many areas
of nitride-based photonics and electronics devices. There will be five
overlapping research thrust areas: Nitride Materials Design and Synthesis;
Nitride Quantum Devices; Nitride Optical Devices; Nitride Devices for Energy
Applications; and, Nitride Electronic and Sensor Devices. The acquisition will
promote multidisciplinary efforts between researchers in materials science,
chemical engineering, device physics and electrical engineering. The UMD
research team, and their collaborators from across the US, will focus on a
number of fundamental issues currently limiting the performance of nitride-based
device structures, including quantum dots in nitrides for quantum information at
room temperature and novel nanowire devices for solid state lighting. The MOCVD
system will allow exploration of the unique properties of III-nitride materials
leading to photovoltaic devices for highly-efficient solar energy collection,
high power devices for smart grid applications, and efficient photonic detectors
based on confined epitaxy. The PI and co-PIs have the necessary expertise
required for this utilization of the MOCVD system and for the planned research
activities.