* 1429890
* MRI: Development of the Keck Cosmic Web Imager Reionization Mapper
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2023
* Christopher Martin, California Association for Research in Astronomy
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,528,403.00

While astronomical images can offer breathtaking records of the appearance of
the Universe, far greater information is obtained by dividing a light beam
according to color (a technique known as spectroscopy). This approach can yield
important details about the physical properties of the source: its temperature,
chemical composition, density, mass, and velocity, among others. Constructing
very efficient, wide spectral coverage, high-resolution mapping spectrographs is
therefore an effective approach to getting the most from our very largest
ground-based telescopes. Dr. H. Lewis (California Association for Research in
Astronomy together with the California Institute of Technology and the
University of California) proposes to complete the development of the Keck
Cosmic Web Imager spectrograph for the 10-m Keck II telescope atop Mauna Kea,
Hawaii with new optics optimized for the red portion of the spectrum. The final
instrument will provide an extraordinary platform for carrying out sensitive
assessments of galaxy formation and evolution in the first few hundred million
years after the Big Bang, to study the interstellar medium in external galaxies,
to probe star clusters and nebulae in our own Milky Way galaxy, and to track the
process of star formation within those clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Keck
Cosmic Web Imager (KCWI) is designed to provide seeing-limited visible band,
integral field spectroscopy with moderate to high spectral resolution (up to R =
20,000), selectable slicer scales and fields of view, high efficiency, and
excellent sky subtraction. KCWI will benefit from the Keck II telescope's large,
10-m aperture and excellent site, providing a dual-channel, modular
implementation. The blue channel of KCWI is nearly complete; the red channel to
be funded through this proposal will extend the spectral coverage to the entire
optical window from 3500 to 10500 angstroms and enable scientists to address
several of the key questions relating to the process of the formation and
evolution of external galaxies, and thereby of the development of matter in the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of the red channel of
the Keck Cosmic Web Imager is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical
Sciences through its participation in the Major Research Instrumentation
program.