* 1429093
* MRI: Development of Testbed Platform for Advanced Multi-Stage Automation and Control for Smart and Micro Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* David Wenzhong Gao, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2020
* USD 877,181.00

The development of flexible electric power and energy systems that are secure,
resilient to attack, sustainable and affordable in an environmentally friendly
manner has become a national priority. Industries, government, National
Laboratories, and various agencies, such as the military (for its bases), are
looking for a testbed to test the design of a flexible micro grid for
independent and reliable power supply to meet the increasing local demands which
cannot be guaranteed by conventional, central generation based electricity
networks, especially during disastrous situations. This MRI project will develop
a new state-of-the-art platform for incorporating the micro grid and smart grid
technologies, which are urgently needed for deployment of new concepts, methods
and tools for smart micro grids. The Howard University (HU), in collaboration
with University of Denver (DU), will design, build, and construct real-time,
highly flexible testbed and tools that will facilitate advancing the design and
implementation of micro grid and smart grid. The testbed will benefit multi-
users including students and faculty at HU and other partner universities and
local electric power utility companies. In addition, the testbed will also be
available as a national asset for standards organization like National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) and policy makers in the Washington, DC area
to try out their ideas and learn about tools being developed in support of
smart- and micro-grid. This will also serve as a research and educational tool
to attract, recruit, and retain students in STEM disciplines. The research
infrastructure will provide a real time platform that external broad users can
utilize for hands-on experience. Minority and underrepresented students and
researchers will be attracted to the testbed for advanced studies of important
power and energy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI Development Project aims
at the following objectives: (1) Design and develop a highly reconfigurable
micro-grid testbed for testing micro grid designs; (2) Deploy distributed Phasor
Measurement Units (PMU), Phasor Data Concentrator (PDC) and a smart grid testbed
with Real-Time Digital Simulators (RTDS); (3) Develop tools to study the impact
and usage of renewable energy resources in the smart grid and micro grid through
real time modeling and hardware-in-the-loop simulation; (4) Develop platforms
for various standards development, real time visualization, and application
development for smart and micro grids. The flexible research and education
testbed will facilitate advancing current work in the design and implementation
of smart grid that will create opportunities for the study of large
interconnected micro grids and smart-grid networks. This will be achieved by
having multi-university collaboration with experts who are actively engaged in
the design and implementation of micro and smart grid technology. This open-
access testbed will be used for decision support, performance study, protocol
evaluation, standards developments and testing of security requirements and
automation functions with interoperability of new technological devices needed
for development of future smart- and micro-grid technologies. This platform will
also readily equip students and professionals with state-of-the-art knowledge.
The benefit of this collaboration will open doors for many players including the
research centers at Howard University, the utility companies, collaborating
universities, military bases, and government agencies to use the University
micro-grid as a testbed for validating new design, prototypes and research while
building new transformational educational courses. The principal investigators
and senior personnel of this project will pursue a holistic range of activities
to promote the usage of the MRI testbed for research-integrated education and
outreach, for training at all levels: from pre-college students through
postdoctoral fellow and young faculty to engage creative and innovative ideas.
This will promote growth among participants and attract more underrepresented
minority to major in power and energy systems.