* 1429258
* MRI: Development of a 260 GHz Pulse EPR/DEER Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ralph Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,584,326.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor R.
David Britt from the Department of Chemistry at the University of California-
Davis (UCD) and colleague Neville Luhmann from the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at UCD as well as various senior personnel from California,
Oregon, Massachusetts and Florida will develop a pulsed EPR spectrometer that
will work at a high frequency (260 GHz), with low power (50 W), and bandwidth
(20 GHz) capable of carrying out electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR)
methods and double electron-electron resonance (DEER). The heart of the
spectrometer design is a compact 260 GHz Sheet Beam Traveling Wave Tube (SBTWT)
amplifier operating at a voltage of 20 kV with a 1% pulse duty cycle. The design
is scaled from that of a 220 GHz SBTWT developed under the DARPA HiFIVE program.
An industrial partner (Bridge 12) is also going to be involved. In general, an
EPR spectrometer yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic
structure of molecular and solid state materials. It may also be used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive
species involved in valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation
of pathological tumor growth. These studies will impact a number of areas, from
the synthesis of inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid
state materials to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Importantly,
participation of students will allow preparation of the new generation of
instrumentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will produce an instrument
capable of carrying out a series of high impact research in various
interdisciplinary fields while involving multiple departments across the United
States. The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) using Gd(III)-DPTA labeling; (b) studying
mechanisms of activation in proteins of GPCR signal transduction; (c) studying
how metals bind to the antimicrobial Calprotectin S100-family protein; (d) using
ENDOR to probe a high affinity Mn(II) binding site in the catalytically active
Mn-substituted form of the hammerhead ribosome; (e) studying oxidation of Mn(II)
in manganese dioxide biomineralization by the bacterial multicopper oxidase
MnxG; (f) studying the circadian clock of cyanobacteria; (g) analyzing the
effects of metal ion binding in activity of DNA polymerase; (h) studying how
metal ion binding affects protein folding and misfolding in a variety of
proteins with Cu(II) and Zn(II) binding domains; (i) studying water oxidation
and hydrogen reduction catalysts to be employed in solar fuel systems.