* 1429500
* MRI: Acquisition of  a High-Density Microelectrode Array for Recording and Stimulating Hundreds of Neurons
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2017
* John Beggs, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2017
* USD 91,555.00

An award is made to Indiana University, Bloomington, to acquire a 512 micro-
electrode array instrument (512MEA) for recording and stimulating electrical
activity in samples of brain tissue. The 512MEA can be used to measure how
groups of several hundred neurons send information back and forth to each other.
The ability to map information transfer in networks of this size is expected to
be very valuable. Many theories predict that information transfer will change in
networks of hundreds of neurons after learning, after exposure to drugs of
addiction or toxins, after seizures and after traumatic injury. Other theories
predict that brain networks process information in a nearly optimal way, an idea
that has remained largely untested. Use of the 512MEA is therefore expected to
provide new knowledge relevant to understanding how learning occurs, how drug
addiction begins, how poisons affect brain health, how epileptic seizures start,
how the brain responds to injury, and how the brain optimizes information
processing. Ultimately, this work could benefit society by helping to improve
teaching and learning in schools, by helping in the treatment of epilepsy
patients, people exposed to harmful substances, war veterans, and by suggesting
new ways to design brain-like computers. To maximize the number of students and
laboratories using this device, it will be rotated between the Department of
Physics, the Department of Brain and Psychological Sciences, and the Medical
School. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training opportunities that are
opened by the 512MEA center on two topics of investigation: (1) emergent
properties, and (2) information transfer. Emergent Properties: Many basic
emergent properties of the brain like pattern recognition, associative memory,
formation of cell assemblies, neuronal avalanches, synchronized pulses, and
collective computations are predicted to arise first in populations of hundreds
of interconnected neurons. Although most of these phenomena have been predicted
for decades, they have remained largely unexplored for lack of proper
instrumentation. The 512MEA would allow all of these topics to be researched in
detail, many for the first time. Information transfer: It is almost completely
unknown how information transfer differs in networks from naive animals and
those that have learned; between networks exposed to neuro-active substances and
those that have not; between developing networks and those that have matured.
Because the 512MEA can record neural activity at millisecond resolution, it can
identify which brain cell became active first in a chain of activity. This
ability is crucial, as it will indicate the direction of influence between
neurons. Optical methods of recording activity between hundreds of neurons often
do not have this capability. The 512MEA can thus permit many of these topics to
be researched for the first time.