* 1429873
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computer Cluster for Gravitational-Wave Astronomy with Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Joshua Smith, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 119,791.00

This award supports the purchase of a supercomputer that will be used by
researchers in California State University Fullerton's (CSUF's) Gravitational-
Wave Physics and Astronomy Center (GWPAC). Gravitational waves are ripples of
warped space and time; experiments such as the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (Advanced LIGO) will soon have the astrophysical
reach to observe gravitational waves from colliding black holes and neutron
stars. Observing as many of these waves as possible and learning as much as
possible about their sources require a generation of students with extensive
knowledge of the high-performance computing (HPC) hardware and software used to
model and detect gravitational waves. GWPAC will use the supercomputer to train
student researchers in HPC and gravitational-wave science, empowering students
to make significant contributions to the field of gravitational-wave physics and
astronomy. GWPAC researchers will use the supercomputer to help maximize the
scientific payoff of Advanced LIGO by i) simulating colliding black holes and
neutron stars to predict the gravitational waves they emit, ii) developing tools
to identify and remove artifacts in detector data that could mimic gravitational
wave signals, and iii) investigating whether gravitational-wave observations can
help us learn how matter behaves in the extreme conditions present in neutron
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imminent direct detection of gravitational
waves, nearly a century after Einstein predicted their existence, promises to
inaugurate a new era of astronomy. Accurate predictions of the expected
waveforms, thorough characterization of the detectors, and exploration of the
potential for extracting astrophysical information from detections each require
HPC. This award will leverage existing infrastructure to double the number of
compute cores (from 240 to 480) of CSUF's first research HPC cluster of its
scale. GWPAC researchers will use the cluster to simulate many more collisions
of black holes and neutron stars, to develop new tools to characterize and
assess data-quality impacts on the Advanced LIGO detectors, and to explore how
including more realistic astrophysics in neutron-star waveform models could
broaden the information we can extract from detections to include the neutron-
star equation of state. The expanded cluster will magnify GWPAC's students'
scientific impact and will strengthen CSUF's links with external collaborations.
The cluster will provide students at CSUF, a primarily undergraduate and
Hispanic-serving institution, with enhanced opportunities to acquire
transferable computing skills while playing important roles in preparing for the
first direct detections of gravitational waves.