* 1429550
* MRI: Acquisition of an Asylum Cypher ES High-Speed Environmental AFM
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Ka Yee Lee, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 332,710.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of an Asylum Research Cypher
ES high-speed environmental atomic force microscope (AFM) opens up new research
avenues for investigators in diverse disciplines spanning biophysics, chemistry,
physics, polymers, and materials science. The Cypher ES produces stunning images
and movies of microscopic objects and phenomena with exquisite speed,
resolution, and sensitivity. The Cypher ES is located in a shared research
facility at the University of Chicago, is open to all users and research teams
from academia, education, and industry alike, and is configured with advanced
features that render it the only system of its kind in the entire Midwest.
Accordingly, the Cypher ES not only substantially enhances campus research
capabilities, it also provides an invaluable resource for the entire Midwest
region research community, and significantly contributes to the national
research infrastructure. Furthermore, the Cypher ES improves the quality of
student education both in the laboratory and the classroom. When learning to use
the instrument, students receive one-on-one comprehensive training that provides
vital tools and understanding to advance their research activities and formative
growth as young scientists. The instrument is integrated into undergraduate and
graduate lab courses. This inclusion supports curriculum development aimed at
incorporating research training into the traditional classroom. The Cypher ES is
also showcased in microscopy demonstrations at an annual Open House that
comprises an important part of science outreach to the general public and the
surrounding Chicago Southside
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
generation of fast scan atomic force microscopes (AFMs) offer the ability to
resolve dynamical processes with high spatial and temporal resolutions
previously unattainable. The Cypher ES high-speed environmental AFM features
fast imaging rates, robust thermal stabilization, closed-loop scanning, advanced
environmental chambers, and proprietary blueDrive cantilever excitation. Taken
together, these features greatly reduce artifacts due to drift and distortion
and enhance imaging speed, stability, and resolution. Automatic non-contact
calibration of cantilever spring constants allows for precise control of
interaction forces (to picoNewton levels) and enables direct nanoscale
viscoelastic mechanical property characterization and manipulation of sensitive
samples. The inclusion of the Cypher ES as part of an established shared user
facility at the University of Chicago enables the activities of a significant
number of research groups with expansive interests: including membrane
biophysics, cellular biomechanics and actin, bioelectronics, synthetic cellular
interfaces, programmable DNA topologies, block co-polymers, hybrid nanoparticle
materials, spintronics and quantum materials, 3D supramolecular materials,
molecular electronics, and polymer solar cells. The fast scanning speed, high
resolution, and exquisite force sensitivity helps image and reveal new types of
dynamics in diverse material, chemical, and biophysical systems. The system is
the first Cypher ES located in an open-access shared user facility in the
Chicago area and is available to all interested on- and off-campus users from
academia and industry. Furthermore, it is the only Cypher system with blueDrive
in the entire Midwest, and thus has a broad and significant impact on research
infrastructure that extends far beyond the University of Chicago. The system
will also be included in undergraduate and graduate lab course curricula and
serve to provide experience with advanced scanning probe techniques to students
in the classroom.