* 1429437
* MRI: Development of a Holographic Nanoscale Optics Instrument
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 383,878.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;Optical (or light) microscopy is arguably one of the
most successful techniques for the non-invasive examination of the microscopic
world ever created. Robert Hooke coined the term "cells" to describe the
substructure of cork he first observed through a microscope in the 17th century.
Over the past century a variety of sophisticated methods have been developed
that today provide the ability to observe migrating cells, examine the
distribution of subcellular structures, map the expression of genes, or form
"chemical images" coded according to the molecular structure of the sample.
Despite its immense success, optical microscopy is fundamentally limited in its
ability to resolve features less than a few hundred nanometers. Specifically,
the diffraction limit causes light from points in an object to spread out as it
propagates through a lens, thereby blurring images as they are magnified. Near-
field microscopy overcomes these limitations by placing an optical probe a few
tens of nanometers away from the object and sampling the emitted or scattered
light before it experiences diffraction. Boston University researchers are
building a versatile near-field microscope providing local and regional users
with access to optical resolution on the order of 10 nanometers. The instrument
is enabling a range of important research thrusts including (i) studies of
protein folding behavior that can shed light on conditions such as Alzheimer's;
(ii) the development of new materials for laser sources; (iii) methods for
engineering the properties of single atomic thick layers like graphene for next-
generation electronics and; (iv) methods for controlling the flow of light on
nanometer length scales, important for new optical sensors and communications
technologies. The BU project is also engaging women and underrepresented
minority undergraduate students in cutting-edge research. Since the ability to
"see" objects at the nanoscale can be a powerful motivator for a young mind, the
team is working with BU's Upward Bound Math Science 7-week residency college
prep program for urban high school students. Every Wednesday in the summer,
students perform nanotechnology hands-on experiments and use the new microscope
to observe the nano-world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Optical microscopy is arguably one of the most successful
techniques for non-invasive examination of the microscopic world ever created,
but is fundamentally limited to length scales of 100 nm or more by the
diffraction limit. Near-field microscopy overcomes this by placing a source or
probe into the near optical field of a sample to couple the non-propagating or
evanescent modes into far-field propagating modes for collection. While there
are 5 or 6 companies that sell near-field microscopes, all are limited in
capability. Boston University researchers are building a versatile holographic
nanoscale optics instrument integrated into an atomic force microscope,
combining near-field spectroscopies of elastic scattering, Raman and
fluorescence over a wide wavelength range. The instrument operates in both
transmission and back-scattering geometries, and includes interferometry for
phase-resolved near-field imaging to map 3D field response, providing the
flexibility and dexterity that are critical to advance complex research
problems. The instrument enables researchers at BU and regional universities to
investigate nanoscale optical phenomena in plasmonics, biophysics, and graphene
and other two-dimensional (2D) crystal membrane physics. Plasmonic studies are
exploring hot spots, local density of states and in particular, phase
singularities predicted to occur at the interface between metal and dielectric
components. In strain engineered 2D crystals of graphene, MoS2 and hBN,
researchers at BU are exploring atomic-scale friction and the exciting
possibility of mapping strain-induced pseudo-magnetic fields. In studies of
Germanium semiconductor nanomembranes, local optical response can confirm and
help engineer nano-devices with direct bandgaps. And in biophysics, long-
wavelength tip-enhanced near-field microscopy can provide unprecedented images
of intrinsic vibrational modes capable of sub-cellular classification and local
presence of important proteins.