* 1429995
* Mortgaging and Relations of Indebtedness in the Context of Economic Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Noelle Stout, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 73,792.00

The most enduring scientific discovery from the subfield of economic
anthropology has been its demonstration, from dozens of empirical cases across
cultures and time, that durable forms of exchange and commerce are frequently
marked by strong social ties and mutual interests. "Trust" in financial markets,
as many economists, anthropologists, and other social scientists have shown, is
essential to preventing market failures and stimulating recovery. In 2007, an
acute spike in subprime mortgage defaults in the United States brought about a
global financial crisis within a year. The origins and macro-level consequences
of the mortgage crisis have been studied quantitatively, but less is known about
how the mortgage modifications of 2.5 million Americans since 2007 have inspired
new understandings of mortgaging, a model of American indebtedness. This study
will explore how ideas about mortgaging have changed, with the aim of
identifying what conditions are necessary to restore faith in housing markets.

Dr. Noelle Stout of New York University will investigate how unpaid debt fosters
social bonds through an investigation of the imagined ties between homeowners
and lenders in the context of the 2008 subprime mortgage crisis. Through
ethnographic research in the Californian Central Valley, one of the fastest-
growing and hardest-hit regions in the nation, this study asks how homeowners'
encounters with lenders and government agencies are reshaping the social
institution of mortgaging. Dr. Stout will conduct ethnographic research among
homeowners, mortgage lending professionals, and state-funded housing counselors
which includes in-depth case studies, semi-structured interviews, media
analysis, and participant observation in a home loan counseling center and three
neighborhoods.

By applying models of debt formulated in non-capitalist economies to a late-
capitalist cultural milieu, this research promises to significantly advance
scholarly understandings of how obligations between people remain central to
financial markets, which are typically characterized as realms of rational
action devoid of mutuality. Moreover, given the extent to which the crisis and
fragile recovery of U.S. mortgage markets has transformed daily life for
millions of Americans, Dr. Stout's findings will be of interest to policymakers,
personnel at community organizations, and government officials working on
consumer protection, housing development, and mortgage assistance programs. More
broadly, an ethnographic purview of the 2008 mortgage crisis and the subsequent
rise of modification programs promises to show how the shifting terrain of home
ownership has transformed the meaning of American middle-class stability and
national solvency.