* 1429348
* Exploring Expert and Novice Graphical Communication Through Digital Sketching
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Geoffrey Herman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 248,238.00

The ability to communicate through graphical means such as sketching is central
to engineering education and practice, yet little is known about how, why, and
when students use engineering sketches or how they learn to use them. This
project studies how novices and experts produce and respond to their own
sketches, and builds on existing techniques for digital sketch recognition.
Students' representational fluency will be examined by exploring the
similarities and distinctions between experts and novices in their use and
production of engineering sketches during problem solving by focusing on
sketching in two domains: digital logic and trusses. These domains use
complementary styles of sketches as digital logic sketches are visually distinct
from real-world implementations, and trusses rely on facsimiles of real-world
objects. The use of complementary domains will provide richer observations that
can inform the future development of theory and pedagogical tools. Educational
data mining of students' sketches will provide new observations on sketching
behaviors (e.g., pen speed, pressure) that might be obscured or invisible to
human researchers.

Think-aloud interviews will be conducted as students and graduate teaching
assistants solve analysis and design problems for digital logic and trusses.
Data from these interviews will be analyzed with qualitative analysis techniques
to categorize behaviors of novices and experts. Additionally, preliminary data
mining will be performed on digital pen inputs to identify salient variables
that can be detected algorithmically. The intellectual merit of this project is
established by its basis on a rich tradition in the study of expert-novice
differences. This project is particularly informed by prior research on how
novices and experts comprehend and use static images in their reasoning.
Aligning educational data mining with qualitative analysis of sketching will
inform the development of a new form of mixed methods research, advancing the
state of the art in educational research methods. The broader impacts of this
project will be seen through three different facets: i) providing new avenues
for richer credentialing in engineering education, ii) enhancing and maximizing
the effectiveness of pedagogies and their tools through data mining, and iii)
producing a large corpus of sketching, simultaneously building a developer/user
community that can use that database.