* 1429042
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Compound-Specific Stable Isotope Analysis at the University of New Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Zachary Sharp, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2016
* USD 314,315.00

Non Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The University of New Mexico recently created
the Center for Stable Isotopes (UNM-CSI) that is dedicated to enhancing research
and training in the application of stable isotope analysis in the biological,
geological, anthropological, and medical sciences. Stable isotope analysis (SIA)
has revolutionized biology by providing an integrative way to trace elements,
the fundamental building blocks of all compounds, from cellular to continental
scales. Our project will expand analytical capabilities at UNMCSI to include
compound-specific stable isotope analysis (CSIA), an emerging technology that
allows for the analysis of individual compounds such as amino acids, fatty
acids, and carbohydrates. The acquisition of cutting-edge instrumentation will
greatly enhance education and training for students and post-doctoral
researchers at UNM. With administrative support, UNM-CSI will offer two research
assistantships per semester to train graduate students in the daily operation of
instrumentation, QA/QC protocols, and data reduction. In addition, most of the
principal investigators associated with this project teach undergraduate and
graduate courses that use UNM-CSI as an educational platform; the new
instrumentation will expose these students to pioneering technology. Lastly,
several of the principal investigators also teach short courses in the U.S. and
Latin America on how to apply SIA to research in their respective disciplines,
which have attracted &gt;500 graduate students and resulted in a number of
students coming to the U.S. to train at UNM-CSI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The majority of SIA applications in biology focus on the
analysis of bulk substrates such as plant and animal tissues. CSIA has given
biologists a view into the biochemical realm that governs how nutrients are
assimilated, synthesized, and transported within and among organisms. The
requested instrumentation will greatly enhance opportunities for UNM faculty and
students whose research focuses on two general areas: (1) organismal ecology and
physiology and (2) paleo-environmental reconstruction. Our research will tackle
several CSIA-based projects to (1) examine the role gut microflora play in
synthesizing amino acids when their eukaryotic hosts do not consume adequate
amounts of protein; (2) explore amino acid hydrogen isotopes in amino acids as
novel tracers of food and water use in animals; (3) understand the dynamics of
carbon turnover and transport in plants, (4) characterize the consequences of
drought and dewatering on population, community, and ecosystem processes in
desert aquatic systems, and (5) reconstruct ancient climates via isotope
analysis of leaf waxes. Our objectives for having CSIA capabilities at UNM are
to pioneer innovative analytical approaches that will be used to address a broad
range of questions in biology, and grant the next generation of scientists
unimpeded access to cutting-edge technology that has the potential to
revolutionize their fields.