* 1429045
* MRI: Development of Multiscale Imaging Platform for Quantitative Analysis of Collagen Organization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Paul Campagnola, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 579,600.00

PI: Campagnola, Paul J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1429045&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI:
Development of Multiscale Imaging Platform for Quantitative Analysis of Collagen
Organization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The equipment and
experimental platform will greatly extend the UW-Madison research infrastructure
and open up new possibilities for studying a wide range of disease states that
have associated collagen alteration, which may have translational possibilities
to a variety of clinical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI developed an
optical microscopy graduate course as part of the biomedical engineering
curriculum. The PI and co-PIs all lecture in the undergraduate/graduate survey
course "the Microscopy of Life" which covers microscopy, biomedical imaging
techniques, and bioinformatics. The graduate students will be immersed in a
highly interdisciplinary research environment that involves aspects of cancer
biology, imaging, optical engineering, and imaging analysis engineering. Their
training will also provide exposure to different possible career paths including
academia and industry. Undergraduates and high school students will also be
involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will develop a "Multiscale
Imaging Platform for Quantitative Analysis of Collagen Organization" to
interrogate size scales of ~100 nm through several mms of tissues. This system
will incorporate Enhanced BackScattering (EBS) for characterization of
nanoarchitecture by optical scattering, laser scanning Second Harmonic
Generation (SHG) microscopy for collagen visualization at the submicron and
micron scale, and Quantitative Ultrasound (QUS) for quantifying larger aspects
of tissue organization. The integration into a single platform affords
significant advantages over individual correlated measurements. The instrument
will also afford both scientific studies of optical and acoustic scattering and
also provide the framework for future clinical diagnostic capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applications of this instrumentation platform will be
focused on investigating collagen and its role and alteration in normal and
diseased processes.