* 1429921
* Latent and Sensible Heat Flux at the Spray-Laden Air-Sea Interface
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* David Richter, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 251,728.00

The air-sea interface in high-wind situations, like hurricanes, is an important
topic that crosses boundaries between atmospheric sciences and oceanography. Sea
spray droplets are known to affect the temperature and moisture distribution in
the surface layer above the ocean, which in turn can affect associated
atmospheric processes. This award will provide an opportunity for a researcher
and his students to work on numerical modeling of these processes using direct
numerical simulation, which allows researchers to follow individual droplets as
they move along in the wind. The potential impact of this project is on improved
prediction of tropical cyclones, but the numerical techniques developed could
potentially have an impact across a variety of scientific disciplines. The work
would also contribute to the future scientific workforce through the training of
a graduate student and undergraduate student.

The researcher plans to address the role of sea spray on the exchanges of heat,
moisture, and momentum at the air-sea interface through a suite of numerical
experiments. The role of sea spray on these exchanges at high winds is uncertain
due to the difficulty in making measurements in these conditions. The researcher
has developed a numerical technique to track individual Lagrangian droplets
through a shear-driven turbulent flow, and two-way momentum coupling was
enforced for each particle allowing for a direct calculation of the bulk moment
flux modifications. This project would extend that work by implementing two-way
thermodynamic coupling between the droplets and the surrounding flow, allowing
for a direct evaluation of spray's influence on latent and sensible heat flux
and the resulting profiles of temperature and moisture. The specific research
questions to be answered include: 1) Do the vertical fluxes of sensible and
latent heat (and enthalpy) in an environment laden with thermodynamically-
coupled droplet particles exceed those of an unladen case? 2) To what degree is
the flux of salinity into the ocean enhanced by droplet evaporation, and can
this lead to enhanced mixing in the ocean boundary layer? 3) Do the mean
profiles of heat and humidity change immediately above the air-sea interface? 4)
What concentrations of water droplets are necessary to see any effects on heat
and moisture fluxes? 5) What size distribution of spray droplets can be expected
when in thermodynamic equilibrium immediately above the air-sea interface?