* 1429316
* MRI: Acquisition of an Adaptive Data Cluster for Data-intensive Applications in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Xinming Ou, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project, acquiring an adaptive multi-petabyte scalable storage cluster for
high-end applications, aims to service multiple research areas such as:
genomics, bioinformatics, computer security, digital ethnography, environmental
modeling, and computer science. The flexible storage consists of an integrated
multi-petabyte disk system with integrated compute capabilities and a scalable
tape archive system for data and storage intensive applications. The system
allows I/O-limited calculations to be performed directly on the storage nodes
(unlike the traditional storage clusters) and can also act as a distributed file
system with massive bandwidth to allow CPU-limited calculations to benefit from
existing cluster computational resources (unlike typical Hadoop clusters). The
instrument enables &lt;br/&gt;- Looking deeper in modeling genomes, hyper-
extractive economies and phenotyping&lt;br/&gt;- Bringing greater data capacity
tied to computational resourcing,&lt;br/&gt;- Attacking grand challenges (e.g.,
forecasting responses of ecological systems to natural and anthropogenic global
and regional change).&lt;br/&gt;- Developing new algorithms in high-throughput
phenotyping, computer security, and genome annotation (hence enabling a new
science with the hybrid platform).&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the storage cluster
constitutes a seminal component for a critical need, a campus-based facility for
data immersive computing, not only at the institution, but for the entire state,
since the institution currently does not have a central facility with capability
for 'big data' high-end computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As new algorithms are
developed for better modeling cyber interactions that can lead to increase the
financial and network infrastructure's ability, resiliency, and resistance,
multidisciplinary impacts on cybersecurity research are likely to be felt. It
can also contribute to train a new generation of researchers in tools and
techniques for data-intensive computing and ease their migration to XSEDE when
their research needs exceed the local resources. It can contribute to protect
the environment when developing better models of the interaction of water,
ecology, and economic factors. Moreover, it can enhance and integrate
educational efforts at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels in
bioinformatics (e.g., preparation of educational materials, impacting the K-12
and STEM education such as 'It's a BLAST' and GROW workshops for female high
school students). Ultimately, it allows access to community colleges and non-PhD
granting institutions to extend big data through and EPSCoR state, enabling many
researchers and educators.