* 1429616
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometer for Accurate Mass Determination and Complex Mixture Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Robert Wallace, Ripon College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 237,383.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Patrick Willoughby from Ripon College and colleagues Colleen Byron and Robert
Wallace will acquire a liquid chromatograph, time-of-flight mass spectrometer
capable of providing accurate mass (LCMS-TOF-accurate mass). In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of
the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph provides additional structural identification power by separating
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. As a primarily
undergraduate institution, Ripon's faculty embraces undergraduate research
experiences as one of the most important outcomes of their research activities.
The proposed instrument will directly impact the research experiences of a large
number of students within the three-year project period, and many more in years
to come. Undergraduate researchers will participate in activities with high
schools. This instrument will also be shared with researchers from the
University of Wisconsin Oshkosh as well as those from Lawrence
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) developing new organic
synthesis methodology involving acyl radicals and photoredox catalysis; (b)
optimizing conditions for the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction of o-benzyne
with a carbonyl ylide; (c) study the effects of byproducts of reactive oxygen
species on electron-transferring proteins; and (d) studying the effect of lipid
profiles on rotifer survival and the unpalatability of rotifer colonies.