* 1429783
* MRI Acquisition: Multi-Environment Research Computer for Exploration and Discovery (MERCED) Cluster
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jian-Qiao Sun, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2017
* USD 515,842.00

Scientific computing plays a central role in knowledge discovery and scientific
advancement. Over 13% of tenured/tenure-track faculty at the University of
California Merced (UCM) specialize in areas focused on computational science.
This expertise at UCM cuts through the university's three schools and includes
faculty-led labs in the natural sciences, engineering, and social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support for the acquisition of a shared
high-performance computing (HPC) cluster named the Multi-Environment Research
Computer for Exploration and Discovery (MERCED). The cluster includes
heterogeneous nodes, including nodes with large memory, nodes with large storage
space, and GPU nodes. The three specific research areas benefit from this
cluster, including modeling and simulation of complex systems, data enabled
science, and numerical optimization. In the simulation of complex systems the
cluster would advance research in high-performance molecular dynamics,
computations of atomistic interactions for friction modeling, first principles
simulations of chemical reactions and chemical biology, and fluid dynamics. In
data enabled study, the cluster would impact the research in computational
system biology, such as handling high-throughput genomics data, cognitive
sciences, such as the evolution of language in human populations, history and
world culture, such as integration of many datasets representing multiple
spatial, temporal and thematic scales and permitting analysis and spatial
visualization of this historical data in human affairs, and using GPU computing
for speeding up the performance of database systems. In numerical optimization,
the cluster would enhance the research in optimizing electric grid, GPU
computing for 3D data processing, and signal reconstruction algorithms. The
cluster enhances the educational and outreach activities at UCM as well as in
the nearby universities.