* 1429937
* CRCNS US-French Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: A replay-driven model of spatial sequence learning in the Hippocampus-PFC network using reservoir computing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Alfredo Weitzenfeld, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2019
* USD 391,576.00

Spatial sequence learning is a complex cognitive process that enables animals
and humans to reliably navigate between different locations in a specific order.
The goal of this project is to provide a better understanding of how spatial
sequence navigation is learned and optimized by integrating information obtained
from experimental studies in rats with computational models and autonomous
mobile robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial sequence learning has been shown to
involve brain areas including the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex (PFC).
Recent studies in the rat have shown that neurons in these two areas
spontaneously re-activate in short sequences. Much attention has been paid to
reactivation during sleep in the context of long-term memory consolidation. The
focus of this project is on the role of replay during the awake state, as the
animal is learning across multiple trials during the same session. The
hypothesis is that the generation of these short sequences of activity in
hippocampus allows for global spatial sequence learning in the PFC. The proposed
work involves the development of an integrated model of the hippocampus-PFC
network that is able to form spatial navigation sequences incorporating: 1) a
replay-driven model for memory formation in the hippocampus and 2) a model of
spatial sequence learning in the PFC that uses what is known as reservoir
computing. The PFC reservoir will consist of large pools of interconnected
neural elements that process information dynamically through reverberations. It
will consolidate hippocampal replay sequences into larger spatial sequences that
may be later recalled by subsets of the original sequences. The proposed work is
expected to generate a new mechanistic understanding of the role of replay in
memory acquisition in complex tasks such as sequence learning. That
understanding will be leveraged and tested on robotic platforms. Original
contributions of the proposed work include 1) the use of hippocampal replay to
create small chunks of valid trajectories, 2) the use of reservoir computing to
learn spatial sequences using the outputs of the hippocampus model, 3)
constraining and testing of the model using electrophysiological data in
behaving rats and 4) the use of the resulting model in the embodied-cognitive
framework of a robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded
by the French National Research Agency (ANR).