* 1429282
* MRI: Acquisition of a PyroCube IsoPrime 100 EA-IRMS for Stable Isotope Research
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Heidi Asbjornsen, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2017
* USD 357,512.00

An award is made to the University of New Hampshire (UNH) to support the
acquisition of an elemental analyzer isotope ratio mass spectrometer (EA-IRMS).
The EA-IRMS system will enhance the scientific and technological education of a
socially and economically diverse body of students of all ages, and will
substantially advance ongoing and future research by UNH faculty. Specifically,
the proposed instrument will enhance the Northern Ecosystems Research for
Undergraduates (NERU) program which brings students recruited from
underrepresented groups to UNH to study changing northern ecosystems. Stable
isotope work has been critical in the majority of NERU projects, and enhanced
analytical capabilities at UNH will expand the range of projects for the
students, while reducing analytical costs for the program. Access to the EA-IRMS
will be provided for middle and high school teachers and students through
partnering with the Joan and James Leitzel Center for Mathematics, Science and
Engineering Education at UNH, and will provide an opportunity for chemistry,
biology, and earth science teachers to use cutting-edge techniques to enhance
their scientific and technological preparedness. The proposed instrument will
also strengthen the UNH curriculum through creation of two new stable isotope
courses and inclusion in up to 13 other UNH courses that together will expose
more than 1000 students per year to training in isotopic analyses. Additionally,
stable isotope analysis will be integrated into two extensive, ongoing projects
promoting healthy nutrition in young adults: the College Health and Nutrition
Assessment Survey and a USDA Multi-State Research Project. These projects seek
to promote healthy eating habits for students of diverse socioeconomic
background and ethnicity across 11 states. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The need for
stable isotope analysis has increased dramatically in recent years as a result
of the increase in number and breadth of research disciplines that rely on
stable isotope techniques, as well as the rapid technological improvements in
stable isotope analysis. At UNH, faculty from diverse disciplines will use the
EA-IRMS to study a broad range of research topics including: 1) methane cycling
in wetlands; 2) coastal nitrogen pollution; 3) marine methyl hydrate production;
4) archaeological analysis of cod fisheries; 5) long term trends in the carbon
and water cycles of temperate and tropical forests; 6) the role of wetlands and
river systems on controlling flooding and water pollution 7) effects of forest
management on small mammal communities; 8) bacterial and fungal controls on soil
carbon storage; 9) crop, weed, and soil management for improved food production;
10) the role of fungi in forest ecology and climate change; 11) evaluating the
impact of dietary food choices on young adult health;12) linking dairy cow diet
to pollution and greenhouse gas emissions; and 13) tracking the consumption of
agricultural and human supplied food in deer populations. The requested EA-IRMS
will directly meet the research and training needs of more than 24 UNH faculty,
45 graduate students, and many more undergraduates, as well as external research
groups.