* 1429567
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry Instrumentation to Support Research and Undergraduate Education in Southern Colorado
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Janel Owens, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 204,047.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Janel Owens from University of Colorado at Colorado Springs will acquire a
liquid chromatograph, tandem mass spectrometer (LCMS/MS). In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are
measured. The chambers aligned in a tandem mode provide a higher degree of
separation. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination
of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph provides additional structural identification power by separating
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. As a primarily
undergraduate institution, the faculty at the University of Colorado at Colorado
Springs embraces undergraduate research experiences as one of the most important
outcomes of their research activities. The proposed instrument will directly
impact the research experiences of a large number of undergraduate students
within the three-year project period, and many more in years to come. The
instrument will be used by participants in an NSF funded REU program and will be
involved in green chemistry research and also by students at neighboring
Colorado College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) investigating
tetrabromobisphenol-A (TBBPA) and derivatives in environmental and food samples;
(b) toxicological analysis of postmortem brain tissue in suspected drug-related
deaths in Colorado; (c) synthesizing and evaluating a new hydroxamic acid series
for the treatment of Human African Trypanosomiasis; (d) investigating microwave-
assisted synthesis of fluorinated antimalarial analogues; and (e) investigating
and quantifying engineered nanomaterials in environmental samples.