* 1429768
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ana de Bettencourt-Dias, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 220,500.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Benjamin King from University of Nevada Reno and colleagues Ana de Bettencourt-
Dias will acquire an X-ray-powder diffractometer. In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. A powder diffractometer also allows
compositional analysis. The studies described here will impact a number of
areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, geology
and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research and research training not only in Chemistry but also in Geology and
Engineering and Materials Science. In addition, the instrument will be used in
outreach activities involving K-12 area schools.

The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) designing and synthesizing Lewis base
derivatized metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) to selectively remove carbon dioxide
from gaseous mixtures; (b) studying capped, mixed bimetallic systems for the
catalytic reduction of carbon dioxide; (c) developing mono- and bi-metallo-
intercalators for site specific binding of DNA; (d) investigating molecular
systems for application in photovoltaics, photocatalytic carbon dioxide
reduction and photoacoustic imaging technologies; (e) studying bioinorganic
chemistry of iron and hydrogen peroxide homeostasis; and (f) developing
strategies for the preparation of complex organic molecules.