* 1430040
* MRI: Development of Ultralight Biophotonic Neuro-cellular Imaging Platform for Elucidating Brain Activity in Freely-behaving Animals
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jin Kang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 557,680.00

PI: Li, Xingde Proposal: 1430040 Title: MRI: Development of Ultralight
Biophotonic Neuro-cellular Imaging Platform for Elucidating Brain Activity in
Freely-behaving Animals

Significance Development of this imaging platform will positively impact human
lives, particularly in the areas of health care, safety, and human assistance,
due to its portability, miniature probe design, and ability to operate in
multiple modalities. The neuroscience research will impact education,
rehabilitation, and mental-health. The project involves people at many career
stages, offering a rich multidisciplinary environment that integrates science
and engineering. Detailed system designs and research results will be widely
disseminated, accelerating the pace of neuroscience discovery. Exposure to this
platform will allow scientists to extend their research into new physiological
and pathological contexts. Moreover, the proposed imaging platform has
significant clinical translation potential, as it enables minimally invasive
visualization of cellular characteristics in vivo, in situ and in real time,
without the need for tissue removal, which can be readily adapted for diagnostic
analysis of other organ systems.

Technical Description: This Major Research Instrument (MRI) project aims to
develop an ultracompact, portable and head-mountable imaging platform, which
will enable imaging of brain activity with subcellular resolution in freely
behaving animals. The core of the platform is a novel fiber-optic, scanning two-
photon fluorescence endomicroscope which is not commercially available. This
ultra-microscope is capable of visualizing cellular activity with an imaging
quality approaching that of large bench-top microscopy systems. In addition, a
small footprint, tunable femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser will also be developed
and integrated to provide a portable platform for two-photon excitation. To
facilitate identification of specific brain regions for high resolution imaging,
a 2-mm fiber-optic confocal probe with a large field of view (FOV) will be
developed and integrated into the platform; this confocal probe will be
exchangeable with the two-photon ultra-microscope through the same head-mount
base. The confocal probe also enables high-speed imaging of cellular dynamics,
complementing the two-photon endomicroscope. The end result of this development
effort will be a unique, highly adaptable imaging platform for shared-use, which
can be transported to specific facilities/labs across JHU to address specific
research questions. The imaging platform will be developed in close
collaboration with four research labs at JHU that are engaged in studies of
cellular and subcellular dynamics in the intact brain and whose studies have
been limited by existing microscope-based imaging platforms.