* 1430552
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Zeolite Membranes for Olefin/Paraffin Separation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Zhong Tang, Bettergy Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 635,937.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project, if successful, could facilitate significant energy
and cost savings for olefin manufacturing facilities. In the US, ethylene and
propylene are the most commonly produced light olefins with annual production
exceeding 25 million tons for ethylene and 16 million tons for propylene. It is
estimated that over 120 trillion Btu of energy per year is consumed by the
current distillation processes for the separation of ethylene/ethane and
propylene/propane mixtures in the United States alone. The proposed work could
lead to the development of novel membrane separation technology with the
potential for significant energy and cost savings in the production of commodity
chemicals such as ethylene and propylene. There is strong commercial market
interest in technology that facilitates cost-effective olefin/paraffin
separation compared to incumbent technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop and commercialize
a robust, cost-effective, olefin/paraffin membrane separation technology with
high permeability and selectivity, as well as excellent operating stability.
Bettergy has shown in the Phase I program that their unique composite membrane
can separate propylene/propane gas mixture with propylene/propane selectivity of
~ 120, and propylene permeance up to 1.5×10-8 mol/m2.s.Pa. More importantly, the
membrane has demonstrated over 1500 hours of stable operation. In the Phase II
program, the major focus will be placed on membrane optimization, scale-up
process development and commercialization. Once fully developed, this membrane
technology could be an attractive alternative to the highly energy-intensive
cryogenic distillation process currently used.