* 1430099
* Fifteenth International Conference on the Science and Application of Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,000.00

ABSTRACT TITLE&lt;br/&gt;Fifteenth International Conference on the Science and
Application of Nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award is a
request for funds to subsidize the registration costs of student attendees at
the Fifteenth International Conference on the Science and Application of
Nanotubes which will be held on June 2-6, 2014, at the University of Southern
California. The PI for the award is Prof. Stephen Cronin from the University of
Southern California. Nanotube science, in the context of this conference,
includes, for example, ways to separate different nanotube materials by their
properties (nanotube has at least one dimension typically less than 1/1000th of
the diameter of a human hair); examination of the structure and properties of
materials made up of these nanotubes; and applications of nanotubes to thermal
and solar energy generation. World-renowned invited speakers will discuss the
key challenges faced by scientists and engineers who study such tiny, diverse,
and unique materials. Student involvement in this conference is an important
educational experience because they are expected to present their own research
at poster sessions. Student involvement is critical for developing the next
generation of innovative scientists and, hence, continues the growth of this
field of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this nanotube conference
series is ?to promote scientific progress, to stimulate free exchange of idea,
and to publicize progress in nanotube sciences.? (http://nt14.org/) This is an
established conference series that has been held every year since 1999. It has
not been held in the United States for the past 10 years. The topics to be
covered at this conference span chemical separation techniques, materials
science, thermal and solar energy conversion, and many others. The key
challenges faced by the research community (e.g., inhomogeneity of carbon
synthesis, toxicity, and utilization of carbon nanotubes in large integrated
circuits) will be addressed by invited speakers who are world renowned for their
leading-edge research on carbon nanotubes and related materials. Student
participation is an important component of this conference series, and all
students are expected to present their own research at poster sessions during
the conference. This inclusion is important to develop the next generation of
innovators and, hence, continue the growth of the field. This conference will
draw scientists from many disciplines in academics and industry, including
chemistry, materials science, biology, physics, and electrical engineering. This
type of interdisciplinary exchange is very important for both the established
scientist or engineer and the student attendees.