* 1430065
* CRCNS: From Sensation to Perception: Cellular and Circuit Mechanisms Underlying Prey Detection in an Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Laurence Abbott, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2017
* USD 720,000.00

A primary goal of neuroscience is to understand how the many components of the
brain interact with each other to give rise to the remarkable capacities of
perception, movement, and thinking exhibited by humans and other animals. For
most brain regions, the parts list is too long and the function is poorly
understood. This proposal takes advantage of an unusual animal--a fish that
emits its own electrical field-- in which the brain structure is simple enough
and the function sufficiently well understood, so that the detailed structure of
neural circuits can be directly linked to function. The project combines high-
resolution experimental measurements from individual components of the fish's
brain with mathematical modeling to make such links. The specific goal of the
proposal is to understand how changes in the strength of connections between
neurons allows the fish to learn to ignore sensations produced by its own motor
actions, so that the fish is better able to perceive tiny electrical fields
generated by insect prey. The work entails extensive collaborative exchange
between experimentalists and neural modelers, and will provide students at the
undergraduate and graduate level with cross-disciplinary training. Additionally,
science projects will be developed and taken to inner-city K-12 classrooms.
Finally, the work has implications for our understanding of failures in the
neural mechanisms that learn to distinguish self-generated from external sensory
signals, a problem that is thought to occur in human neurological disorders such
as schizophrenia.

The cerebellum-like electrosensory lobe (ELL) of mormyrid electric fish is an
ideal model system for exploring how motor corollary discharge is used to
predict self-generated sensory signals. Past work has produced a well-tested
model in which spike timing-dependent synaptic plasticity sculpts well-described
motor corollary discharge responses into a negative image of the sensory
response to the fish's own electric organ discharge (EOD). The goal of this
proposal is to extend this model from a description of the recordings of
negative images in ELL to an understanding of the fish's ability to use this
circuitry to detect the minute electrical signals generated by prey. The project
will determine how ELL supports the detection of prey-like signals assessed from
extracellular spike trains of identified neuron classes recorded at several key
processing stages within the ELL. In parallel, models of ELL adaptive processing
will be constructed to identify the essential features needed to account for the
measured detection performance at both the neural and the behavioral level.
Together, these closely coordinated experimental and theoretical efforts will
provide a detailed explanation of how plasticity operating in a well-
characterized circuit contributes to behavior.