* 1430144
* PFI:BIC  Fraud Detection via Visual Analytics: An Infrastructure to Support Complex Financial Patterns (CFP)-based Real-Time Services Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 805,129.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
from Arizona State University focuses on building a platform that will integrate
data from multiple sources and explore data analysis techniques that can more
accurately detect indications of financial fraud. According to Federal Trade
Commission's (FTC) annual "Consumer Sentinel Network Data Book", the most
comprehensive database of U.S. fraud trends, American consumers submitted more
than 1.5 million complaints - a 62 percent increase in just three years, and
they reported losing over $1.6 billion to fraud in 2013. Detecting increasingly
complex fraud schemes requires services that are able to integrate and enrich
data from disparate financial and other data sources and hunt for recurring and
often interconnected anomalous patterns in large networks. The proposed platform
will enable integration and enrichment of limited private financial data with
larger publicly available data sets to detect fraud and reduce losses due to
fraudulent transactions. The project will also include training and research
experience for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
data linkage and financial pattern discovery platform which is to be developed
via visual analytics will enable "smart" fraud detection and prevention
services. Today, in order to obtain a single unified view of fraud activity
across the enterprise and manage fraud on a cross-institution basis, fraud
detection companies collect, verify, and analyze consumer data and financial
information. Researchers recognize, however, that new insights into fraud and
risk patterns require the ability to integrate financial data with domain
independent data through real-time entity/identity discovery, resolution, cross-
linking and schema mapping techniques. Therefore, the importance of the research
discovery underpinning this project includes solving platform and processing
challenges that arise from the need to integrate, filter, analyze, and
visualize, in a secure and scalable manner, large private knowledge networks,
also incorporating uncontrolled, unrestricted, untrusted, unstructured and
unpredictable data from external domains. The ability to treat together
financial and domain independent data will lead to enriched unified data,
unprecedented predictive accuracy in fraud prevention and detection, and an
entirely new suite of risk management services and
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partners at the inception of the project are
Arizona State University (ASU) (School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision
Systems Engineering and, notably, the investigators also are members of ASU's
Information Assurance Center, certified by NSA and DHS); and a small business,
Early Warning Services, LLC (Scottsdale, AZ).