* 1430690
* SBIR Phase II:  Defect Mapping Instrument for Optimizing Wafer Manufacturing Process
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Araz Yacoubian, Ler Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2016
* USD 759,922.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that it will benefit the semiconductor
manufacturing industry by providing a metrology tool that increases yield and
reduces manufacturing cost. This project develops a non-contact, non-destructive
tool that enables rapid wafer scan, producing a subsurface defect map to locate
and minimize defects during integrated circuit manufacturing. The end user will
benefit from the lower cost of electronics resulting from increased yield.
Environmental benefits include reduction of wasted wafers and associated
materials and chemicals used during wafer processing. Other use of this
technology is as a laboratory instrument, providing a new subsurface
characterization tool to the scientific community. Semiconductors are ubiquitous
in our lives and the trend towards making them (and the products which house
them) faster, cheaper and smaller are clear. The industry is vocal in its need
for testing equipment to keep up with this trend, but current technologies fall
short.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project is to develop an inspection tool that is capable of detecting
subsurface features and defects for semiconductors wafer inspection. In the
wafers manufacturing, starting from the bare wafer, each step can lead to
defects, which, if not detected, can lower yield and increase cost. Certain
buried defects are not detectable using standard imaging techniques due to the
presence of absorptive layers. This SBIR Phase II project describes a non-
contact, non-destructive tool that utilizes an optical/acoustic technique that
enables rapid wafer scan, producing a subsurface defect map to locate and
minimize defects during integrated circuit manufacturing. Successful completion
of the Phase II will lead to prototype work and commercialization.