* 1430408
* Conference on Comparative Approaches to Grand Challenges in Physiology; San Diego, CA - October 5-8, 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,500.00

This award provides participant support for an American Physiological Society
(APS) Intersociety Meeting on Comparative and Evolutionary physiology to be held
October 5-8, 2014, in San Diego, CA. This APS Intersociety Meeting will be the
sixth in a series of meetings, held every four years, on the topic of
comparative and evolutionary physiology. This has been a highly successful
series, attracting 400-600 attendees, with a high proportion of international,
female, and junior scientists. The APS Intersociety Meeting on Comparative and
Evolutionary Physiology is one of only a limited number of international
meetings solely dedicated to the dissemination of recent conceptual and
technological advances in this diverse and exciting area. The theme of the
meeting will be "Comparative Approaches to Grand Challenges in Physiology." This
theme emphasizes the application of the Krogh Principle to solve major
physiological questions and features the "grand challenges" concept articulated
by the National Sciences Foundation. Examples of such challenges include
evaluating the mechanistic responses of animals to changing environments, using
genomes to inform physiology and vice versa, understanding the benefits (and
assumptions) of animal models of human disease, and teaching integrative animal
physiology to the next generation of scientists. Support from the award will: 1)
fund trainee workshops on "The Challenge of Teaching Physiology in a Changing
Environment: Innovations and Resources" and "Non-Traditional Career Paths for
Comparative Physiologists;" and 2) promote the participation of young scientists
in this Intersociety Meeting through the establishment of NSF-funded travel
awards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting is anticipated to have tremendous
impact on the field of comparative and evolutionary physiology and considerable
influence on the development of young scientists in this area. The trainee
workshops will provide valuable insights into career development and teaching
methods that will ensure continued progress and vitality of this important area
of physiology. Along with travel awards, this proposal will extend the reach of
this meeting by (a) attracting a larger number of participants to this meeting
and (b) recognizing the most meritorious research contributions by young
investigators in this area. The funds will augment the APS contribution to
travel and minority access awards, thereby improving support for young and
minority investigators and broadening the impact of this APS Intersociety
Meetings.