* 1430002
* Collaborative Research in IPY: Abrupt Environmental Change in the Larsen Ice Shelf System, a Multidisciplinary Approach - Marine and Quaternary Geosciences
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Eugene Domack, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 09/30/2014
* USD 12,485.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a research cruise
to perform geologic studies in the area under and surrounding the former Larsen
B ice shelf, on the Antarctic Peninsula. The ice shelf's disintegration in 2002
coupled with the unique marine geology of the area make it possible to
understand the conditions leading to ice shelf collapse. Bellwethers of climate
change that reflect both oceanographic and atmospheric conditions, ice shelves
also hold back glacial flow in key areas of the polar regions. Their collapse
results in glacial surging and could cause rapid rise in global sea levels. This
project characterizes the Larsen ice shelf's history and conditions leading to
its collapse by determining: 1) the size of the Larsen B during warmer climates
and higher sea levels back to the Eemian interglacial, 125,000 years ago; 2) the
configuration of the Antarctic Peninsula ice sheet during the LGM and its
subsequent retreat; 3) the causes of the Larsen B's stability through the
Holocene, during which other shelves have come and gone; 4) the controls on the
dynamics of ice shelf margins, especially the roles of surface melting and
oceanic processes, and 5) the changes in sediment flux, both biogenic and
lithogenic, after large ice shelf breakup. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include graduate and undergraduate
education through research projects and workshops; outreach to the general
public through a television documentary and websites, and international
collaboration with scientists from Belgium, Spain, Argentina, Canada, Germany
and the UK. The work also has important societal relevance. Improving our
understanding of how ice shelves behave in a warming world will improve models
of sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported under NSF's International Polar Year (IPY) research emphasis area on
"Understanding Environmental Change in Polar Regions".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;