* 1430398
* STEM Retention and Graduation: An Integrated Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Kamel Haddad, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,002,206.00

California State University, Bakersfield (CSUB) is a four-year degree granting
institution whose service area covers nearly 25,000 square miles, encompassing
Kern, Tulare, Inyo, and Mono counties, along with parts of Los Angeles and Kings
Counties. The area's need for workers with science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) degrees are high (5% of Kern County's total workforce), but
the pool of potential applicants is low (less than 1% of the population has
related STEM degrees). CSUB is in a unique position to meet that need. In 2009,
CSUB was cited in a research report by the Center for Urban Education as one of
the twenty-five Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) with the potential to
become an exemplary provider of STEM education because of CSUB's commitment to
providing equitable opportunities in STEM fields. This project is designed to
help CSUB realize that potential by overcoming a number of barriers found to
limit student retention in STEM. Studies have found that in order to have high
interest and motivation, students need to believe that a STEM major is worth the
effort, that they have the ability to complete their degree, and that the degree
is very useful for future employment. It has also been shown that classroom
climate and activities play critical roles in determining the students who do,
and do not, persist. This project is designed to provide freshman and sophomore
STEM students with confidence in their ability to deal with demanding courses
taken early in their academic career and the tools to do so, early exposure to
real-world applications of their major, positive insight into potential careers
and strong mentorship opportunities with upper-classmen in their major.

Specific goals include: increase the 2-year retention rates of STEM fields
students by 15% of the Fall 2011 figure, to 63.3% for freshmen and 59% for
transfers by the end of the three year grant period for lower division students;
increase the number of women and underrepresented minority (URM) students who
persist in STEM fields; increase the average student grade in the supported pre-
calculus and calculus sequence. A number of mechanisms will be used to
accomplish these goals. A student ambassador program will be established linking
upper classmen and lower classmen in STEM fields via a mentorship program. In-
class student tutors will be established in pre-calculus and calculus courses in
addition to designing these courses to be co-taught by both mathematics and
science (including computer science) faculty. A summer enrichment program will
be established for freshmen and sophomores. In order to help students realize
the job opportunities available in fields related to their STEM studies the
project will establish enhanced opportunities for undergraduate research and
internships with industries related to STEM majors.