* 1430843
* The Role of Tacit Knowledge in Scientific Experimentation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 436,108.00

Experimental historian of science, Professor Pamela Smith will lead a team of
international interdisciplinary experts and students in the reenactment of
experiments that were conducted during the scientific revolution. In 2014-15,
the focus will be metalworking and portrait medal casting; in 2015-16, on
pigment making and painting; and in 2016-17, on varnish making. These laboratory
seminars lay out a new model for collaboration between the humanities and
sciences, demonstrating the reciprocal effects of bringing historical research
to bear on laboratory activities and vice versa. It will have significant impact
on students of chemistry, engineering, and history because the learning
experiences are designed to illuminate the relationship between making and
knowing. The historic laboratory manual from which these historical experimental
reenactments will be drawn will be published in an open-access format open to
the public and the results of the research will be made available in a multi-
media interactive online environment. This resource will be invaluable to
scholars and to science educators and students interested in STEM. The
involvement of curators, conservation scientists, and educators will ensure that
museums and other public institutions will be able to use the research generated
by the project to develop public programming and installations that emphasize
the common history of art, technology, and science and the value of history of
science and hands-on learning in both historical and scientific training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will illuminate the role of technical manuals
in fostering the creative process and technical ability, qualities that are
instrumental to industrial innovation. The focus will be the physicality of
investigating nature, particularly the tactile relationship to materials that
produced unprecedented accuracy and innovation in experimentation and on the
role of tacit knowledge in methodological experimentation. A better
understanding of the embodied techniques used in scientific experimentation may
illuminate current concerns with experimental replication.