* 1430561
* U.S. Involvement in International Radio Science at the URSI GASS, August 14-23, 2014
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 07/31/2015
* USD 80,857.00

The International Union of Radio Science (URSI) General Assembly and Scientific
Symposium (GASS) is held every three years. In 2011 the 30th URSI General
Assembly was held in Istanbul, Turkey, with over 1,200 attendants. The next
URSI-GASS will be held in Beijing, China on August 14-23, 2014. The National
Academy of Sciences provides travel fellowships for young scientists to attend
the URSI-GASS and travel support for senior scientists to represent the United
States at the URSI Council meetings. Ultimately this ensures that we are
maintaining U.S. pre-eminence in the field of radio science, strengthening the
current and future health of U.S. scientific research and promoting scientific
advances in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conducted by the
U.S. National Committee for the International Union of Radio Science (USNC-URSI)
which operates under the Board on International Scientific Organizations in the
Policy and Global Affairs Division. The support for senior scientists to
represent the United States at the URSI Council meetings allows them to
participate in union discussions on scientific, programmatic, financial, and
organizational topics; work with colleagues from other countries on resolutions
and other union matters; and work with the U.S. early career travel awardees to
ensure they are fully included and involved in the Scientific Symposium. The
travel fellowships encourage students at U.S. universities to participate in the
Scientific Symposium and in the 2014 URSI General Assembly and allow younger
researchers to participate in scientific meetings in their field and to present
their research to colleagues in an international setting. This exposes them to
new scientific developments from both leading U.S. and international
institutions, and contributed to their education and their professional
development.