* 1430404
* Collaborative Research:  Integration Of Urban And Rural Population
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Lauren Ristvet, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 194,229.00

A question of current practical concern is how in developing countries
integration is achieved between urban and rural sectors of society. For a state
to function effectively, mechanisms for efficient social, economic and political
linkage must exist. The central goal of this project is to examine how such an
urban-rural system emerged. Archaeology is particularly relevant for such a
study because it permits processes to be traced over extended periods of time.
The fundamental goal of this research is to better understand the phenomenon of
low-density urbanism. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lauren
Ristvet (University of Pennsylvania), Dr. Hilary Gopnik (Emory University), Dr.
Emily Hammer (University of Chicago), and their colleagues will investigate a
large, dispersed settlement (ca. 490 ha) dating to the Middle Iron Age (MIA, ca.
800-600 BC) that surrounded the fortress site of Oðlanqala. Researching the
relationships between local communities and fortress-based polities in Naxçývan,
Azerbaijan can provide an alternative to models of urbanism that focus on high-
density cities. Given current concerns about low density urbanism ("sprawl") an
investigation of this phenomenon is critical to addressing long term questions
of urban form and sustainability. This project has the potential to transform
current debates on low-density urbanism, the role of pastoralists in political
complexity, and fortress-based polities. The rare opportunity to compare data
collected from the careful excavation of a fortress with evidence from
excavation and survey of an associated settlement will move the discussion of
urbanism from considerations of size and density to an evaluation of how
specific economic and social strategies shaped unique political forms. The broad
range of evidence considered will contribute to our understanding of the myriad
ways that local communities position themselves in relation to dominant powers

Previous work at Oðlanqala has recast scholarly understanding of the MIA, by
revealing a fortress with a hybrid Urartian-local cultural assemblage that led
to a reevaluation of the nature of imperial power in the region. Three years of
further research will clarify the nature of urbanism in the Iron Age South
Caucasus through survey and excavation of the settlement surrounding this
fortress. Researchers will evaluate four models of settlement dynamics that
consider the intersection of social variables including population density,
spatial segmentation, planning, investment in fortifications, economic
integration, and mobility. A pedestrian survey and magnetometry will analyze
settlement layout, density, and land-use patterns to determine how the
settlement interacted with its hinterland. Horizontal excavation will study the
patterning of activities to evaluate the relationship between households,
subsistence pursuits, and political authority. Three emerging scholars will
collaborate on stable isotope analysis of the archaeobotanical, faunal, and
human remains recovered from excavation, providing insights into agropastoral
practices, human and animal mobility, seasonality of occupation, and food
provisioning. Finally, stylistic, petrographic, and chemical analyses of
ceramics will shed light on production and exchange between the fortress and the
settlement. All datasets will be integrated into a 3D GIS recording system being
developed specifically for this project, which can be used for future research
in a range of disciplines.