* 1430429
* Meeting: 16th International Congress on Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, Rhodes Greece, July 6-10, 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Mary Beth Mudgett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The objective of this project is to secure travel support for 15 promising,
young U.S. scientists to attend the 16th International Congress on Plant-Microbe
Interactions (IC-MPMI), which will convene in Rhodes, Greece from July 6-10,
2014. This meeting is the premier forum for announcing and discussing the most
innovative scientific discoveries elucidating the molecular events by which
plants and microbe interact. The program will include established and young
scientists working on pathogenic and symbiotic associations using diverse
biological systems. Plenary and concurrent sessions will highlight the latest
advances in fundamental research as well as translational studies critical for
advancements in agricultural science. A major goal of the IC-MPMI is to provide
an interactive platform to share emerging data, establish and strengthen
collaborations, and develop innovative strategies and technology to improve
plant health, productivity, and security. These activities require full
participation from the international scientific community, most notably U.S.
students in training (i.e. graduate students and post-doctoral scholars). Travel
fellowship awardees will participate in small workshops and lunches with
established international scientists to promote student participation and
critical discussion. Awardees will contribute to the dissemination of findings
by releasing meeting highlights via social networking and publishing a congress
report. The broader impact of the IC-MPMI is to unite specialists who otherwise
would not cross paths. The meeting provides significant training value for young
U.S. scientists, including enhanced learning, networking, and career development
at the international level. The organizers have promoted broader participation
of minorities, women, and first-generation students by identifying top
candidates at U.S. institutions and soliciting their applications for the
meeting travel fellowships. Importantly, advanced professional development of
young U.S. scientists in plant-microbe interactions is fundamental to ensure
sustained production of high-quality crops in the U.S., and to meet the
increasing demands for food and energy worldwide.