* 1430435
* Scholars Award: The Structure of Spacetime: A New Approach to the Structure of Space-Time Controversy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Jill North, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 200,714.00

The investigator will engage in philosophical analysis in order to shed new
light on a long-standing, ongoing debate over the existence and the nature of
space-time. She will bring into consideration new results from physics (such as
different theories of quantum gravity) and new insight from metaphysics (having
to do with the notion of grounding, for example). The results of this study
should serve to clarify the ontological commitments of the physical theories
involved, and to advance understanding of the fundamental nature of the physical
world. It will have far-reaching consequences for metaphysics (developing the
notion of grounding in new contexts), philosophy of physics (drawing
philosophical conclusions from recent work in quantum gravity), and philosophy
of science (by exploring the relations between different levels of science). It
will also introduce new and useful concepts that will serve to foster mutually
beneficial communication between physicists and philosophers, who are
substantially and increasingly engaged in collaborative efforts.

The broader significance of this project relates to the investigator's
multidisciplinary approach and her efforts to address the glaring under-
representation of women in the fields of philosophy of science and the
conceptual foundations of physics, which is a serious problem. The results of
this study will be disseminated in a variety of multidisciplinary journals and
conferences that engage the attention of philosophers, physicists, and
historians of science. The research undertaken will enrich classes taught by the
investigator and enhance her mentoring of students, in particular women
students. She will use her influence to affect the gender balance of conferences
she attends, and cultivate supportive relationships with junior women faculty in
her area of expertise.