* 1430956
* SBIR Phase II:  A microscopic electronic chip with sensors that can be implanted into living cells to monitor events in real time
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Wlodek Mandecki, PharmaSeq, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,046,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to provide researchers and educators a
powerful device to monitor biochemical reactions and physical conditions inside
living cells in real time. The probe, which is microscopic in size and powered
by incoming light, will be inserted into living cells and will report parameters
such as pH and concentration of selected molecules via radio transmissions to a
nearby receiver. The transmission will contain both the identity of each cell
and the parameter(s) being recorded-hence it will be possible to monitor many
cells simultaneously. The ?radio p-Chip? will greatly advance the science of
probing cell physiology and create a new area in basic and applied research by
providing scientists the ability to study localized functions within living
cells. As such, it will be a powerful new tool for advancing knowledge in the
fields of mechanisms of disease, drug discovery, and control of biochemical
functions, metabolism and other areas. The radio p-Chip and receivers are
projected to be low enough in cost that they will also become scientific tools
for students to study cell physiology and thus become incorporated into
educational curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will result in
a system that will, for the first time in history, allow scientists to monitor
conditions in a living cell with a device that will not interfere with normal
functions including movement. The system will be based the current p-Chip, the
world?s smallest microtransponder that continuously emits a radio signal with an
identification number (ID) when illuminated with light. The p-Chip is used today
to tag, track and authenticate a wide variety of objects. In order to realize
the radio p-Chip, the current version of the chip will be shrunk by a factor of
10, and a variety of sensors will be added to its surface. Once complete, the
radio p-Chip will be able to alternately transmit its ID and sensor value
continuously to a nearby receiver. The receiver will process the signal for
further use by the operator. In parallel, a series of tools will be developed to
reliably implant the chips into living cells. In order to accomplish the goals
of the project, PharmaSeq will combine leading edge technologies in
semiconductor device design and fabrication, advanced sensor technology, digital
and analogue electronics, optics and software.