* 1430007
* PFI:BIC A Wireless Networked Biophilic Lighting System for the Delivery of Lighting for Enhancing Secondary School Student Performance
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jimmy Xu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 814,500.00

Adequate sleep is crucial for students to maintain the best possible performance
in the classroom. However, a natural biological tendency among teenagers to stay
up later in the evening combined with early morning start times at most schools
can result in a lack of sleep among middle and high school students that can
impact their classroom performance. Research has shown that various properties
of indoor lighting can influence the human cycle of sleep and wakefulness, known
as circadian rhythm. This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation
Capacity (PFI:BIC) project from Brown University aims to better understand those
light properties and design a dynamic, intelligent lighting system that can
effectively shift the circadian phase of students to help them remain alert and
focused during the school day.

The project aspires to advance smart lighting by developing a wireless networked
biophilic lighting system that will deliver lighting tunable in terms of
spectral band(s), intensity, directionality, duration, and season. An essential
first step will be to determine the efficacy of this system in suppressing the
production of melatonin, a hormone that mediates the circadian cycle. Working
with Digital Lumens, the team members will design and integrate several of these
wirelessly networked LED systems that are equipped with sensors and actuators.
They will then test them in the Sleep Labs of Brown University/Bradley Hospital,
via the monitoring and control of the lighting conditions, and analyze the
physiological responses in real time. The "prescriptions", in the form of
control algorithms and wireless networked control and sensor modules, will be
the basis for field-tests in a local school, conducted in cooperation with
school administrators, teachers, parents, and students.

The project will be undertaken by an interdisciplinary collaboration between the
laboratories of Professor Jimmy Xu, from Brown University's School of
Engineering, and Professor Mary Carskadon, from the Department of Psychiatry and
Human Behavior at Brown University's Warren Alpert Medical School. The
industrial partner is Digital Lumens (Boston, MA), a small business pioneer in
the development and implementation of next-generation LED lighting solutions.