* 1430642
* Expanding STEM Talent Through Upward Transfer: Factors Influencing Transfer in STEM Fields of Study from Two-Year to Four-Year Institutions
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Xueli Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,766,708.00

Two-year institutions are essential components of the nation's education system
and increasingly recognized as critically important in established and emerging
areas of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). However,
there is a limited body of research examining what influences student transfer
from two-year colleges into STEM fields of study at four-year institutions.
Drawing upon social cognitive career theory, the project will develop and refine
a STEM transfer model that hypothesizes that STEM transfer is influenced by
demographic factors, contextual factors, learning experiences in STEM, and
motivational beliefs related to STEM learning and transfer. The four-year
longitudinal mixed methods research project will investigate STEM transfer and
will advance and test a model of postsecondary STEM pathways to the
baccalaureate and careers in STEM or to alternative educational and occupational
attainment in STEM. The research team will follow a cohort of 3,000 students
beginning in STEM programs or courses required for STEM programs at two-year
community and technical colleges in Wisconsin and study factors that facilitate
or hinder their transfer into a STEM major at 4-year colleges and universities
during the study period.

The research adopts an explanatory sequential mixed methods design in which the
quantitative approach is dominant and is followed by a complementary qualitative
approach. The quantitative phase will consist of collection and analysis of
students' administrative records from participating institutions integrated with
students' data from a new longitudinal survey on STEM transfer. To establish
construct validity, the research team will perform exploratory factor analysis
to identify the factor structure. This will be followed by a confirmatory factor
analysis. Additional factor analyses will be ongoing as each wave of the survey
data becomes available. Three waves of data collection will be conducted.
Structural equation modeling (SEM) will be used to analyze the multivariate data
and to test the theoretical framework. SEM defines latent and observed variables
while testing the direct and indirect relationships among variables that are
hypothesized. The interview and focus group sample will be purposively selected
from survey participants. While specific selection criteria will depend on the
analysis of the survey data, it is anticipated that a combination of intensity
sampling, maximum variation sampling and/or homogenous sampling will be the most
viable strategies to provide more depth and insight into the factors influencing
STEM transfer as identified by quantitative findings. Deductively guided and
inductively grounded data analyses will be utilized to discover common themes
across interview and focus group qualitative data. The project will advance the
knowledge base on STEM transfer and contribute to theory building in this
important area of study.