* 1430810
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Surgical Closure Device for Minimally Invasive Procedures
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Dan Mazzucco, ZSX Medical
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,183,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is as part of a broader plan to develop,
validate, and market this new surgical device across a broad spectrum of
surgeries involving internal incisions (a total of 10 million procedures
annually in the U.S. alone). This technology has particular value in the
rapidly-growing minimally-invasive surgery market, in which internal closure is
made difficult by the small size of superficial incisions. These markets
represent more than 6 million surgeries per year in the U.S., creating a
domestic market potential of more than $2.5 billion for the platform of closure
devices under development. Initially, the system directly addresses a specific
unmet clinical need: reducing both the technical demands of internal closure
during minimally-invasive hysterectomy and the significant complications
associated with the use of sutures in this procedure. There were approximately
420,000 of these surgeries performed in the U.S. in 2013, representing more two-
thirds of all U.S. hysterectomies. This fraction of hysterectomies performed in
this manner is continuing to grow, and will represent a total annual addressable
domestic market size at peak sales of $200 MM ($600 MM
globally).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops a novel surgical
closure system for closing internal incisions in endoscopy. Our initial
application is in laparoscopic (minimally-invasive) hysterectomy. Sutures are
typically used to close internal incisions in laparoscopic surgery. Throwing
loops and tying knots are among the most difficult parts of laparoscopic
procedures; these difficulties have slowed the adoption of laparoscopic
hysterectomy. In Phase II, the Technical Objectives are (1) to refine the
closure system to meet the requirements of a minimum viable product; (2) to
demonstrate safety and efficacy of the system in a large animal model of
laparoscopic hysterectomy; and (3) to demonstrate efficacy of the system in
laparoscopic hysterectomy in a cadaveric model. These objectives are designed to
complete the evaluation of the performance of this novel closure system against
product requirements identified by the surgical community and utilized in the
design process.