* 1430062
* PFI:BIC  Making Full Use of the High-Resolution Image Capability of Smartphones to Collect Data through Ophthalmic Devices for Smart Mobile- and Tele-Health
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kevin Garcia, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 805,675.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
from the University of Arizona is designed to extend healthcare to remote
patients suffering from eye diseases. The field of Mobile Health, or M-Health,
is the merging of mobile technology and healthcare. Its purpose is to extend the
reach of healthcare services to people living in rural, remote, or isolated
areas who do not have routine access to healthcare. M-Health allows for
effective medical analyses and decisions to be made where remote patients are
located, rather than requiring them to travel to a distant city to receive
medical care. Ocular trauma, glaucoma, and macular degeneration are all
significant causes of preventable vision loss, if detected and treated early. A
series of devices is proposed which act as medical examination extensions to a
smartphone. A visiting healthcare practitioner attaches such a device to a
smartphone and runs a custom app to perform a specialized examination of
specific portions of the eye. Using a WiFi or cell signal, the smartphone app
submits the collected examination data to a remote "expert system," which
provides in-depth medical analysis processing. The analysis results are sent
back almost immediately and are displayed onscreen to the healthcare
practitioner. Through this process of telediagnosis, the project offers the
potential of greatly improving remote patient screening and triage. It will help
to ensure that patients with undiagnosed eye diseases are detected early and can
arrange to visit an ophthalmologist in time to prevent permanent eye damage. The
result of establishing this paradigm of remote medical care will extend
healthcare to those most in need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project establishes a
smart service platform in ophthalmology by creating a server-based
telediagnostic analysis capability for current and future smartphone-based
ophthalmic examination devices, three of which are to be developed in this
effort: a microscopic extension, a panoptic ophthalmoscope, and a portable slit
lamp. This capability would allow examination data, gathered with such devices,
to be sent wirelessly to a remote server for automated analysis, the results of
which would be sent back to the originating smartphone. This server-based
telediagnostic analysis capability allows for either tele-expert or automated
machine-based in-depth evaluation and diagnosis of the submitted image data.
This is made possible because smartphones are ubiquitous and Internet-connected.
This capability enables both real-time and store-and-forward teleconsultation
and communication to other health professionals for a full diagnosis later in
time when convenient or possible. These handheld devices will enable field-
conducted examinations that are otherwise restricted to clinical settings (e.g.,
medical offices and clinics). Compared to state-of-the-art ophthalmic equipment,
the proposed devices will be miniaturized, portable, and usable even by non-
specialists outside clinical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the inception of
the project, the partners are the lead institution, University of Arizona
(Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering
and Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science), and a small business,
Breault, Inc. (Tucson, AZ). Broader context partners are Tech Launch Arizona
(University of Arizona, Office of Technology Transfer) and California Institute
of Technology.