* 1430763
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Minimally Invasive Device for Harvesting Autologous Bone Graft
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Neil Shah, Avitus Orthopaedics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,425,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project can strongly influence the healthcare system.
The technology of the proposed project has the potential to make a broader
impact by decreasing the risk of performing the bone graft harvesting procedure
compared to current methods and consequently increase the number of surgeons who
choose to collect a patient?s own bone graft in lieu of using inferior bone
graft alternatives/substitutes. Furthermore, whereas fewer new, inexperienced
surgeons are currently being trained to utilize the patient?s own bone graft
because of the risks of current harvesting methods, these surgeons may be
encouraged to perform the harvesting procedure with the introduction of the
proposed concept. The increase in use of the patient?s own bone will benefit
patients because of the widely accepted clinical benefits of autogenous bone
graft compared to synthetic or exogenous alternative solutions. The proposed
technology may also have a significant commercial impact to hospitals because of
potential decreases in operating room time and post-operative patient
hospitalization time (compared to the standard harvesting procedure) as well as
decreased per-procedure product costs (compared to substitute bone graft
products).

The proposed project addresses the important unmet clinical need of enabling
orthopaedic surgeons to collect bone graft from the patient?s pelvic bone in a
minimally invasive manner without the patient morbidity and added surgical time
intrinsic to the current standard bone graft harvesting methods. The research
objectives of the proposed project are to explore various design enhancements to
the minimum viable product and assess the impact of these changes on the value
proposition; and to explore adjustments to the minimum viable product and assess
their fit for use in additional surgical procedures not accessible by the
minimum viable product. These objectives will be completed by investigating
various new product features and manufacturing processes as well as testing
these concepts in various pre-clinical settings. This project has strong
intellectual merit because this transformative technological concept has the
potential to disrupt the current methods that surgeons employ for harvesting
bone graft by introducing a novel solution that improves patient outcomes,
surgical time, and hospital costs.