* 1430212
* PFI: BIC Wearable Smart Textiles Based on Programmable and Automated Knitting Technology for Biomedical and Sensor Actuation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Vadake Narayanan, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 818,100.00

Many medical conditions would benefit from continuous patient monitoring and
treatment, although this is currently impractical due to the cumbersome nature
of current medical equipment. Recent advancements in specialized materials and
fabrication technologies offer exciting opportunities to create seamless
garments as sensors and actuators for biomedical applications. Knitting
fabrication, known as the intermeshing of yarns into loops (resulting in
fabrics), is an ancient form of textile production widely used in the fashion
industry. Knitting technology has gained a great deal of attention in the field
of wearable electronics and could become a widespread method of construction for
smart textiles in the future. In this PFI:BIC project from Drexel University,
the aim is to replace current bulky medical monitoring devices with a line of
lightweight smart garments. The fiber content of these garments will be similar
to those commonly used in active wear such as wicking polyester to insure
breathability and comfort, while the actuators and sensors, made of smart
materials, will be strategically placed in the clothing to comprise only a small
percentage of the material used. The project will leverage intellectual property
pertaining to fabric-based connectors, microwave antennas, super capacitors, and
robotics, to integrate smart fabric sensors and actuators into comfortable
clothing, providing unobtrusive sensing and treatment options that are not
currently possible.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For textile communication, active and
passive transceivers will be fabricated through knitting of different microwave
structures. These knit microwave structures will also be used along with
processing of passive RFID signals to create mechanical strain sensors.
Mechanical actuation will be realized through knit robot technology making use
of shape memory alloys. The knit antennas will be combined with knit
supercapacitors to create wireless power systems for body area sensor networks.
Focus groups with patients and healthcare practitioners will determine market
needs. Prototype garments will be beta tested with sample target users.
Industrial partners will provide raw materials, manufacturing advice, and
commercialization expertise. Key is Shima Seiki knitting technology at Drexel
University, which enables customization and innovation in the design and
fabrication of wearable and machine washable smart (with integrated power and
circuitry) textiles capable of wireless sensing and actuated treatment
applications. Target applications that are the focus of this project will
include a "bellyband" for uterine contraction monitoring during pregnancy,
medical sensor patches, and knit robots for therapeutic massage.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Drexel University has formed an interdisciplinary academic team
including expertise from industrial and fashion design, materials and electrical
engineering, nursing and medicine, as well as management and entrepreneurship.
To complement this academic team, a three-tier industry partnership representing
all levels of production and commercialization has been formed. The Material
Suppliers tier includes EY Technologies (small business, Fall River, MA),
custom-engineering groups providing creative solutions for the development of
specialized yarns allowing for the creation of raw materials with unique
functionality for novel biomedical smart textiles. The Fabrication tier includes
Shima Seiki USA (large business, Monroe Township, NJ), a leader in 3D knitting
simulation software and computerized knitting machines to manufacture biomedical
smart textiles at both laboratory and production scale. Finally, in the
Commercialization tier, NetScientific America (small business, Harrison, NY)
augmented by the industrial advisory board of the Drexel Coulter Translational
Research program will help determine commercial viability of various biomedical
smart textile solutions and carry promising technologies to the market. Ben
Franklin Technology Partners/Southeastern PA (non-profit, Philadelphia, PA) will
serve as a broader context partner building upon experience in launching
university/industry partnerships that accelerate scientific discoveries to
commercialization and seeding regional initiatives that strengthen the regional
entrepreneurial community.