* 1430260
* PFI:BIC:  The Living Bridge: The Future of Smart, User-Centered Transportation Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,10/31/2021
* Lawrence Hamilton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2021
* USD 988,008.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
from the University of New Hampshire focuses on a "living bridge", which
exemplifies the future of smart, sustainable, user-centered transportation
infrastructure. Bridges deliver such a fundamental service to society that they
are often taken for granted. Typically, bridges only stir the public's interest
when they must unexpectedly be replaced at great cost, or, worse, fail. The
Living Bridge project will create a self-diagnosing, self-reporting "smart
bridge" powered by a local renewable energy source, tidal energy, by
transforming the landmark Memorial Bridge--a vertical lift bridge over the tidal
Piscataqua River, with pedestrian access connecting Portsmouth, New Hampshire to
Kittery, Maine--into a living laboratory for researchers, engineers, scientists,
and the community at large. The Living Bridge will engage innovators in sensor
and renewable energy technology by creating an incubator platform on a working
bridge, from which researchers can field test and evaluate the impact and
effectiveness of emerging technologies. The Living Bridge will also serve as a
community platform to educate citizens about innovations occurring at the site
and in the region, and about how incorporating renewable energy into bridge
design can lead to a sustainable transportation infrastructure with impact far
beyond the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable, smart bridges are key
elements in developing a successful infrastructure system. To advance the state
of smart service systems and clean energy conversion, this project team will
design and deploy a structural and environmental monitoring system that provides
information for bridge condition assessment, traffic management, and
environmental stewardship; advances renewable energy technology application; and
excites the general public about bridge innovations. This PFI:BIC project is
enabled through partnerships between academic researchers with expertise in
structural, mechanical and ocean engineering, sensing technology and social
science; small businesses with expertise in instrumentation, data acquisition,
tidal energy conversion; and state agencies with bridge design expertise. The
Living Bridge technical areas are structural health monitoring, tidal energy
conversion with fluid-structure interaction measurements, estuarine
environmental monitoring, and outreach communication. Sensors will be used to
calibrate a three-dimensional analytical structural finite element model of the
bridge. The predicted structural response from this model will assess the
measured structural response of the bridge as acceptable or not. Instruments
installed on the turbine deployment platform will measure the spatio-temporal
structure of the turbulent inflow and modified wake flow downstream of the
turbine. Resulting data will include turbine performance and loads for use in
fluid-structure interaction models. Deployed environmental sensors will measure
estuarine water quality; wildlife deterrent sensors will deter fish from the
turbine. Hydrophones and video cameras will be used before and during turbine
deployment to monitor environmental changes due to turbine presence. Outreach
efforts will make bridge data, history, and information about new systems
accessible and understandable to the public and K-12 educators, facilitated by
an information kiosk installed at the bridge. Public awareness will be assessed
with survey methods used in the N.H. Granite State Poll.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution is the University of New Hampshire
(UNH) with its departments of Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and
Sociology, and the Center for Ocean Engineering. Primary industrial partners are
a large business, MacArtney Underwater Technology Group, Inc. (Houston, TX); and
a small business, Lite Enterprises, Inc. (Nashua, NH). Broader context partners
are New Hampshire Department of Transportation, NH Fish &amp; Game Department,
NH Port Authority, NH Coastal Program, City of Portsmouth (NH), Sustainable
Portsmouth (nonprofit), Maine Department of Transportation, U.S. Coast Guard,
Archer/Western (Canton, MA, large business), Parsons-Brinkerhoff (Manchester,
NH, large business), UNH Tech Camp, UNH Infrastructure and Climate Network, UNH
Leitzel Center for Mathematics, Science and Engineering Education, and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Changing Places (a joint Architecture
and Media Laboratory Consortium, in Cambridge, MA).