* 1430826
* Knowledge Governance and its Effects on Knowledge Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Amy Javernick-Will, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 08/31/2019
* USD 301,695.00

The ability of an organization to mobilize knowledge when and where it is needed
is fundamental for organizational performance. When done effectively, this
ability can help organizations reduce repeated mistakes, spread innovation and
best practices, and avoid dedicating resources to problems that have been solved
previously. To date, various organizational mechanisms to govern knowledge have
been proposed and implemented, yet they have had limited and varying effects on
knowledge mobilization. Thus, there is a pressing need to better understand how
to govern knowledge and effect knowledge mobilization across the entire
organization.

Knowledge governance is concerned with how the deployment of organizational
mechanisms influences knowledge processes, i.e., the creation, retention, and
sharing of knowledge. Traditionally, knowledge is governed in organizations
through social and control mechanisms through the implementation of Communities
of Practice (CoPs) and hierarchical reporting structures. In addition to these
traditional mechanisms, this research will analyze the creation of a new form of
knowledge governance - a knowledge market, where knowledge is created, priced
and sold internally - within a multinational engineering organization. Thus,
this research builds from institutional theory, transaction cost economics and
the knowledge-based view of the firm to (i) analyze the design and evolvement of
an internal knowledge market; (ii) compare and contrast the governance of
knowledge through internal knowledge markets and traditional Communities of
Practice; and (iii) analyze how different forms of governance affect knowledge
mobilization.

Intellectual Merit This research is expected to expand upon theories of intra-
organizational knowledge governance. Specifically, by analyzing a new form of
knowledge governance (i.e., internal knowledge markets), this research
introduces market mechanisms into intra-organizational analysis. In addition,
this research will create a theoretical framework for analyzing and comparing
different forms of knowledge governance (e.g., centralized approaches vs. CoPs
vs. internal knowledge markets) and determining the effects of these governance
strategies on knowledge creation, renewal, reach within an organization.

Broader Impacts This research will engage industry throughout the data
collection and analysis process to validate and refine our findings. A toolkit
and best practice guide on how to create an effective internal knowledge market
and how different governance forms affect knowledge mobilization will be created
and disseminated to organizations. In addition, a course module will be created
from this research for teaching in Universities. Overall, the research aims to
aid knowledge intensive organizations, such as engineering organizations with
globally distributed knowledge workers, in their mobilization of knowledge to
increase productivity and improve performance through the implementation of more
efficient knowledge governance mechanisms.