* 1430780
* SBIR Phase II:  Serendipitous Search System Using Lateral Analogy to Match Potential Solutions to Unmet Needs:Feasibility Study Based on Screening Approved Drugs for Repurposing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Brian Sager, Leonardo Innovations Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,310,747.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to accelerate the
pace&lt;br/&gt;of research and development to enable more rapid deployment of
technologies&lt;br/&gt;into commercial / industrial contexts. In many fields,
information is expanding at&lt;br/&gt;such an exponential rate that finding
relevant results to technical knowledge&lt;br/&gt;searches is increasingly
difficult. Further, content is expanding so fast that most&lt;br/&gt;fields are
rapidly forming sub-disciplines, leading to the ?silo-ing? of
different&lt;br/&gt;knowledge sub-domains, a clear challenge to both academia
and industry. We&lt;br/&gt;need ever better ways to organize and present
information to users. There are&lt;br/&gt;disadvantages of the current search
engines, mostly relating to excessive&lt;br/&gt;similarity in search results.
Further, while these engines present information&lt;br/&gt;relating to a known
search target, they are less effective at presenting&lt;br/&gt;unexpected
results for information that a user has never heard of but that
would&lt;br/&gt;be useful. What is therefore needed is an exploration system
giving searchers a&lt;br/&gt;strong serendipitous element with a maximum
likelihood of results from diverse,&lt;br/&gt;unexpected, and potentially
provocative sources. This will break down silos by&lt;br/&gt;providing a rapid,
relevant means for knowledge-transfer between different&lt;br/&gt;disciplines,
fostering interdisciplinary innovation. This system has been
designed&lt;br/&gt;to provide a means for systematic, automated
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project is focused on&lt;br/&gt;optimizing and scaling a serendipitous
document search system for repurposing&lt;br/&gt;technologies by analogy into
lateral fields. Both by sub-parsing discrete content&lt;br/&gt;into
ontologically separable entities, such as capability, characteristic,
and&lt;br/&gt;composition, and by comparatively assessing certain of these
attributes between&lt;br/&gt;such entities, the attribute relatedness of these
entities can be used to drive their&lt;br/&gt;self-assembly into related
attribute networks. This approach provides a&lt;br/&gt;significant value
proposition for drug repurposing, which is the current focus of&lt;br/&gt;this
project. To scale the pair-wise comparison and network assembly of
millions&lt;br/&gt;of documents, a map-reduce based text-processing framework
will be developed&lt;br/&gt;so that massively parallel computations can be
carried out in a time- and costefficient&lt;br/&gt;manner. A distributed search
engine technology will be deployed to&lt;br/&gt;enable rapid querying of the
emerging document relationship network. A series of&lt;br/&gt;machine learning
algorithms will then be used to determine potentially
hidden&lt;br/&gt;structural architectural features within the document
relationship network.&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning will elucidate the nature of
the relationships in drug networks&lt;br/&gt;through analyses of inter-node
relationships and sub-graph motifs (termed&lt;br/&gt;?innovation motifs?).
Documents including U.S. patents and scientific papers will&lt;br/&gt;be
processed in the system.