* 1430710
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of On-Land, Closed Containment Integrated Multitrophic Sustainable Aquaculture by means of Ecological Diversity.
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Taylor Pryor, Acadia Harvest, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 819,221.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate an entirely new approach to
farming seafood. To date only a limited amount of marine aquaculture on-land and
indoors is carried out anywhere utilizing a technology requiring only saltwater,
limited space and our novel zero waste approach,. This approach takes advantage
of ecological principle whereby diverse aquatic species ? including fish,
sandworms, algae, oysters, seaweed and more ? are cultured together in a cyclic
system in a way that allows the waste from one to serve as nutrition for others.
Because such facilities are not in the ocean, seafood culture will no longer be
restricted by certain naturally ideal habitats, competition for space, strict
environmental regulations, occasional pollution and hazardous weather. Indeed,
they offer what may be the only technology able to satisfy the ever growing
global demand for protein. The inputs required are sunlight for the plants and
feed, but even the latter can be cultured either internally or derived from
ever-present, external waste streams. The approach is commercially attractive,
too, especially when combined with alternative energy sources. Being modular,
the first unit can be readily emulated everywhere. The proposed project seeks to
break away from dependency on the oceans for seafood production sites and, of
course, to do so in a manner that is economically viable. On-land production
does offer challenges, many of which are overcome by farming diverse kinds of
seafood together, a second break-away that confers health and generates
byproduct revenues. To do so requires new farm designs, a grasp of each aquatic
crop?s special needs and full understanding of how each interacts beneficially
with others within the shared space and seawater. To achieve this so that the
first full scale, commercial operation can be undertaken with confidence, it is
deemed vital that a pilot plant be operated for not less than two years. Within
that period, approximately ten forms of marketable marine plants and animals
will be introduced. Health, growth and overall water quality will be carefully
monitored. Special attention will be given to purely practical aspects of
aquafarm management so that, when commercial, any reasonably capable farmer can
manage the operation, guided by a computer model that, along with equipment
design, will be a major deliverable of the research in addition to the proposed
demonstration. From apparent complexity, simple commercial methods will emerge.