* 1430905
* SBIR Phase II:  Reliable and Efficient Data-Plane Verification
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ahmed Khurshid, Veriflow Systems
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,399,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to significantly enhance reliability
and security of critical network infrastructure, and ease network management
tasks. Through multiple pilot deployments on live networks, a prototype version
of the company's software tool has found a number of serious errors and
vulnerabilities that were missed by existing state-of-the-art auditing
techniques and monitoring tools, and was able to perform real-time network-wide
verification within as little as one millisecond. When more fully developed
under this project, the company's technology will help ensure highly available
networking infrastructures. To this end the company will work with Urbana-
Champaign Big Broadband (UC2B), a community network expected to provide gigabit
fiber-to-the-premise to 2700 under-served residences and 350 community anchor
institutions. The company will also work with the Global Environment for Network
Innovations (GENI), which is building a collaborative network environment to
catalyze groundbreaking discoveries and innovation in emerging global networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will continue the development and commercialization of a new approach to
analyzing and protecting computer networks. Every aspect of our society, from
business, to government, to medicine and the sciences, is now tightly
intertwined with the functioning of computer networks such as the Internet.
However, modern networks are extremely complex, leading to a rich variety of
failure modes and outages. These errors can result in very high costs for
businesses, including lost revenue from SLAs, lost customers and contracts,
fines for violating regulations such as HIPAA, leaks of sensitive information,
and decline in corporate image. To address this challenge, the company is
building a system that automatically verifies security and correctness of
computer networks in real-time, discovers vulnerabilities, and assists network
operators in determining their cause. The technology functions by scanning a
network, constructing a formal model of the network's behavior, and using custom
formal logic algorithms to automatically determine whether the network contains
faults. It can vet networks continuously as the network state evolves, detect
transient errors and signal immediate alarms, and scale to large and highly
dynamic environments. It is intended to provide immediate practical assistance
to network operators.