* 1430614
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Participation in Engineering among Women and Latina/os: A Longitudinal, Multi-Site Study
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Lisa Flores, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 677,390.00

The project aims to investigate the longitudinal effects of social cognitive,
cultural, personality and contextual factors on engineering students and workers
satisfaction, engagement, and persistence as posited by Social Cognitive Career
Theory (SCCT). The longstanding underrepresentation of White women and Latina/os
in engineering majors and jobs provides the rationale for this investigation of
psychological factors leading to their academic and career satisfaction,
engagement, and persistence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using data from a sample of
engineering students at nine engineering colleges, the PIs propose to test the
hypothesis that SCCT model will explain significant variance in engineering-
related satisfaction, engagement, persistence. A structural equation modeling
study of these factors will be complemented with a qualitative study of the
individual and institutional factors. Intellectual merits of the project
include: 1) A potentially conclusive examination of the utility of the SCCT
model in predicting satisfaction, engagement, and persistence in engineering for
White women and Latina/os both during college and early career stages; 2)
Understanding the role of social cognitive, environmental and cultural factors
in the satisfaction, engagement, and retention of White women and Latina/os in
the engineering pipeline over time; 3) Advancing theory to explain engineering
satisfaction, engagement, and persistence of Latina/os and White women in
engineering; 4) Understanding factors influencing the persistence and non-
persistence decisions of White women and Latina/o engineers; and 5) Developing
reliable and valid measures to assess negative outcome expectations in
engineering and engineering specific learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this work will inform the
development of custom interventions to enhance relevant systemic supports and
bolster the social cognitions that are the strongest predictors in engagement,
persistence, and satisfaction in engineering for each group. The findings can
also inform the development of supports at strategic points in students'
educational training when they may be at higher risk for dropping out of
engineering.