* 1430284
* NANOGrav Physics Frontier Center
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2022
* James Cordes, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Cooperative Agreement
* James Shank
* 09/30/2022
* USD 17,342,872.00

General Relativity predicts the existence of gravitational waves, but none have
yet been directly detected. In addition to testing General Relativity, the
discovery of gravitational waves will make possible new tests of theories that
explain the origin of the acceleration of the universe's expansion and that
reconcile quantum mechanics with gravity, two of the most profound challenges
facing fundamental physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. Through this Physics
Frontiers Centers (PFC) award the North American Nanohertz Observatory for
Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav) will focus on the detection and characterization
of gravitational waves with nanohertz frequencies-frequencies eleven orders of
magnitude lower than those probed by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (LIGO). NANOGrav will use observations of millisecond pulsars
(pulsating neutron stars spinning with a period on the order of a millisecond)
to search for these low frequency waves. The arrival times of the emissions from
these pulsars will stray from their regular pattern if distorted by the passage
of a gravitational wave. Correlating observations between different pulsars and
monitoring pulse arrival times will enable NANOGrav to search for these low
frequency gravitational waves in a way different from but complementary to LIGO.
NANOGrav will also engage middle school and undergraduate students in their
research efforts, including data collection, analysis, and characterization, as
well as the search for gravitational waves in the data. The Center will have a
targeted approach to increase student participation of women and traditionally
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NANOGrav Physics Frontier
Center will monitor the pulse arrival times of millisecond pulsars (MSPs) in
order to detect and characterize low frequency gravitational waves (GWs). In
addition to known MSPs, the Center will search for new ones. Research goals and
activities involve: the detection and characterization of low frequency GWs,
including algorithm development, the study of electromagnetic counterparts to GW
sources, and GW tests of gravity; the creation and curation of a GW dataset,
including the creation of the time series analyzed to search for GWs, full
characterization of the data set and its error budget, creation of a new,
independent software package to create the GW data sets, as well as data mining
and distribution; and the further enhancement and characterization of their low
frequency GW detection method with increased sensitivity resulting from adding
to the number of detection arms, characterizing their pulsars, and developing
algorithms to increase the efficiency of their searches for new
MSPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Physics Frontiers Centers award is co-funded by
the Physics Frontiers Centers Program in the Division of Physics and the Mid-
scale Innovations Program in the Division of Astronomical Sciences.