* 1430508
* DataONE (Data Observation Network for Earth)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2020
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,000,000.00

DataONE will create new cyberinfrastructure (CI) that will resolve many of the
key challenges that hinder the realization of more global, open, and
reproducible science. We will do so through four interrelated CI activities that
are supported by the DataONE team of developers and the CI Working Group.
&lt;br/&gt;First, we will significantly expand the volume and diversity of data
available to researchers through the DataONE Federation of repositories (i.e.,
Member Nodes) for large-scale scientific innovation and discovery. DataONE will
create lightweight and easily deployed "Slender Node" software and develop
DataONE compatibility for common repository software systems (e.g. DSpace and
others) that are already deployed in hundreds of high-value repositories
worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;Second, we will incorporate innovative and high-value
features into the DataONE CI. These new features include: 1) measurement search
to leverage semantic technologies and enable highly precise data discovery and
recall of data needed by researchers; 2) tracking the data through creation, all
transformations, and analyses (provenance) to enable more reproducible science
by storing and indexing provenance trace information that can be used to both
reproduce scientific data processing and analysis steps and to discover specific
data sources by examining the documented workflows; and 3) data extraction, sub-
setting and processing services to enable researchers at any location to more
easily participate in ?big data? initiatives (e.g. working with data from large
environmental observatories and participating in broad-scale synthesis and
modeling endeavors). These three new sets of features will dramatically improve
data discovery; further support reproducible and open science; and enable
scientists from any institution, independent of networking capacity, to extract
subsets of large data sets held in DataONE-affiliated repositories for
processing and interpretation. &lt;br/&gt;Third, we will maintain and improve
core CI software and services (e.g., Coordinating and Member Node software
stacks and key components of the Investigator Toolkit) so that the user
experience continues to improve, new services can be easily added over time, and
the CI can be readily upgraded as operating system and other supporting software
systems continue to evolve. &lt;br/&gt;Fourth, we will increase the number of
Member Nodes (size of the Federation) while maintaining cybersecurity and trust.
Both of these activities respond to the need for DataONE network continuity and
reliability that are critical to maintaining community trust and enabling
researchers to achieve their science objectives. &lt;br/&gt;Four working groups
that are each comprised of a small number of experts from computer and
information sciences, domain sciences, and cyber-enabled learning will guide and
contribute to DataONE CI development and usability, sustainability, and
education and outreach. The CI Working Group will coordinate core CI research
and development, including the addition of new services such as provenance
tracking and semantically enabled measurement search. The Usability and
Assessment Working Group will help DataONE understand community needs and
expectations, and constantly improve the CI via feedback from usability
analysis. The Community Engagement and Outreach Working Group will ensure that
community needs are met and that education activities and materials achieve
optimal impact. The Sustainability and Governance Working Group will empower the
community to drive the organization?s governance structure and sustainability
strategies, ensuring that DataONE can sustain services and evolve to meet the
needs of researchers, libraries, sponsors, and other stakeholders for decades to
come.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to developing robust and powerful infrastructure,
DataONE aims to change the scientific culture by promoting good data stewardship
practices. Our specific goals are to: 1) build a community of stakeholders
through active engagement with data repositories and the broad community of
scientists; and 2) educate scientists about good data life cycle practices
through effective education, outreach and training activities and experiences.
Community engagement in the biweekly Member Node Forum and the annual meeting of
the DataONE Users Group will support expansion of the data content and services
provided to and needed by the research community. A new DataONE webinar series
and education resources (e.g., best practices and software tools, learning
modules) will enable researchers to better steward their data and take advantage
of the myriad services and tools available through DataONE. The DataONE Summer
Internship Program will actively involve students in CI development and related
DataONE activities such as creating and providing web-based educational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;