* 1430428
* Collaborative Research on Plant Stress Response Through Innovations in Phenomics and Molecular Imaging Technologies
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Yuan-Chuan Tai, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,849,999.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists in Arkansas and
Missouri propose to create an interdisciplinary, state-of-the-art Bioimaging
Consortium that enables researchers to adapt food, fiber, and fuel crops to meet
the challenges of a changing climate and a growing world population. The ability
of plants to adapt to stress, and the enhancement of these adaptations via
biotechnology and breeding represent a means of mitigating the increased
pressure on the agricultural economy. Researchers at the Arkansas Science and
Technology Authority, the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, the University
of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, the University of Missouri, Lincoln University, and
Washington University St. Louis will use molecular and plant imaging techniques
to generate new tools and discoveries to reduce crop losses to stresses such as
drought, salinity, insects and diseases. The project will promote diverse and
inclusive workforce development practices while training students and creating
linkages with private industry through internships and a joint seminar series.
In addition, the group will promote science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education by working with industry to develop a new
competency model for primary and undergraduate education in bioimaging. This
model will be implemented by disseminating a hands-on teaching module for K-12
teachers to develop key competencies, and by creating undergraduate and graduate
course modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioimaging technologies have transformative potential to
overcome the phenotyping bottleneck that currently limits the ability to predict
the phenotypic consequences of genetic variation. The proposed AR and MO Plant
Bioimaging Consortium will bring together multiple disciplines (synthetic
chemistry, radiochemistry, imaging science, plant biology, bioengineering,
computational biology and informatics) to address a consequence of increased
climate variability, and also one of the Five Grand Challenge areas in biology,
specifically, to predict an organism?s phenotype based on its genotype. Multi-
disciplinary teams will work collaboratively on four experimental models to
generate new knowledge in plant stress biology and develop bioimaging tools
essential to the plant science community. The consortium will also create a seed
grant program to enable plant biologists throughout AR and MO to apply
bioimaging approaches to study a wide variety of stress responses in multiple
plant species. New knowledge in plant biology will include a better
understanding of how four key physiological processes - the transport of
nutrients, accumulation of reactive oxygen species, metabolism of antioxidants,
and partitioning of photoassimilates - are modulated in response to stress.
Methodological advances will include new protocols, molecular probes, data
analysis algorithms, and pipelines needed to apply HTP and MI to plant stress
biology. During the three years of this Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 project, the program expects to provide services to over 130 plant
biologists in the region, while directly training the first wave of twenty
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars in bioimaging. The consortium
will help build the critical interdisciplinary workforce that AR and MO need to
develop a biotechnology industry, which is a major component of the innovation
economy planned for both states. Lastly, the proposed activities would advance
scientific literacy in the two states by developing new, evidence-based, hands-
on teaching techniques and science strategies for K-12 schools.