* 1430679
* SBIR Phase II:  River Electrical Energy Devices
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Scott Kennedy, Renerge, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 920,710.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
development of river energy harvesters uniquely suited to harvesting energy from
undammed turbulent river flows, currently untapped due to state-of-the-art
technology limitations. Mature renewable energy technologies include silicon
based solar panels, large scale wind turbines, and high-head hydropower
turbines. However, consumers are often geographically distant from these
resources. The vast majority of people live adjacent to life-sustaining
waterways. Millions live in remote parts of the world alongside vast
hydrokinetic resources, but currently have little or no access to reliable
electricity. This program specifically seeks to address such underserved
markets. Recently, there has been growing interest in harvesting from flows with
significant kinetic energy, which have been described in a US resource
assessment study as a "gargantuan" untapped natural resource. But with existing
technology, siting continues to be the single biggest challenge facing expansion
of this high-energy renewable resource. This project aims to develop harvesters
specifically suited to turbulent and/or very low head flows, thereby expanding
hydro-energy siting options and potentially enabling a second hydro-power boom.

The Phase II technical effort will explore the conversion of hydrokinetic energy
to mechanical energy via a dynamic, fluid-solid interaction. An example of the
phenomenon to be harnessed is the bouncing motion observed in power lines on
rainy, windy days. The repeating motion is observed only during specific weather
conditions because the unstable dynamics are a function of both the flow type,
and the geometry of the affected surface. This motion is undesirable in most
instances, including for power lines, but it also represents an energy
conversion opportunity from ill-behaved flows. The Phase I project identified
and demonstrated two specific adaptive structures strategies for enhancing the
desired energy conversion; additional strategies were identified and will be
investigated during a Phase II project. The goal of this Phase II program is to
demonstrate technical and commercial feasibility of the resulting technology by
building and operating a 2 kilowatt prototype in the field.