* 1430908
* SBIR Phase II:  Three Dimensional Headphone Audio for Music, Gaming, Entertainment and Telepresence
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Adam O'Donovan, VisiSonics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,429,878.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project extends to wherever headphones are used to
listen to sound. The first commercial markets targeted by the technology being
developed are gaming, virtual reality and consumer entertainment. These are
areas in which the US has strong market and technology leads. By the end of the
project, the company intends to have developed software that can be licensed to
major players in these areas, reaching tens of millions of users. Beyond these
markets, there are many applications for spatial audio in human-computer
interfaces to deliver spatial information along with the intended semantic
message. Several niche markets also exist, such as data presentation/exploration
via sonification and specifically designed auditory interfaces for vision-
impaired users. Overall it is expected that the proposed R&amp;D work will
advance the state of the art in science and technology and will be of
substantial value to society as a whole due to high usability, fidelity,
naturalness, and portability of the developed spatial audio
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to develop highly realistic and computationally efficient
software for synthesis of personalized spatial audio, for applications that
include virtual reality, gaming, and prostheses for the blind. Current
algorithms are either perceptually unsatisfactory or have very high
computational load. Approximate modeling of sound propagation, reverberation,
and diffusion, along with tradeoffs between complexity and quality, will be
explored using perceptual distortion metrics combined with the skills of
professional listeners. The software will be optimized for use on mobile,
console and embedded platforms. Additionally, a method to personalize the
software to individual listeners, which was previously developed and tested in
laboratory conditions, will be further refined and ruggedized for use in
realistic environments. The expected outcomes will include a high-quality and
efficient audio rendering library, a portable personalization apparatus, and
several demonstrations that highlight the capabilities of the technology.