* 1430918
* SBIR Phase II:  The Development of Higher Voltage, Longer Life and Lower Cost Activated Carbon Materials for Supercapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Edward Buiel, Coulometrics
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2016
* USD 649,434.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in significantly increasing the ways
supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries are used today. Supercapacitors offer
very high power capabilities and high energy efficiency and have been used in
many renewable energy applications such as hybrid buses and wind turbines.
Currently, their use is limited due to high cost and low energy density relative
to Li-ion batteries. Coulometrics has developed a proprietary process that can
modify low cost activated carbon materials into supercapacitor grade carbons
with 25% higher energy density and twice the current lifespan of existing
materials. These critical developments will lower the overall system cost and
improve cell life allowing for more widespread use of supercapacitors in
renewable energy applications. Coulometrics has also shown that a very similar
process can be used to convert natural graphite to lithium ion grade anode
materials with higher energy density and significantly lower cost. This process
will also enable a Northern American company to become the first producer of
graphite for lithium ion batteries on the continent which can significantly
reduce lithium ion battery cost for applications such as electric vehicles. Both
projects will have additional environmental benefits including reduced
greenhouse gas emissions, less burning of fossil fuels, and help protect the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
break through a significant barrier that has kept ultracapacitor voltage and
energy density stagnant for over a decade and significantly reduce costs of
lithium ion battery carbon materials. Supercapacitor companies all produce
products with different carbons, electrolytes, cell construction, etc. and yet
are all confined to the same performance specifications. We believe that this is
related to oxidation/reduction reactions that occur on the carbon surface; a
fairly intuitive hypothesis; however attempts at solutions have been futile. The
surface treatment we developed in Phase I has resulted in a reduction of these
oxidation/reduction currents by more than 50%. This technology will lead to the
largest performance gains in the ultracapacitor industry in over 10 years.
Additionally, one of the most challenging factors limiting market growth for
ultracapacitors is their high cost, of which activated carbon accounts for 27%.
Coulometrics' treatment applied to inexpensive water filtration carbon, also
developed in Phase I, has shown very similar performance enhancements, and will
cost up to 95% less than commercial activated carbon materials. The surface
modification process for graphitic carbons will enable the low cost and high
quality production of carbon anode materials for lithium ion batteries based on
natural graphite. This breakthrough can significantly reduce lithium ion battery
cost which is a key element for more wide spread adoption of electric vehicles
which will help reduce our nation's dependence on the need to import foreign
oil.