* 1430781
* Perception of Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Ann Bostrom, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2018
* USD 638,187.00

One of the great challenges for the scientific community over the next decade is
to provide useful guidance to society regarding the implications of global
climate change, including the substantial uncertainties involved. Moreover, the
methods by which that information is communicated have the power to shape public
attitudes and response. This project is designed to clarify the relationships
between specific methods of climate communication, cognitive processes,
attitudes and decisions. The project focuses on four key factors in climate
mitigation choices 1) trust in climate projections, 2) concern about climate
change 3) self-efficacy with respect to climate change mitigation efforts
(whether one feels that one can have an impact) and 4) causal understanding of
the mechanisms that underlie climate change. A series of experiments, using a
wide range of methodologies, will test the influence of communications
strategies on each of these factors as well as whether they interact with
participant characteristics such as partisanship, age and gender. Effective
climate change communication is a critical challenge for society. It requires
transforming complex scientific information, including uncertainty information,
into understandable yet relevant projections for a wide range of users in both
public and private decisions. This project informs the design of such
communications in the context of climate change as well as in other domains.

Experimental procedures test whether climate projections that include
uncertainty estimates enhance user trust, the perception of scientific
consensus, decision quality and the role of immediate feedback on some of these
effects. Experiments also test the role of availability (recent experience with
weather consistent with global warming) on risk perception and decisions. Four
key communication strategies are explored. This research will test whether 1)
the inclusion of uncertainty estimates in climate projections increases trust or
impacts the perception of scientific consensus, 2) reducing the level of
abstraction impacts mental representations, concern, self-efficacy, or decisions
3) descriptions of extreme weather events consistent with climate change (e.g.
heat waves) increase concern or climate friendly choices, 4) causal explanations
enhance trust in climate projections or self-efficacy.Furthermore, this project
conducts the first experimental comparison of the impact of availability from
experience and availability from description. If the latter is effective it may
be useful in counteracting the psychological consequences of experience
inconsistent with global warming. This project also provides a first
experimental test of the impact of causal explanations on trust in climate
projections and on self-efficacy with respect to climate mitigation efforts.
This project tests whether abstraction in mental representations can be altered
with simple communication techniques using a repeated measures design, whether
observed changes endure over time, and whether they influence concern about
climate change, self-efficacy, and decision-making. By investigating these
general mechanisms, the project adds to the scientific understanding of the ways
in which people comprehend, evaluate and choose how to act upon predictive
communications in risky contexts, advancing both risk communication and decision
sciences. Effective climate change communication is a critical challenge
requiring transforming complex scientific information, including uncertainty
information, into understandable yet relevant projections for a wide range of
users in both public and private decisions. The results of this work will inform
the design of climate communications as well as predictions and forecasts in a
wide range of domains.