* 1430328
* PFI:BIC:  Enhanced Situational Awareness Using Unmanned Autonomous Systems for Disaster Remediation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* George Bebis, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 805,740.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
from the University of Nevada-Reno has as its goal the enhancement of the
situational awareness capabilities of law enforcement agencies and first
responders by employing unmanned autonomous systems (UAS) with high-resolution
sensing and imaging capabilities for disaster remediation. Law enforcement
agencies and first responders face significant challenges during an emergency
event, such as a natural or anthropogenic disaster (earthquake, tsunami, fire,
hurricane, tornado, flood, power or nuclear accident, act of war, or terror).
One of the major challenges is acting decisively based on available information
and considering human factors, making high-quality real-time situational
awareness critical to effectively manage and safeguard civilians and in- field
personnel. This project focuses on creating a smart emergency-response service
system using UAS, both air- and ground-based systems, equipped with state-of-
the-art imaging, sensing, and communication systems to provide first response
teams with high-quality, real-time information to act decisively and effectively
via human-machine interactions. Such a smart service system will guide/escort
humans to safety, direct rescue crews to access trapped humans, and provide in-
situ communication, medication, water and food, and power. The program will
develop the requisite human infrastructure of graduate students in mechanical
engineering, computer science and engineering, electrical engineering, and
social psychology. Working together in the interdisciplinary team, students will
be exposed to research outside of their respective disciplines and to innovative
opportunities for entrepreneurship. A successful smart service system will
impact the operations of the public safety sector, and it could be adapted by
similar organizations.

The project's objectives include the following: (1) develop and integrate UAS
platforms, sensors, imaging and communication systems, and control and path
planning algorithms to create a UAS-based smart service system for first
response; (2) model the state of humans and infrastructure during a disaster,
identify the scene, and create access paths to safety; (3) test prototypes and
pursue commercialization opportunities; and (4) educate the public and train
first responders on the technology. The translational research to create the
UAS-based smart service system will focus on sensor data fusion, scene
identification, modeling of the state of humans, infrastructure and their
interactions as well as on the platform for testing and evaluating remediation
strategies, communication schemes, and access path planning. Understanding of
the system aspects will enable first responders and public safety command
personnel to analyze and understand on-scene, active emergency situations
through interactive, integrated data analysis and visualization; and give them
the ability to sense, predict, and act in a variety of disaster scenes and human
socio-psychological conditions.

Partners at the inception of this project are the University of Nevada at Reno
(involving faculty across four departments: mechanical engineering, computer
science and engineering, electrical engineering, and social psychology);
industry partners: two small businesses, Drone America and SpecTIR, companies
based out of Reno, Nevada; academic partners: University of Nevada, Las Vegas;
and the University of Utah as well as experts from the UNR Seismology Lab and
the Washoe County as System users; and broader context partners include the
newly established Nevada Advanced Autonomous Systems Innovation Center (NAASIC)
at UNR, the state-supported UAS program management office, Nevada Institute for
Autonomous Systems (NIAS), and the Nevada Industry Excellence (NVIE).