* 1430833
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Electroencephalography to Advance the Research and Diagnosis of Brain Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Walter Besio, CREmedical Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,224,712.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is multi-fold: First, the proposed tripolar
concentric ring electrode and instrumentation for acquiring brain signals,
tripolar electroencephalography (tEEG), is a platform technology that has a
variety of medical and commercial applications. By providing significantly
clearer brain signals, tEEG will resolve conventional EEG?s major drawback of
poor signal quality that clinicians and researchers have been struggling with
for decades. tEEG can advance diagnosis and fill unmet clinical and research
needs such as detection of biomarkers to quantify various neurological
disorders. Second, commercially, tEEG can transform the market landscape and set
a new standard for EEG equipment. The fundamental improvement promised by tEEG
and its non-invasive nature are particularly appealing. tEEG could greatly
simplify and advance the diagnosis of a wide spectrum of neurological disorders
(epilepsy, sleep disorders, stroke, Parkinson?s, Alzheimer?s, etc.) and more
effectively guide neurosurgical and other medical procedures. Third, the
fundamental improvement in spatial resolution and artifacts rejection in EEG
signals will help advance the understanding of brain activity, leading to new
discoveries in the research of various brain diseases and neurological
disorders.

The proposed project aims to develop a portable tripolar concentric ring
electrode (TCRE) electroencephalography (tEEG) recording system and perform a
comprehensive clinical evaluation to demonstrate that tEEG can detect certain
important brain EEG signals better than conventional EEG. EEG is the primary
diagnostic tool for epilepsy, the most common serious brain disorder worldwide,
but misdiagnosis occurs in up to 50% of the patients. Artifact contamination
seriously hinders the effectiveness of EEG and is a root cause of misdiagnosis.
tEEG automatically suppresses artifacts and increases the interpretability of
EEG through two inventions: (1) a transformative electrode configuration - the
TCRE; and (2) the proprietary tEEG Interface and digitizer. The TCRE, tEEG
Interface, and digitizer together comprise a complete, Portable tEEG system with
the data stored and displayed on a laptop. In this project, clinicians will
evaluate tEEG against conventional EEG in areas such as usability, ability to
suppress artifacts, and superiority in seizure detection. If successful, tEEG
would generate intense interest in the field because of the significant clinical
and research impact. We expect that comparing tEEG and EEG in a clinical setting
will demonstrate the superiority of tEEG for diagnosing epilepsy.