* 1430218
* RAPID: Mega-typhoon impacts on the metapopulation resilience of coral reef fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Malin Pinsky, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/29/2016
* USD 93,009.00

When Typhoon Haiyan hit the Philippines it had sustained winds of 305 to 315 kph
and was the strongest storm ever to make landfall. Storms are one of the most
important disturbances to coral reef ecosystems. Previous research has primarily
emphasized that habitat recovery is important for the recovery of reef fish
communities after disturbance. We understand little, however, about the role of
larval dispersal in mediating species responses to disturbance. Reef fish
function as metapopulations connected by larval dispersal among reefs, and
larval connectivity is therefore a critical process for their dynamics. A field
site directly in Typhoon Haiyan's path provides an ideal opportunity to address
the role of larval dispersal during recovery. Over the course of four field
seasons (2008 to 2013), nearly two thousand clownfish were surveyed along 20km
of coastline. Clownfish possess the same basic life history as most reef fish
(sedentary adults and pelagic larvae), but are sufficiently rare and visible
that genetic parentage methods can be used to follow larval dispersal. This
study site is therefore a unique location in which to understand the
metapopulation impacts of a massive storm. This project will focus on three
hypotheses: 1) Habitat destruction determines the short-term impacts of storms
disturbance, 2) Metapopulation processes shape recolonization after disturbance,
and 3) Disturbance allows rare competitors to increase in abundance. The project
will address these questions with a combination of fixed and random transects to
assess reef habitat and reef fish abundance and diversity, as well as detailed,
spatially explicit surveys of anemones and clownfish. Genetic mark-recapture and
parentage methods with yellowtail clownfish will pinpoint the origin of new
recruits that recolonize the reef post-typhoon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs
are among the most biodiverse and economically important ecosystems on earth,
providing food, coastal protection, tourism, and medical compounds for millions
of people around the world. In order to guide conservation efforts, we need to
understand the processes that influence their resilience to large-scale
disturbance. This project will compliment other international conservation and
research efforts and the lessons learned from this research will also be
communicated to local decision-makers. The principal investigator will also
prepare a presentation on this research for the Rutgers' Institute of Marine and
Coastal Sciences STEM Educator Series. The program provides professional
development training to middle- and high-school teachers by combining current
research with lesson plans designed around real world data.