* 1430051
* Decadal Prediction Following Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Alan Robock, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2019
* USD 758,937.00

Large volcanic eruptions produce stratospheric sulfate aerosols that can persist
for one to two years following the eruption. In addition to a reduction in
global-mean temperature over this time period, the aerosols can produce regional
climatic responses including reductions in tropical monsoon rainfall, winter
warming over the Northern Hemisphere continents, and possibly an increase in the
likelihood of El Nino events. While these effects may only last for one or two
years, the impact on subsurface ocean temperatures can last longer, up to
several decades for water masses below the
thermocline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to determine the extent to
which the above climatic consequences are predictable. While the eruptions
themselves are not predictable, the amount of sulfate injected into the
stratosphere can be determined within days of an eruption, and this information
may suffice to determine the volcanic influence over the years to decades
following an eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large part of the research effort
is devoted to identifying the volcanic signal in climate simulations from multi-
model ensembles including the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project versions 3
and 5 (CMIP3, CMIP5), the Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project versions 2
and 3 (PMIP2, PMIP3), and the NCAR Large Ensemble (LE) and Past Millenium (PM)
simulations. Several aspects of the simulations will be evaluated as part of
this effort, including the nature of the volcanic forcing used, the state of the
atmosphere and ocean (in terms of climatic fluctuations associated with El Nino
and other climate modes) at the time of the eruption, and the effect of the
eruption on stratospheric ozone. Following this analysis the Principal
Investigator and his team will conduct a suite of climate simulations with the
Community Earth System Model version 1 (CESM1). A number of simulations will be
performed including simulations of past volcanic eruptions and simulations of
eruptions starting at specific climate states (e.g. the warm and cold phases of
El Nino). Simulations will also consider the predictability of climatic effects
as a function of the size, location (particularly high latitude versus low
latitude), and time of year of the eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
societal broader impacts due to the substantial human impacts that eruption-
induced climate fluctuations can have. Work performed under this award could
contribute to the development of a forecasting system for the long-term climatic
disruptions following volcanic eruptions, which would enable adaptation efforts
for communities likely to be adversely affected. In addition, the project
supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate, thereby
providing for the future scientific workforce in this research area.