* 1430996
* SBIR Phase II:  A Multimodal Sensor Platform for Automated Detection and Classification of Pest Insects
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Scott Williams, DTN, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,185,504.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. The
proposed technology could drastically improve the overall effectiveness of pest
management programs in various agricultural industries. The proposed system not
only eliminates one of the most laborious and dreaded activities of manually
inspecting insect traps, but also provides unprecedented access to accurate,
real-time insect population information to make more effective pest management
decisions. This leads to reduced, spatially-restricted pesticide applications,
better understanding of insect pest behaviors, and enhanced biological control.
The automated trap?s ability to monitor more than one species of insect not only
achieves a higher level of efficiency in pest monitoring but also multiplies the
technology?s value to the end users. The potential market for the proposed
technology is quite broad. In fact, the technology can benefit any industry that
requires regular monitoring of insect populations. Furthermore, the proposed
technology could be used for various state and federal pest monitoring programs,
such as the Slow the Spread (STS) Project administered by USDA to monitor gypsy
moths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
2 project proposes to develop a multi-modal sensor platform for robust detection
and classification of multiple insect pest species for automated monitoring of
insect populations in production agriculture. The main goal of this project is
two-fold: First is to demonstrate that bio-impedance sensor alone provides
useful data to classify multiple insect species. A linear support vector machine
classifier using mel-frequency cepstral coefficients extracted from bio-
impedance data will be implemented on an embedded platform for detection and
classification of two insect pest species. These bio-impedance based electronic
traps will undergo large-scale field trials and be prepared for full
commercialization. The second objective is to develop a multi-modal electronic
trap with ultrasound, infrared and bio-impedance sensors that can simultaneously
monitor four or more insect pest species. Measurement signals generated by the
sensors will be analyzed to determine a set distinct features that can be
computed on an embedded platform for real-time processing. These features will
then be used in multi-modal sensor fusion algorithms for robust detection and
classification. Different sensor fusion strategies will be investigated and the
performance of each fusion algorithm will be evaluated both in controlled and
field conditions.