* 1430396
* AGS-PRF:  Observing and Diagnosing Mechanisms of Energy Balance in Temperate Freshwater Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* David Reed, Reed                    David          E
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2017
* USD 172,000.00

Freshwater lakes play a small but important role in the transfer of energy and
carbon to the atmosphere. Current earth system models rely mainly on lake
temperature to determine how active these systems are, but they do an inadequate
job during wintertime ice and transition season conditions. The funding under
this grant will provide an early career researcher the opportunity to study the
complete picture of lake thermodynamics by making a suite of measurements from a
platform in the middle of a mid-latitude lake. The main scientific benefit of
this award will be improved modeling of lakes within the widely used Community
Land Model. Local high school students and undergraduates will be actively
solicited to participate with the project and the lead researcher will also work
to develop high school teaching modules. Data from this project, such as ice
thickness, will be disseminated at near real-time to stakeholders including the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, which will benefit the public and
economy by increasing the safety of major wintertime activities like ice
fishing.

Freshwater energy, momentum, and biogeochemical cycles are coupled in ways
unique to other terrestrial or ocean systems, but observations and theoretical
improvements of all these processes has been limited. This research project will
specifically focus on quantifying all parts of a lake energy budget with the
goal of reaching a complete thermodynamic closure, in order to improve process-
level understanding of changes in ice-cover and feedbacks to biogeochemistry.
The researcher will use year round eddy covariance flux data currently deployed
on a lake, in combination with novel lake thermal measurements, to understand
time lake processes, particularly in winter. With new insight into the processes
that control surface heat flux, this project will refine theories of lake energy
cycling and improve prediction of lake carbon cycling, particularly during ice-
transition periods.