* 1430948
* Support for a Symposium Honoring Mark Cane's Contribution to Climate Science; Palisades, NY; October 20-21, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Richard Seager, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

Professor Mark Cane has been a leader in the field of climate dynamics for over
three decades, and his research has led to fundamental advances in our
understanding of the climate system. His research spans the fields of tropical
ocean dynamics and ocean-atmosphere interactions, seasonal forecasting,
applications of climate science to society, data analysis techniques, and
paleoclimate dynamics. He was a developer of the first self-consistent dynamical
model of the El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, which was used to
produce the first successful forecast of an El Nino event from a dynamical model
(the 1986/87 event, which was predicted a year and a half in advance). This work
paved the way for routine predictions of ENSO and the development of operational
seasonal-to-interannual predictions of global climate variability. He has also
led the way in the application of climate information for the betterment of
society. More generally, his work has lead to broad recognition of the key role
played by the tropics in climate variability, climate change, and the evolution
of past climates. Much of the recent work on tropical paleoclimate and its
global implications can be directly traced back to Professor Cane's pioneering
efforts.

This two-day symposium consists of a series of invited presentations
highlighting key advances made during the past few decades in understanding the
role of the tropics in the climate system, as well as outstanding problems in
the field. The symposium will focus on two main areas: ENSO dynamics and
societal applications of ENSO prediction; and tropical climate change from the
distant past to the future. Presentations are intended to provide a broad and
up-to-date perspective on each topic, and provide context for panel discussions
that will focus on key questions and strategies for future progress. The
underlying theme of the symposium is the extent to which the tropics play a
dominant role in variations of global climate on all timescales, from year-to-
year fluctuations to paleoclimate evolution to future climate change.

Funds provided through this grant will be used to cover the travel costs of
students, postdocs, and invited speakers. Travel funds for students and postdocs
will be advertised to the community and made available through a competitive
process. The symposium will have a broad scientific impact by encouraging the
exchange of ideas between climate scientists in different stages of their
research careers. It will also provide an opportunity for prominent researchers
to educate and inspire the next generation of scientists in research areas
related to tropical climate dynamics.