* 1430899
* SBIR Phase II:  Trans-esterified Lignin Thermoplastic
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* NHIEM CAO, Cyclewood Solutions, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2016
* USD 506,793.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
need for affordable compostable plastics to replace petroleum-based plastics.
Plastic bags are an environmental eyesore that pollute waterways and kill
wildlife. Local governments are now passing laws to ban the use of plastic bags
in efforts to hinder the spread of pollution. The U.S. plastic bag market was
over $10.6 billion in 2013. While society and government have placed more
emphasis on diverting compostable waste (25% to 40% of garbage) from landfills,
the average American throws away 1,500 pounds of garbage every year. Lignin
output is expected to increase in the ensuing years due to an increase in lignin
extraction plants coming on-line. These modified lignin resins range in lignin
concentration depending on the application. Utilizing compostable lignin resins
eliminates plastic waste and makes composting easier. Using compostable bags and
liners removes the risk of plastic contamination. The objectives for this
project include the determination of ideal production conditions for modified
lignins and the creation of formulations for a variety of applications. The
commercialization of these modified lignins will help to alleviate the plastic
waste problems that are impacting municipalities across the country.

The objectives of this research are to optimize production of chemically
modified lignin and thermoplastics, develop quality control methods for raw
lignin and modified lignin, and create more proprietary formulations to expand
lignin applications. Modified lignins were successfully produced in large scale
during the Phase I project. Phase II will continue to improve and expand the
modified lignin production by optimizing for physical properties and cost. The
variables selected for this optimization include reaction time, reagent
quantity, and reaction temperature. Developing a continuous process is also an
objective for this effort. Compounding of modified lignin with other
thermoplastics will also be optimized for physical properties and cost. The
variables for this portion include screw design, screw speed, and temperature.
Quality control methods for raw lignin and modified lignin will be developed
using existing analytical methods tailored to the specifics of raw lignin and
modified lignin. In addition, formulations will be expanded to tailor blends to
specific applications. Strength, elongation, modulus, and cost are a few of the
factors that determine what formulation should be used for a particular
application. The anticipated results of this Phase II project are to optimize
the production process and produce consistent modified lignin.