* 1430537
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a web-based authoring framework for animated interactive university STEM web content via curated crowdsourcing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Smita Bakshi, Zyante Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,366,989.00

This SBIR Phase II project develops a new web-based publishing paradigm that
creates interactive learning content for university-level science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields. The interactive content, featuring
animations, interactive question sets, and online tools, along with some text,
may replace or enhance traditional textbooks, with studies showing significant
improvements in student engagement and learning outcomes. The project addresses
the nationwide high dropout rates of STEM students, due in part to outmoded
learning materials. Such dropout rates not only prevent students from achieving
their career goals, but result in a shortage of college graduates in nationally-
critical STEM fields. The project creates novel web-based tools that empower
teachers, and even students, to straightforwardly contribute new interactive
content, thus tapping the latent talent and energy of many thousands of people.
The project creates automated and human-overseen processes that efficiently and
effectively percolate the highest-quality contributions to the top of lists,
enabling content to be created and maintained at large scale and low cost. The
project's new publishing paradigm can disrupt the existing publishing industry.
The interactive quality content can increase the number of students who
successfully graduate in STEM fields, which can strengthen the nation's economy
and competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a new web-based
content authoring and delivery framework that supports a novel curated-
crowdsourced publishing paradigm. The framework tightly integrates collaborative
web-based authoring with delivery of animated interactive web-based content. The
project develops elegant tools for instructors, and even students, to contribute
new interactive items. Such tools include a novel browser-based animation
creation tool, which allows powerful animations to be easily and quickly created
via any web browser without requiring application installation or requiring
extensive tool training. The project creates and tests new processes that, via a
combination of peer evaluations, usage data, and assessments, automatically
percolate quality contributions to the top, for final curation by instructors,
authors, or editors. Such percolation crowdsourcing can yield superior learning
materials, at scale and cost-effectively, while simultaneously yielding
substantially lower prices than traditional textbooks.