* 1430077
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Central Pattern Generators and Reflexive Feedback in Insect Locomotion: A Cross-Species Study
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Philip Holmes, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 506,745.00

Animal locomotion begins in the central nervous system and results in
quantifiable mechanical activity; it therefore provides an excellent window into
the neural computations that create intentional behaviors and respond to
environmental conditions. Locomotion originates in central pattern generators:
neural networks in the spines of vertebrates and thoracic ganglia of insects
that produce rhythmic movements. Some preparations (e.g. lamprey, crayfish) can
produce stable, near-periodic rhythms in isolation, others either require
sensory feedback to produce functional gaits or are significantly stabilized by
it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cockroaches and stick insects exemplify these two
extremes. They share the same basic neural and biomechanical architecture, but
the former run rapidly over rough ground, while the latter are adapted for slow
walking on twigs and leaves with varied orientations to gravity. Using existing
information and collecting new data, this project will compare these species and
address questions such as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the functional
organization of feedforward motor coordination: How are neural circuits that
drive individual legs and joints coupled to achieve inter-limb
coordination?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) What is the role of sensory input in
coordination: How does feedback affect motor patterns, and how does locomotion
modulate incoming sensory information?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) How are pattern
generators and sensory feedback systems modulated to create appropriate actions
as animals change speed, face unexpected perturbations, and maneuver to
negotiate complex terrain?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of integrated
mathematical and computational models is central to answering such questions.
New data will improve existing models, and new models will be created to span
the morphological and behavioral ranges from stick insects to cockroaches,
allowing us to illuminate their adaptive strategies to different environments.
This research will deepen our understanding of the generation and control of
locomotion, with general relevance to animals and
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US component of this project is jointly funded
by the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.
The German component is funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF).