* 1430503
* Building a Common Framework for Understanding the Dimensions of Achromatic Perception: Brightness, Lightness and Perceived Illumination
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Mark McCourt, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 06/30/2019
* USD 443,111.00

Determining the basic mechanisms of human achromatic visual perception is
important to understanding the operation of human vision as a whole. This
proposal is concerned with lightness, brightness and transparency perception,
and is aimed primarily at understanding how the visual system parses incoming
patterns of light into separate representations of surface reflectance and
illumination intensity. The research could have implications for the design of
visual displays, virtual reality systems, artificial vision systems, and
effective lighting systems. The project integrates the basic research goals with
the training of undergraduate students as well as public outreach in the state
of North Dakota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though the initial visual information
entering the visual system is a distribution of light intensity (an image) on
the back surface of the eye (the retina), the retinal image itself is inherently
ambiguous because the intensity at each point in the retinal image is given by
the product of the amount of incident light (illumination) and the surface
reflectance. Without additional information (or prior assumptions), the relative
contributions of these causes cannot be uniquely determined. This is known as
the "inverse problem" in vision. The goal of the proposed research is to
identify the prior assumptions and processing strategies that the visual system
uses to solve this problem. In the experiments, observers make apparent
intensity (brightness) and apparent reflectance (lightness) matches of surfaces
(both rendered and real) under homogeneous illumination and in the presence of
visible shadows and transparencies. Both behavioral responses and pupillary
responses will be measured. Measuring both brightness and lightness perception
under the carefully controlled conditions of the experiments is expected to
increase current understanding of how the visual system parses incoming patterns
of light into the separable components of surface reflectance and illumination
intensity in the computations that enable perceived lighting to occur. The
investigators ultimately aim to explain why people often vary in the accuracy of
their judgments about lighting.