* 1430837
* Science of Broadening Participation: Multiculturalism, Social Networks and Under-Represented Minority Student Success in STEM Fields
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Adan Colon-Carmona, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,991.00

Social scientists know that minority students are underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. However, they also know
that the reasons for this are complex, seem to vary by cultural group, and are
shaped by global as well as local processes. The goal of this research project
is to see if increased multicultural contact, such as that brought about by
economic and cultural globalization, affects student STEM achievement and
success. Drawing on an interdisciplinary suite of theories and methods, Dr.
Rosalyn Negron and Dr. Adan Colon-Carmona, both of the University of
Massachusetts Boston, will undertake research to refine the conceptualization
and measurement of multiculturalism, and examine specific interactions between
multiculturalism and STEM skills as correlates of STEM success. The researchers
hypothesize that multiculturalism will be associated with key STEM skills, and
that under-represented minority students who persist in STEM studies beyond the
first academic year will be more likely to be multicultural than students who
drop out of STEM studies.

The research will be conducted in the College of Sciences and Mathematics at the
University of Massachusetts Boston, a minority serving institution. The
researchers and a team of graduate and undergraduate assistants will recruit
STEM students who self-identity as belonging to one of the university's
underrepresented minority categories (American Indian/Alaskan Native, African
American/Black, Hispanic/Latin, Cape Verdean, Hawaiian Native/Pacific Islander,
and Southeast Asian). They will administer standard scales and conduct life
history and social network interviews with a small sample (N = 18). Results from
that first phase will be used to develop a Multiculturalism Scale and survey
that will be completed by 100 students. This will be followed by testing for
STEM competences and cross-cultural communication skills. Finally, they will
employ a case-control methodology by comparing students who persist in STEM
programs with those who do not.