* 1430967
* Foundational Research on Problem Mathematization in Undergraduate Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 497,404.00

A common lament among undergraduate professors is that students have poor math
skills. Research has shown that the difficulty does not lie in students lack of
knowledge of math. Evidence indicates that most students struggle with parsing a
word problem and representing it in a form that is solvable using a calculator
or computer. Within physics and other fields 'Mathematization'-how students
translate the conceptual understanding of a problem into mathematics-is a very
important skill for students to master not only in physics but in applied
science, research science, engineering, and many other STEM disciplines. To
date, little research has been done to gain an understanding of how students
learn to express conceptual problems in mathematics. This comprehensive,
foundational, research project will focus on four essential mathematical
abilities: setting up integrals, setting up differential equations, using
approximations and choosing appropriate coordinate systems. These are essential
skills for problem-solving not only in the undergraduate physics curriculum, but
also in many other STEM courses of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
be guided by three research questions. What malleable factors influence
student's mathematization (factors that teaching can alter)? What moderating
factors influence student's mathematization (factors that teaching cannot
alter)? How will the ability of students' problem 'mathematization' evolve over
the students' undergraduate career? The proposed effort will provide a detailed
analysis of the development of these skills through analyzing student work
across classes and by following individuals over three years in a longitudinal
study. Along with the more typical video analysis the PI, who has relevant
previous experience coding and analyzing the resulting transcriptions, will
adapt an innovative use of smart pens for capturing group homework writing and
discussion. An experienced external evaluator will utilize both formative and
summative strategies that include 1) assessing the viability of the research
studies to be completed by the project, 2) assessing research reliability and
replicability, and 3) examining the project's contribution to problem
mathematization in physics. Qualitative and quantitative methodologies and
multiple evaluation research methods will be utilized to triangulate data for
more robust findings from the evaluation, which will then be shared with the
project team and used to refine program activities. Project success will be
documented through aligning project documentation and research activities with
project goals, validating the research data and the outcomes of the developed
assessments and examining potential for replication of the assessment strategies
and assessing the contribution of the project to the theory and methodology of
STEM education.