* 1430741
* OPERATION OF A COMMUNITY MARINE-ATMOSPHERIC SAMPLING FACILITY AT TUDOR HILL, BERMUDA
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 289,010.00

This award will provide funding to continue operation of the Tudor Hill marine-
atmospheric sampling station in Bermuda. The Tudor Hill facility has served as
an observation and monitoring station of the marine boundary layer since 1988.
The continued operation and maintenance of the Tudor Hill site will facilitate
research concerning the chemistry and physics of the marine troposphere and
ocean-atmosphere exchange processes -- topics that are central to predicting and
mitigating the effects of anticipated future climatic and environmental change.
This project will make significant educational contributions at a number of
levels, including undergraduate education opportunities through the NSF-funded
Research Experience for Undergraduates program and through courses taught at the
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The troposphere plays
important roles in the global cycling of many elements, the global radiation
budget, and in the global distribution of organic compounds, nutrients,
microbes, and pollutants. At present, many aspects of atmospheric composition,
transport, and atmosphere-ocean exchange remain poorly understood, limiting our
ability to predict and mitigate the effects of future climate change. Central to
improving our understanding of these topics is the ability to observe and sample
the marine boundary layer. By virtue of its location in the western North
Atlantic Ocean, Bermuda has been a key location for numerous field studies of
the marine troposphere. With this renewed support, researchers will continue the
collection and archiving of meteorological, aerosol, and rain samples/data, and
other atmospheric collections for analysis by external investigators.