* 1430959
* Evaluating the Variables that Drive and Sustain Human Conflict in Agrarian Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Mariane Ferme, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 188,789.00

Civil wars have taken place in 73 countries since World War II, costing an
estimated 16 million lives. As scholars attempt to establish generalizable
patterns for the drivers and sustainers of conflict, and the conditions that are
necessary for conflict resolution, the reliability of many scientific studies
has been nagged by a noticeable lack of pre-conflict and post-conflict data for
the specific contexts that they study. This project has the unusual advantage of
being able to draw on a longitudinal data set, because of the researcher's long
history of engagement with the research site and local scientific collaborators.
By focusing on a range of decision-making processes in contexts long turned to
as models for studies of conflict, the research aims to answer questions about
what variables drive and sustain human conflict.

Dr. Mariane Ferme of the University of California, Berkeley, will collaborate
with scholars based at Njala University, Sierra Leone (West Africa) to
understand agrarian change in a number of "benchmark" rural contexts in that
country, which have been the focus of prior research, or will be established as
new sites for long-term study. While scholars agree that economic factors have
at least some role in sustaining conflict, there is no widespread agreement on
what drives it. The project seeks to answer this question by focusing on the
decision-making processes involved in access to land and labor, property rights,
and resource allocation through social institutions such as lineages, extended
households, local political authorities and the courts, particularly in areas
affected by large land deals with foreign investors. Sierra Leone is regarded as
an important testing ground for theories about the drivers and sustainers of
conflict, as its civil war represented a prima facie example of "extraversion",
where a regime draws on external commercial and/or donor relationships rather
than local taxation to maintain its political authority. Dr. Ferme's research
focuses on three sites where she will conduct surveys, participant observation,
and interviews, with an emphasis on access to justice, in areas where local
grievances shaped the violence of the 1991-2002 civil war in Sierra Leone. This
research will contribute to advance several bodies of social scientific
knowledge: 1) on the drivers and sustainers of civil wars; 2) on agrarian change
approached through novel interdisciplinary collaborations including
archaeologists, geographers, experimental economists, and political scientists,
in addition to cultural anthropologists, which offer insights over different
temporal scales; and, 3) on the issue of so-called "land grabs" in Africa and
elsewhere--large scale land deals, usually involving governments and business
corporations, which displace small-holder, local farmers. Dr. Ferme also plans
to study the impact of the legal empowerment movement, which in Sierra Leone
places trained paralegals in rural chiefdoms to increase access to justice for
the poor. Beyond its scholarly impact, this project promises to increase
understanding of the social and intergenerational fragilities left in place in
the aftermath of civil war, to shed light on the impact of new land policies
which are rapidly changing the agrarian landscape, and to contribute to the
training of a younger generation of Sierra Leonean social scientists.