* 1430391
* Environmental Exposures: A Bio-ethnography of Urban Families
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Elizabeth Roberts, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 313,500.00

This research project addresses the question, "Are the deleterious effects of
exposure to chemicals such as lead, mercury, and bisphenol A, the same for
everyone? Or are they affected by life circumstances?" There is increasing
evidence linking early life exposure to chemicals to the contemporary epidemic
of diabetes and obesity in the United States. There is also increasing evidence
that the effects of these chemical exposures are intensified by adverse life
circumstance like poverty, stress and poor nutrition. Thus the long-term life
impact of chemical exposures on the poor might be greater than for other groups,
given that ill-health affects educational attainment and work productivity. It
is critical then to understand the relationship between life circumstances and
chemical exposures in order to inform public policy concerning the allocation of
scare resources towards environmental clean up and chemical
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in Mexico City,
Mexico, where obesity and diabetes rates have risen dramatically in the last
decades. In 1995, a group of environmental health scientists from the United
States began a chemical exposure study with a large group of poor and working
class pregnant women in Mexico City. The study has become the largest and
longest running of its kind in all of North America, and has contributed several
key findings about the links between early life chemical exposure to obesity and
diabetes. However, while the project scientists have collected an unparalleled
array of biological samples and survey data from the over 7000 women and
children enrolled in the study, they know very little about the daily life
circumstance that may affect how chemical exposures impact the health of these
study participants. The depth and breadth of this biological data set offers a
unique opportunity for a social scientist to investigate how chemical exposure
and home and neighborhood environment shape health. The investigator for this
study, medical anthropologist Dr. Elizabeth Roberts of the University of
Michigan, will undertake intensive ethnographic observations of the daily life
of six study participant families in their home and neighborhood environments
over the course of a year. When the investigator completes these observations
her data will be correlated with the biological exposure data collected about
these same families for the last nineteen years. Findings from this
collaborative research will provide insight into how life circumstances, over
the long term, may intertwine with chemical exposures to shape the health and
economic status of urban poor and working class families. Understanding this
intertwined relationship can then contribute to developing effective
environmental and health care policy in the United States for today and for the
future.