* 1430536
* SBIR Phase II:  Enhanced Dexterity Minimally Invasive Surgical Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Randall Sullivan, FlexDex, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,371,608.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that more patients will benefit from
minimally invasive surgery, in which operations are completed through tiny
incisions. In addition to patient benefits of less postsurgical pain, less
scarring, and quicker recovery, minimally invasive surgery also reduces
healthcare cost due to shorter hospital stays and lower risk of post-operative
complications. Minimally invasive surgery impacts all surgical specialties,
including gynecology, general, bariatric, urologic, and cardiothoracic. Although
more than 1.5 million such procedures are performed in the US each year, wider
adoption is limited by the high cost of current surgical robots, training burden
of traditional hand-held instruments, and complexity of certain minimally
invasive procedures. The technology developed via this project will enable
surgeons to perform complex minimally invasive procedures such as hysterectomy
with minimal training and at a fraction of the cost of surgical robots. Surgeons
will benefit from this ergonomic design that will significantly reduce the
incidence of workplace related injury associated with many laparoscopic
instruments. This development effort will lead to a versatile platform
technology that can impact nearly all kinds of surgeries enabling a wider
adoption of minimally invasive surgery.

The proposed project aims to complete the design, development, verification,
validation, regulatory clearance and commercial launch of a laparoscopic
articulating needle driver. This novel low-cost minimally invasive surgery
technology provides enhanced dexterity and intuitive control that is seen only
in multi-million dollar surgical robots. Minimally invasive surgery is performed
through small holes on a patient?s body to minimize trauma, blood loss, and
recovery time, and generally involves suturing, knot-tying, and fine dissection,
all of which would benefit from enhanced dexterity in the surgical instrument.
Currently available low-cost mechanical (non-robotic) instruments either lack
dexterity or are counter-intuitive to operate, resulting in surgeon fatigue and
significant training requirements. Robotic instruments provide exceptional
dexterity and intuitive control, but are costly and beyond the reach of many
hospitals and patients. The proposal minimally invasive surgery technology
platform overcomes this affordability versus functionality tradeoff via a novel
forearm mounted tool configuration and innovations in parallel-kinematic virtual
center mechanisms that makes the tool input joint coincident with the surgeon?s
wrist. This results in a natural and intuitive motion transmission from the
surgeon?s hand to the tool end-effector via a low-cost design that does not
require any sensors, actuators, or computer-control.