* 1430991
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanomanufacturing process simulation and design
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Daniel Hudgins, Nanofoundry, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2016
* USD 452,625.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in launching a scalable, environmentally-
safe, chemical manufacturing process capable of producing high performance,
cost-competitive, and domestically-sourced magnetic materials suitable for a
large range of industrial and consumer applications. This will drive jobs growth
in the US, reduce supply chain risk, improve national security by reducing
reliance on foreign sole sources for critical materials, and enable greater
energy efficiency nationwide. Nanofoundry's carbide-based nanostructured magnet
material represents the first major innovation in permanent magnetic materials
since the early 1980's. In combination with an innovative manufacturing method,
Nanofoundry expects to produce a large range of high value nanoparticle
materials at low cost at industrial volumes. The permanent magnet market is $14
billion and is growing at nearly 9% annually. Nanofoundry projects that its
first generation product, Cobalt Carbide nanoparticles, could capture $600
million of that market in 2018 dollars and that its second generation product
(for which this project is foundational), could have an 80% to 90% cost
advantage over current products, with the potential to capture over 30% of the
global market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
break through historical barriers in two areas: launching a new product
technology to the magnet market-the first transformational innovation in three
decades-and developing a commercially-viable manufacturing capability to produce
high-quality magnetic nanoparticle material at industrial scales. The specific
focus of this project is to develop a scalable chemical production process to
manufacture magnetic Cobalt Carbide nanoparticle material, and to prototype the
use of the material in an end-use application. Several key innovations of this
program include (1) the optimization of a class of cobalt carbide nanoparticles
for use as a permanent magnet material, (2) the application of continuous flow
microreactor wet chemical process technology to the manufacturing of high
quality nanoparticle carbides at large scale, and (3) the use of supercritical
solvents for efficiency and environmentally-friendly processing.