* 1430662
* Conference: A Proposal to the National Science Foundation for Support of the Seventh Annual Inter-Science of Learning Centers (iSLC) Student / Postdoctoral Scholar Conference
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 03/31/2016
* USD 99,999.00

The purpose of this proposal is to obtain funding for the seventh annual inter-
Science of&lt;br/&gt;Learning Centers (iSLC) Conference entitled "Navigating the
Future of the Science of Learning. This conference organized by students and
postdoctoral fellows of the six Science of Learning Centers in the Science of
Learning Centers (SLC) Program will be hosted by the NSF-funded Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center (PSLC) in March, 2014. The funds will be used to
cover participants' costs of attending the conference, including conference
registration, travel, per diem, and accommodations as well as use of facilities
at Carnegie Mellon University. The 2014 Conference will build upon the previous
Conferences by including cross-Center presentations in both symposia and
methodology workshops. In addition, the conference will feature special
programming to address its sub-goals of supporting intra-center collaboration,
promoting inter-center collaboration, and improving collaboration with the
broader community. To promote inter-center collaboration, members of the PSLC
will present the Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework, a theoretical
taxonomy for categorizing and aligning knowledge, learning processes, and
instructional principles. This would be followed by a discussion of how each
Center's research fits (or does not fit) into this framework, or how the KLI
could be extended to be applicable to a wider range of studies. To improve
collaboration with the broader community, the conference will include a workshop
on how to design educational museum exhibits for children. This effort will
culminate in an exhibit being designed and installed at the Pittsburgh
Children's Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The iSLC
Conferences have been and continue to be vital to the education and training of
the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows who attend them, and to the
emerging interdisciplinary Science of Learning field. Research discussions
organized around selected themes will facilitate cross-center collaborations and
expand the expertise-base of interdisciplinary researchers in the Science of
Learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The Conference's
focus on networking provides important community-building and access to diverse
expertise that is essential for the sustainability of interdisciplinary training
that the students/postdocs have experienced at their home SLC. This annual event
enables the trainees to learn from the experiences of their peers, while being
exposed to new and alternative methodologies, paradigms, and tools used at the
other SLCs. In addition, the Centers will benefit from the increased familiarity
of their graduate students and postdocs with ongoing work at other SLCs and in
other disciplines.