* 1430092
* PFI:BIC:  Nutriphone: A Nanoparticle-based Optical Contrast Assay to Monitor Vitamin and Micro-nutrient Levels Uisng Smartphones
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Saurabh Mehta, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 718,339.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
from Cornell University aims to develop a simple, cost-effective technology to
obtain personal micronutritional status using a smartphone. This system would
provide this information allowing users to accurately track their nutritional
status directly rather than relying on guesses based on diet. The "NutriPhone"
system is comprised of a hardware accessory that attaches to a smartphone,
custom test strips that accept a blood sample and conduct a detection assay, and
a software app. The app operates the smartphone, interprets the test strip
results, displays the results to the user in an intuitive fashion, and provides
therapeutic suggestions, if needed. The personalized self-report and automated
data streams are expected to yield greater awareness and self-management of
health and diet.

Vitamin and micronutrient deficiencies are responsible for a multitude of
adverse health conditions, including anemia, rickets, scurvy, adverse pregnancy
outcomes, infant growth inhibition, osteoporosis, and cancer. Worldwide, over
1,000,000 people die every year from vitamin A and zinc deficiencies alone.
Domestically, as many as half of patients with hip fractures are thought to be
vitamin D deficient. Fortunately, many deficiencies and their symptoms are
reversible through changes in diet or by taking supplements, particularly if
detected early. Very few people, however, have information as to their own
personal micronutrient status, what the potential outcomes of their deficiencies
are, or the recommended treatments. Having nutritional status information could
significantly enable healthier living. In addition to commercial outreach,
NutriPhone technology will be integrated into Cornell's Division of Nutritional
Sciences' community extension programs both domestically and internationally,
including the NutritionWorks program (nutritionworks.cornell.edu), to improve
and strengthen capacity, particularly around nutrition and health.

A unique nanoparticle-based binding reaction allows the creation of an optical
contrast depending on the level of the particular marker (e.g., vitamin D). The
technology allows the measurement of this optical contrast using the smartphone
camera, which is integral to every smartphone. Among the important aspects of
this use of the smartphone camera is that it dramatically reduces the cost of
the accessory. The state of the art currently is to use liquid chromatograph
mass spectrometry (LCMS) to measure vitamin D. A nanoparticle-based optical
contrast assay is a major advancement. The research program is structured to
address the scientific and engineering challenges with the development of the
NutriPhone in parallel with the equally important consumer uptake and business
model development challenges. This is done through a series of user trials that
will be conducted throughout the program at Cornell and extensive product
development support, market research, consumer focus groups, and business model
development support provided by the industrial partner, Amway. The most
transformative aspect of this type of technology is that it will enable
quantitative diagnostics to be deployed directly to the consumer rather than
through an intermediary. Amway represents a particularly appealing industrial
partner to enable this as they have extremely broad experience in direct-to-
consumer marketing and sales.

At the inception of the project, the partners are the lead institution, Cornell
University, and a large company, Amway (Ada, MI).