* 1430703
* SBIR Phase II:  Low power hardware-software subsystem for intelligent sensory stream analysis
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Atif Hashmi, Thalchemy Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2017
* USD 880,004.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to significantly
reduce the development effort for continuous sensing applications and to enable
deploying them in a wide range of battery-constrained sensing devices, including
personal mobile devices like smartphones, tablets, and smart watches; wearable
health monitoring devices for tracking EKG/EEG and other vital signals; and
remote sensing devices for monitoring structural integrity, emission levels,
pollutant concentrations, or seismic data. In these applications, continuous
sensing triggers context- and location-aware computation or communication in
response to sensory stimuli in the device?s environment. Without dramatic
innovations in the development of ultra-low power sensory processing, continuous
sensing will remain a niche application limited to environments with a stable
and plentiful power source. In contrast, this project will demonstrate the
viability and potential widespread deployment of continuous sensing in mobile
and remote environments. The ability to flexibly deploy continuous sensing for
these and other applications has the potential to revolutionize these markets
and create entirely new and unforeseen application domains, dramatically
altering the extent to which cyber-physical systems can interact with their
physical environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project will develop a complete software and hardware
platform for developing and deploying applications that identify and respond to
spatial and temporal trigger signatures (events of interests) in continuous
sensory data streams. Current sensory processing platforms rely on a power-
hungry application processor to analyze continuous sensory streams of real world
phenomena to identify trigger signatures, and application development is
cumbersome and requires significant domain expertise. The proposed approach
offloads continuous sensing and trigger signature detection from the power-
hungry application processor to a recognition engine deployed either in firmware
on a low-power microcontroller or as a custom hardware accelerator. Furthermore,
an integrated software development toolkit will be provided to streamline
implementation of sophisticated sensing applications, leading to widespread
adoption and future availability of always-on, sensor-based applications. The
result of this project will be a software implementation of the novel neurally-
inspired algorithm/firmware optimized to be deployed on currently available
smartphones, a software toolkit that enables easy and rapid development of
always-on sensing applications, and a novel ultra low power, neurally-inspired
sensory data preprocessor.