* 1430145
* PFI:BIC  A Smart-city Cloud-based Open Platform and Ecosystem (SCOPE)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Christos Cassandras, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 799,998.00

This NSF Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC)
project from Boston University will research, prototype, and evaluate novel
"smart-city" services for the city of Boston and for the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. The centerpiece of the project is a Smart-city Cloud-based Open
Platform and Ecosystem (SCOPE), which creates a multisided marketplace for
smart-city services based on the Open Cloud eXchange model, in which
stakeholders compete and cooperate within the same infrastructure. By harnessing
breakthroughs in cyber-physical, mobile, and cloud computing technologies, and
by building upon novel data acquisition and mining capabilities to be developed
by the investigators and their industrial partners, SCOPE-enabled smart-city
services will address challenges faced by twenty-first century cities:
connecting people with resources, guiding changes in collective behavior, and
supporting innovative transportation, healthcare, energy distribution, and
emergency response solutions, as well as business, commerce, and social
applications. SCOPE's broader impacts include providing a template for
widespread experimentation with and adoption of smart-city services by other
cities in Massachusetts and beyond; accelerating technological innovation,
commercialization, and business development; breaking technological and
institutional silos; facilitating institutional transformations and deep citizen
engagement; and development of curricular content and projects that leverage
smart-city big-data platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of SCOPE
entails the design and prototyping of new techniques and novel application
programming interfaces, adding capabilities that are currently not available in
public cloud offerings, including (a) support for predictable operation of
cyber-physical systems in support of sense-and-respond real-time applications;
(b) management of data quality and provenance attributes in support of
applications that fuse potentially noisy data from multiple trusted and
untrusted sources; and (c) incorporation of security-enhancing services in
support of privacy-preserving analytics. In addition to the design and
prototyping of SCOPE, the investigators and their collaborators will work with
partners to develop specific SCOPE-enabled smart-city services, including (d)
transportation and mobility services to reduce traffic congestion, save time and
wasted fuel, and reduce pollution; (e) energy and environmental services that
monitor/estimate greenhouse gas emissions for congestion management and
coordination of smart-grid energy demand-response solutions; (f) public safety
and security services for big-data-driven coordinated scheduling of public works
and municipal repairs; and (g) tools for management of city assets through
mining of large data sets and crowd-sourced coordination of asset use.
Additionally, the investigators will investigate and evaluate various (h)
social, institutional and behavioral mechanisms to facilitate adoption of new
services, such as incentive programs and community report cards to promote
transparency and sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the Hariri
Institute for Computing at Boston University, SCOPE will be led by investigators
from multiple disciplines including Computer Science, Systems Engineering, Earth
and Environment, and Urban Planning. Once developed, SCOPE services will be
offered through the Massachusetts Open Cloud, a new public cloud designed and
implemented through the Green High-Performance Computing Center (Holyoke, MA)
and supported by the Massachusetts Technology Collaborative (Westborough, MA).
Industry partners include two large businesses: Schneider Electric (Palatine,
IL) and International Data Corporation, an IDG subsidiary (Boston, MA), and
three small businesses: Integrated Technical Systems (Wallingford, CT),
Connected Bits (Bedford, NH), and CrowdComfort (Beverly, MA). Public sector
partners include the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Office of the CIO, City of
Boston, Metropolitan Area Planning Council, and the Metropolitan Planning
Organization (Boston, MA).