* 1430982
* SBIR Phase II:   Contactless and portable heart-rate device based on magnetic sensing technology
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Rita Macedo, Picosense Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 814,389.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Research (SBIR)
project is to develop and prototype a novel magnetic sensor capable of
continuous detection of the small magnetic signals generated by the human heart.
The proposed technology enables heart-rate and heart waveform detection without
any contact to the skin, contrary to standard electrocardiograph (ECG) based
devices that require uncomfortable electrodes, adhesives and chest straps to
operate. Furthermore, this technology can be manufactured at low cost and easily
miniaturized. The goal of the project is to provide a contactless, unobtrusive
and comfortable way to evaluate the heart condition, to be used by sports
enthusiasts for fitness heart monitoring, and for heart disease patients that
require an accurate, continuous and long-term heart monitoring solution. The
proposed technology is designed to be easy integrated with bracelets, smart-
watches, or simply placed in a pocket, while constantly measuring the heart
function. Its small size and low cost enables the broad use of this technology
and easy integration with available wearables. Moreover, knowing that heart
disease is the main cause of death in developed nations, we believe our low cost
and easy to use device will have positive impact on public health, and on
preventive medicine. Better preventive care will consequently help to lower
healthcare costs.

The proposed project will focus on the development of a novel magnetic sensor
for continuous and portable monitoring of the human heart, based on
magnetocardiography (MCG). Portable cardiography has been limited to
electrocardiography (ECG) sensors for decades. ECG is not suitable for
continuous heart-rate monitoring (e.g. for in-home use by elderly patients)
since it requires conductive (adhesive) electrodes on the patient?s chest. In
contrast, MCG can accurately record the human heartbeat non-invasively and
contactless. We propose a novel, chip-scale, highly sensitive magnetometer that
can enter and expand the portable ECG heart-monitoring market. The goal of this
Phase II project is to continue the optimization of the magnetic sensing
technology, and start the development of prototypes and demonstration units that
can record the heart signals in real time, providing a new and contactless way
to measure heart-rate and heart waveform for medical diagnosis.