* 1430660
* Coordination and Participation: Workshop "Observations of upper-ocean and sea-ice interactions in the Eastern Arctic Ocean"
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Igor Polyakov, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2015
* USD 9,989.00

Funds are provided for an international, interdisciplinary Workshop entitled
?Observations of upper-ocean and sea-ice interactions in the Eastern Arctic
Ocean?. The workshop builds on significant previous efforts in developing
scientific ideas for the proposed "Eurasian Basin Ice Camp" (EBIC) field program
and will promote international support. EBIC would collect data with which to
address the questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. What are the processes, and their
magnitudes, that explain the rapid reduction in ocean heat content of the
Atlantic Water as it circulates along the margins of the eastern
Arctic?&lt;br/&gt;2. How do these processes interact with the pack ice and
atmosphere to modify the evolution of Arctic sea ice in a changing climate? and
&lt;br/&gt;3. How do properties of the upper ocean affect fundamental processes
of nutrients and zooplankton assemblages in the poorly studies region of the
Arctic Ocean? &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will enable US and international
investigators to discuss common areas of interest, potential collaborations, and
opportunities for sharing logistical resources. This workshop will develop a
concrete science plan, with broad US and international Arctic community
contribution, for the scope of the abovementioned field program. Following this
general goal, the proposed Workshop?s objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. identify
key science questions and hypotheses that must be addressed by an experimental
program in order to significantly advance our understanding of sea-ice and
upper-ocean processes and interactions in the eastern Arctic Ocean,&lt;br/&gt;2.
identify essential technologies and platforms to address these questions and
hypotheses, including, but not limited to, the potential for ship surveys; one
or more focused ice camps; drifters, underwater and airborne autonomous
vehicles; and satellite or airborne remote sensing,&lt;br/&gt;3. develop plans
for experiment logistics, &lt;br/&gt;4. identify timelines, multi-agency funding
sources, international cooperation strategies, and management approaches,
and&lt;br/&gt;5. develop approaches for coordination of the proposed activities
within the wider Arctic science community, identify needs of the satellite and
modeling communities in terms of observational data to be collected during the
ice camp, and develop plans for engagement of young scientists in project
activities.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop coordinators will develop a draft White Paper
summarizing the workshop outcomes. This document will be circulated amongst all
workshop participants for further comment, then posted, broadly advertised and
shared directly with the community for further comment before being finalized
three months after the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large amounts of heat are
transported into the Arctic Ocean with waters originating in the Atlantic Ocean.
There has been much speculation concerning the fate of this heat, particularly
its importance in melting sea ice. Recent reductions in sea ice and large
expanses of summer open water may have changed the process environment of the
Eurasian Basin of the Arctic Ocean. The proposed workshop would bring together
international scientists to discuss these issues and to plan a possible field
effort to study the fate of this heat in a changing environment. The resultant
understanding from such a study would be important for forecasting sea ice cover
over the Eurasian Basin and, possibly, beyond, to the Canadian Basin.