* 1430526
* Geomagnetic Signals from the Earth's Core: Searching for Evidence of Waves and Stable Stratification
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 227,697.00

Fluctuations in the Earth's magnetic field provide unique insights into the
internal dynamics of our planet. Turbulent flow in the liquid metal core
generates the geomagnetic field, causing observable fluctuations at the Earth's
surface. Historical observations reveal several distinct periodicities in the
range of several decades. The origin of these fluctuations is not well
understood, but their existence profoundly affects our ability to forecast
changes in the geomagnetic field. The proposed research seeks to develop
physical models for waves at the top of the Earth's liquid core with the goal of
explaining the observed geomagnetic fluctuations. Physical conditions in the
core, including the possibility of density stratification, can be recovered by
fitting the model predictions to the observations. One potential outcome of this
project is a change in the way we interpret geomagnetic fluctuations because the
presence of certain types of waves can substantially alter our understanding of
dynamics near the top of the core. This work is particularly timely given a new
satellite mission (ESA's Swarm mission) to monitor the Earth's magnetic field
with unprecedented resolution. The combination of better observations and more
realistic physical models should improve our ability to forecast of changes in
the geomagnetic field over the next few decades. More broadly, our work
addresses the thermal and chemical evolution of the Earth because the gradual
transfer of heat and matter in the interior ultimately sets the density
stratification in the present-day Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waves with
periods of several decades can arise when the top of the liquid core is
stratified by either thermal or compositional gradients. These waves are
sometimes called MAC waves because they involve the interplay of Magnetic,
Archimedes and Coriolis forces. Preliminary results show that a linear
combination of MAC provides a good description of zonal flow in the core, based
on several independent estimates of core flow. The same combination of waves can
also account for observed fluctuations in the dipole field. Success in
explaining these distinct phenomena motivates our hypothesis that the dominant
periodicities in the historical record are due to MAC waves. We explore this
hypothesis by developing a more sophisticated numerical model for the wave
motion and by devising more comprehensive tests using a wide range of
observations, including geomagnetic secular variation and changes in the length
of day. We propose to invert these observations for the structure and properties
of a stratified layer in the core. We will also explore the consequences of
stratification on the long-term dynamics of the core using a new geodynamo model
called Calypso, which was developed at UC Berkeley with prior NSF support.
Calypso will be used to quantitatively assess the excitation of MAC waves in the
core and to identify specific diagnostics that could support or refute our
hypothesis.