* 1430001
* SusChEM:US/China Workshop on Combustion Related to Sustainable Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2015
* Eric Eddings, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2015
* USD 49,957.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1430001&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Eric G.
Eddings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is targeted to identify high-priority
specific research objectives that can be pursued significantly better by
collaborative U.S. - China research teams than by U.S. researchers and China
researchers working separately without U.S. - China collaboration. In this
workshop, U.S. and China researchers will define high-priority research
objectives on combustion related to sustainable energy and identify related
collaborative research project areas that are potentially fundable jointly by
the U.S. NSF and the China NSF. The workshop is designed for broad and in-depth
discussions of challenges, opportunities, and collaborations in critical areas
of combustion related to sustainable energy. Participants from each country are
leading/active scholars in the general area of combustion (which includes
combustion, gasification, pyrolysis and related thermal processes). The workshop
will include the following 4 themes: 1) global climate change considerations,
such as reducing the emissions of greenhouse gas emissions through carbon
capture and sequestration (CCS), and switching to lower carbon or more carbon-
neutral fuels; 2) sustainable fuel supply, which includes a transition to more
renewable resources, but also new fossil-based resources (e.g. shale gas) and
new approaches for using fossil resources in a more climate-friendly manner; 3)
other environmental impacts beyond climate change (Hg, NOx, SOx, PM2.5, air
toxics emission, solid/liquid waste streams); and 4) energy efficiency
considerations, which would impact each of the 3 previous items. China and the
US are the top two generators of CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel combustion.
Consequently, US-China collaboration on combustion and sustainable energy are
essential for addressing a variety of global energy-related challenges, ranging
from sustainable fuel supply to air quality, solid waste management and global
warming. The participants will gain a broader perspective on global combustion
and sustainable energy challenges, which they can incorporate into their
teaching and research programs. The workshop will develop a network of
collaborators well versed in key energy research questions for each of the
participant countries. In addition, one US graduate student from an under-
represented group will participate in the meeting, allowing her to broaden her
perspective on US-China sustainable energy challenges, global collaboration, and
promising future research directions. Finally, the proposed project will
disseminate the workshop's results and key findings through a final report that
will be provided to the U.S. NSF as a key deliverable and which will also be
made available on the website for the Institute of Clean and Secure Energy at
the University of Utah. This award is co-funded by the Global Venture Fund (GVF)
of NSF's International Science and Engineering section (ISE) as well as the CBET
division of NSF's Engineering Directorate.