* 1430400
* Biological links between rhythm and reading
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nina Kraus, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 552,207.00

Learning to read is the cornerstone of education. Recently, it has been
discovered that the better you are at keeping a beat (e.g., accurately tapping
along to a metronome or tapping out a beat in music) the better you are at
reading. This raises fundamental questions about the overlapping brain and
behavioral bases of reading and rhythmic abilities. This project measures sound-
induced brainwaves in the auditory neural system in a search for "neural
signatures" that are shared between people who are good readers and those who
are good at keeping a beat. Once these signatures are established, they can be
used to hone programs such as school-based music instruction that emphasize
rhythmic skills in order to best encourage the parts of the brain that support
reading and literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine the
overlap in the neural resources drawn upon by reading and rhythm. By measuring
neural responses they will test the hypothesis that two types of rhythmic
skills, synchronizing to a metronomic beat and extracting a beat from a complex
rhythm, involve different brain regions, subcortical and cortical, respectively.
The hypothesis is that the two rhythmic skills relate to temporal precision in
the brainstem and phase-locking of ongoing cortical oscillations and contribute
independent sources of variance to reading ability. By comprehensively testing
rhythmic and reading skills in secondary school students, an age group old
enough to perform the required rhythmic tasks but in whom reading skills are
continuing to emerge, the investigators hope to further our understanding of
reading and rhythm in relation to the unique contributions of subcortical and
cortical auditory areas. In so doing, this work might guide the development of
teaching strategies to optimize language skills for all children and remediation
programs for poor readers.