* 1430728
* STTR Phase II:  Security Monitoring and Intrusion Detection in SDR and CR Using Power Fingerprinting
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2017
* A.A. (Louis) Beex, Power Fingerprinting, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 892,717.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of an
innovative cyber security solution based on Power Fingerprinting (PFP) for
vulnerable wireless networking equipment and smart grid infrastructure. PFP can
prevent well-funded adversaries from compromising these critical systems and
operate without being discovered. The PFP monitor can assess the integrity
directly on the target platforms, including those for which there is no
commercial solution available. PFP can be applied to a variety of embedded
platform and can coexist with traditional cyber security solutions adding an
extra layer of protection in a defense-in-depth approach. These characteristics
make PFP capable of detecting sophisticated attacks, such as the recent Stuxnet
worm. Traditional peripheral cyber security approaches, such as anti-virus and
firewalls, are being adapted for the target platforms but with limited success.
PFP addresses a growing need to secure critical infrastructure, such as
communications and power generation and distribution, and directly monitor their
execution. PFP has dual application in the commercial and government
cybersecurity markets, particularly for resource-constrained and embedded
platforms. PFP has the potential to become a fundamental player in cyber-
security by protecting the nation?s infrastructure and promoting further
development of the economic base and employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase 2 project aims to demonstrate
a commercial prototype of a novel cyber security solution for wireless network
infrastructure and Smart Grid applications based on a novel approach called
Power Fingerprinting (PFP). PFP provides integrity assessment and intrusion
detection for embedded and resource-constrained platforms by using an external
device to monitor side-channel information and applying signal processing
techniques to determine the execution status of a processor. Due to
computational resource constraints, the application of traditional cyber
security solutions to the proposed target applications is very limited.
Furthermore, there are no commercial solutions available capable of directly
monitoring the execution and detecting intrusions in networking equipment, such
as wireless routers, or control systems used in the Smart Grid. The objectives
of this Phase 2 effort include: 1) Demonstrate a PFP monitor commercial
prototype for wireless network and Smart Grid platforms, 2) Leverage PFP tools
to enhance automatic characterization on target platforms, and 3) Integrate
suitable mechanisms to improve timing synchronization. At the end of Phase 2, a
blind test demonstration of the prototype PFP monitor detecting malicious
intrusions will be provided and serve as the launching pad into
commercialization.