* 1430838
* Workshop on Patterns in Science and Technology, March 31 - April 2, 2014, Gainesville, FL
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2014
* S. Balachandar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

1430838&lt;br/&gt;Balachandar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
partial support for scientists and engineers to participate in a workshop titled
?Patterns in Science and Technology,? which will be held March 31 through April
2, 2014 in Gainesville, Florida. The workshop will bring together experts in
fluid dynamics of multiphase systems to examine pattern formation in diverse
problems, including multiscale turbulence, interfacial instabilities, granular
flows, and flowing suspensions. The workshop will focus on the mathematical
structures and underlying physics that are common to this diverse set of
multiphase systems. The workshop will feature invited and contributed research
presentations as well as several poster sessions that will address important
problems in pattern formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of patterns
in flowing systems is an important feature of many multiphase and interfacial
processes. The development of such patterns in complex materials sometimes
indicates the onset of an instability that can influence the processing of such
materials. In geophysical flows, structures that develop can influence
potentially catastrophic events such as avalanches in landslides. By seeking
commonalities in the behavior of distinct physical systems, this workshop may
aid researchers who study a broad range of materials. The workshop will also
provide educational opportunities for students at a variety of academic levels.
The meeting will give students a chance to interact with leaders in their
research fields, which will enhance their early career development.