* 1430372
* The Effects of Identity Development on Women's Recidivism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Merry Morash, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,962.00

Proposal Title: The Effects of Identity Development on Women's Recidivism
Institution: Michigan State University Abstract Date: 06/27/14 This study
examines how women offenders' identity development contributes to whether they
desist from crime or reoffend, and what factors promote or impair desired
identity development among women. Prior tests of narrative identity theory have
shown that identity development explains behavior; its application to a study of
women offenders on probation and parole for serious felony offenses offers
considerable promise for understanding desistance in this population. This
research builds upon baseline data from an earlier study of 400 drug-involved
women offenders. The new data will generate information on how and why women do
or do not change in ways that support breaking off from a pattern of illegal
behavior, with particular attention to key features of identity,the types of
neighborhoods in which the women live, and factors that impede them from
obtaining needed services and assistance. The project examines how known
predictors of recidivism work in combination with identity to provide a more
complete explanation of outcomes. Findings about identity development will
inform correctional, substance abuse treatment, and mental health treatment
practitioners' efforts to promote desistance from crime.In-depth life history
interviews will be completed with 60 women who recidivated and 60 who did not,
supplemented by telephone interviews spaced two years apart with the full sample
of 400 women. Interviews will include a number of validated and reliable scales
to assess engagement in volunteer work, skill development, and treatment
services as well as life satisfaction, motivations to assume prosocial roles,
self-reports of contact with the justice system, services needed and received,
residential mobility, and proximity to service location. Regression models will
be analyzed to predict recidivism from personality indicators in addition to a
set of established predictors in the literature,and an established qualitative
coding scheme will be adapted to include newly identified themes reflective of
women's process of desistance from crime. In combination, this will provide a
strong test of the nature and effect of identity development for drug-involved
women offenders. Findings will inform evidence-based correctional practices that
promote desistance and will suggest interventions useful for women offenders.