* 1430473
* Cooperative Election Study, 2010 to 2014 Panel Survey
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephen Ansolabehere, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 456,878.00

This project supports a 2014 pre- and post-election survey that re-interviews
9,000 citizens nationwide who were originally surveyed during the 2010 and 2012
elections. This will result in one of the largest multi-year election panel
surveys ever produced. The panel design provides a way for researcers to better
understand how public opinion, political attitudes, and electoral behavior
change from one election to the next. The large panel provides sufficient
statistical power to measure the dynamics of public opinion within groups, such
as ethnic, economic, or partisan groups or within particular areas of the
country. As a result, the power of the panel may provide new insights on a wide
range of research questions. For example, how does the composition of the
electorate change from midterm elections to presidential elections? What is the
impact of redistricting on voter engagement? How does the electorate hold the
government accountable for the economy? And, what role do deployements or
casulties play in affecting support for U.S. involvement in foreign conflicts?
The answers to these questions will contribute to our understanding of how to
sustain an informed and engaged citizenry in democracies
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The panel dataset produced by this project will
be made available to the scholarly community and will be an important resource
for scholars interested in a wide variety of questions ranging from how
attitudes change over time, the impact of redistricting, and the administration
of elections, and will additionally contribute to the advancement of survey
research methods. The results may be highly useful in assessing the effects of
shifts in district and preceints on election administration. The results of the
project will be communicated to election administrators, especially through the
CALTECH/MIT Voting Technology Project and associated activities. Finally, this
project fosters education. The grant supports the production of educational
materials related to the survey, so that faculty can readily integrate this and
other panel studies into their courses and students can the results for their
thesis and other research.