* 1430168
* PFI:BIC  Self-Learning Algorithms for Advancement of Smart Stormwater Green Infrastructure Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Robert Traver, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 801,606.00

A pressing social and environmental issue on a national scale is the effect of
stormwater on waterbody impairment, particularly in urban and suburban
watersheds. For example, stormwater can diminish water quality by discharging
pollutants like metals and nutrients as it runs over land and into the streams.
Stormwater causes stream erosion, sedimentation, flooding and overflows in
combined sewer systems. To combat these issues, municipalities must adopt
innovative technologies, such as Green Infrastructure (GI) systems like
bioretention, constructed wetlands, and vegetated roofs. Despite the advantages
of GI systems, its adoption has been slow due to technological and human
factors. These systems are not yet dynamic, cannot adapt to seasonal changes and
are often able to accomplish only one performance goal resulting in high
implementation and maintenance costs. Other potential factors include operation
and maintenance issues, policy and financing issues, lack of buy-in from
different stakeholders, and unclear return on investment. This research will
develop "smart" (i.e., efficient, active and self-learning) stormwater service
systems. "Smart" systems use sensor- and human-generated data to streamline GI
maintenance programs to be less costly and more effective in performance,
prediction and failure prevention. The broader impacts of the research
activities are the improvement of stormwater management across treatment scales.
The research activities will lead to more efficient and economical GI that
demonstrates its need and benefit to society and all watershed stakeholders by
making major progress towards flood mitigation and water quality improvement in
impaired waterbodies. The underlying technologies allow for unique opportunities
to directly connect infrastructure to stakeholders, system data is transmitted,
stored, and processed in cloud-based data management systems and published as
web services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enlists a research-based
approach that integrates application with the socio-technical system. This
outcome will be achieved by optimally using all physical processes in a GI
system (i.e., detention, infiltration, evapotranspiration), which uses sensors
and controls integrated with real-time weather and system conditions, forecast
data, and social media. Villanova University GI systems (green roof, constructed
stormwater wetland, bioretention rain garden) will be equipped with sensors
(e.g., soil moisture, water level, temperature and dissolved oxygen), as well as
automated control structures (e.g., valves or gates), providing dynamic control
algorithms that optimally operate during and after rain events. This GI system
will be dynamically linked to a platform technology with real time
visualization, data accessibility, quality assurance and real time control
through physical computing. The entire automated system will operate at three
time scales: 1) hours during, 2) days after the rain event, and 3) seasonal
scale. All control algorithms will be geared to maximize storage available for
stormwater and water quality improvement. These goals will vary across season
and climate zones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary partners include Department
of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Department of Computing Sciences
from Villanova University (Villanova, PA); University of Pennsylvania School of
Design (Philadelphia, PA); and Geosyntec Consultants, an industry partner
(Boston, MA). The broader context partners include Veolia, Paris France; City of
Austin, Texas; District Department of the Environment; City of Omaha, Nebraska;
and Philadelphia Water Department.