* 1430989
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-light,modular wind turbine
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Ben Glass, Altaeros Energies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,240,679.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
ultra-light, modular wind turbine for use in buoyant airborne wind energy
systems. Reduced turbine weight has a cascading effect on total airborne system
mass, allowing a significantly smaller, lower cost buoyant structure to be used
to access high altitude winds. At heights up to 2,000 feet winds are strong and
consistent, allowing for the production of low-cost, reliable power at a broad
array of sites. High altitude winds have over five times the energy potential of
ground winds accessed by tower-mounted turbines, opening the potential for a
major new renewable energy resource to be harnessed. In addition, the
containerized deployment of airborne wind turbines has the potential to expand
wind development to sites that are not feasible today, including sites that are
remote or have weak ground-level winds. Overall, the technology holds the
potential to significantly lower energy costs and improve reliability for remote
industrial, community, and military customers and represents a major step
forward in unlocking the abundant high-altitude wind resource to help in the
global pursuit of greater adoption of renewable energy
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will focus on reducing
the total weight of the wind turbine system. Turbine weight is one of the most
critical cost drivers of buoyant airborne wind energy systems. For each kilogram
removed from the turbine, an additional kilogram can be removed from the
inflatable shell and tethers, resulting in a significantly smaller and lower
cost system. The lightest commercially available small- to medium-sized wind
turbine weighs 31.1 kilograms per kilowatt of capacity, which is too heavy for
an economically-viable airborne turbine. By incorporating a compact, modular
architecture, a lightweight permanent magnet direct-drive (PMDD) generator and
high-strength composite materials, the proposed Phase II research effort aims to
double the power density of traditional medium size turbines, making the
proposed system suitable for use in an airborne application, while maintaining a
high level of reliability and cost performance.