* 1430647
* SBIR Phase II:  Amphiphilic Copolymers as Thickening Agents for Personal Care Products
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Liang Huang, ATRP Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 760,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is significant. The purpose of this project is to
create new ingredients which reduce the toxicity profile of personal care and
cosmetics products. This project will achieve this by inventing and
commercializing a new class of poly(ethylene glycol) PEG-free and 1,4 dioxane-
free ingredients. The current, PEG- containing ingredients are highly
sophisticated in their structure and function, however, PEG-base ingredients
have been found to contain 1,4 dioxane residuals which are known to have a poor
toxicity profile. In order to achieve a next generation PEG-free ingredient with
improved performance, we will employ a new technique called atom transfer
radical polymerization (ATRP). ATRP has proven to be a powerful method to
produce polymers with improved structure, purity and function for a broad range
of applications including cosmetics, biomaterials, home care, paints and
adhesives. This technique, however, has also proven to be difficult to scale to
commercial volumes. The result of this project will not only be improved
thickeners for personal care and cosmetics products, but, it will also be a
commercial process so that ATRP can be used to produce polymers with improved
performance for broad market segments.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project includes work relevant
to both the advancement of atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP)
technology (especially as it related to chemical engineering and scaling) and an
advancement of the understanding of polymer structure and function for the field
of rheology modifiers. Today, ATRP technology is commonly implemented using
methods acceptable in the laboratory setting. In this project, we will be
adapting ATRP to a scalable, efficient, cost effective industrial process.
Multiple-step synthesis will be simplified to a one-pot process. The post-
synthesis procedures will be optimized to save costs, eliminate toxic residuals
and reduce the amount of waste generated. The result of this work will be carry
with them significant intellectual merits applicable to scaling any polymer
produced by ATRP technology. This project will also deepen understanding of
structure to function relationships for this new class of rheology modifiers.
This knowledge will not only enable commercialization of new and improved
ingredients for personal care and cosmetics, but, it will also enable new high
performance polymers for many new products.