* 1430521
* Student Support for the Fifteenth International Conference on the Science and Application of Nanotubes, University of Southern California, June 2-6, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 11/30/2014
* USD 5,000.00

1430521&lt;br/&gt;Cronin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will feature many
world-renown invited speakers presenting cutting edge research on carbon
nanotubes and related materials. The topics covered in this conference span a
wide range including chemical separation techniques, materials science, and
thermal and solar energy conversion. Many of the topics covered in this
conference will address the key research challenges facing the community at
large, such as inhomogeneity of carbon synthesis, toxicity, and utilization of
carbon nanotubes in large integrated circuits. Student participation is an
important component of this conference series, and it is expected that all
students will present their own research in the poster sessions during the
event. We recognize that this inclusion is important in developing the next
generation of innovators, and hence, continued growth of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, Prof. Stephen Cronin won a bid to host the
Fifteenth International Conference on the Science and Application of Nanotubes
(www.NT14.org ) at the University of Southern California in June 2014. Based on
the recommendations of the NT advisory board, we made a tight budget that
offered low registration fees for attendees, especially students. While the
conference registration fees are expected to cover the basic cost of the venue
associated with the conference, funds are requested from the National Science
Foundation to subsidize the registration costs for student attendees. These
funds will be used for US student support only and no international travel. As a
partial sponsor of this conference, we will display the National Science
Foundation logo in our list of partners on the NT14 website and in the program
abstract book. This is a great opportunity for the National Science Foundation
to make a strong impression on this international scientific community.