* 1430087
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: Mapping and Control of Large-Scale Neural Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Danielle Bassett, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 361,507.00

Brain stimulation is currently being used to treat a variety of cognitive,
neurological, and psychiatric disorders, including depression, Parkinson's
disease, and schizophrenia. Despite this broad use, how brain stimulation works
remains largely a mystery. This project aims to address this gap in
understanding by studying and modeling how neural processes change with brain
stimulation. The investigators aim to develop criteria by which to evaluate and
optimize stimulation-based treatments of neurological and psychiatric disorders.
To accompany the scientific advances, the investigators will engage in
educational efforts to bring the research to the classroom and to enhance cross-
institutional opportunities for students. The investigators will place special
emphasis on mentoring and encouraging women and minorities on the academic path
in science and engineering. In addition, the investigators are combining their
efforts in the Skirkanich Internship in Network Visualization, which hosts
undergraduate art students each summer. The investigators propose a new set of
mathematical techniques to describe and predict neural processes and how they
change with brain stimulation. Investigators at the University of California at
Riverside (one of the most ethnically diverse research-intensive institutions in
the U.S.) and the University of Pennsylvania will collaborate on theoretical,
computational, and experimental research with three main research initiatives:
(1) static and dynamic modeling of complex neural dynamics, identification of
multi-resolution regions of interest in the human brain, the nature of their
interconnections, and their function in observed cognitive dynamics; (2)
analysis of network-wide dynamic properties of neural systems, characterization
of brain regions based on controllability metrics, and design of non-disruptive
control algorithms for the modulation of complex neural processes; (3)
validation of models and control strategies in a wide variety of empirical
settings to engineer and predict the outcomes of clinical interventions in
neurological and psychiatric disorders. The success of this project will enable
a deepened understanding of complex neurobiological systems, construct novel
maps of the human brain and its dynamic processes, and develop non-disruptive
control techniques for therapeutic brain stimulation protocols.