* 1430986
* SBIR Phase II:  An Intelligent Rapid Prototyping System for Synthetic Biology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Michael Fero, TeselaGen Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to accelerate the pace of microbe
development for the biomanufacture of valuable proteins, advanced enzymes for
industry, or therapeutic medicines. DNA cloning is an everyday practice in the
course of both industrial- and university-based research. Cloning technology has
remained largely unchanged for the last 20 years. As a consequence, researchers
consume a significant amount of time and money designing and constructing DNA,
rather than on designing and conducting experiments. Over the past few years,
standardized experimental DNA construction methods have been developed that lend
themselves well to automation and rapid assembly of DNA. Process automation is
progressing from luxury to necessity, as target applications demand the
fabrication of large combinatorial DNA libraries in the search for better
antibodies, faster enzymes, and more productive microbial strains. The proposed
technology will allow rapid forward engineered biological libraries of
recombinant DNA. The commercial availability of this technology will provide a
low cost alternative to current methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project aims to develop a bioCAD/CAM (Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing)
technology that enables rapid DNA assembly for synthetic biology. Wedding recent
advances in DNA assembly methods, and the software algorithms used to design
those DNA assemblies, the proposed research will result in a platform technology
for facilitating an optimized combination of direct synthesis and DNA assembly
to make large combinatorial libraries. After the construction of the DNA
libraries, screening for constructs with the desired activity remains a major
scale-limiting bottleneck, both in terms of cost and time. The proposed
technology will allow rapid prototyping and characterization of forward
engineered biological libraries of recombinant DNA, proteins, or whole cells.
The goal is to commercialize an easy-to-use platform for assembling complex
constructs onto vector backbones, transfecting them into host microbes, and
doing a rapid assessment of product yield. Results are captured, saved, and
returned to a design database after data cleansing and analysis.