* 1430719
* SBIR Phase II:  A novel and cost effective mechanical ventilator for pandemic preparedness and emergency stockpiling
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Matthew Callaghan, OneBreath, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,463,132.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a cost-effective mechanical
ventilator designed specifically to address the need for pandemic stockpiling
and surge capacity use. The output of this Phase will be a new ventilator ready
for FDA clearance and market entry in 2017. US government planners have
described a need for many thousands of additional ventilators in the event of a
pandemic influenza or other large-scale medical emergency. Severe influenza
often leads to respiratory distress which cannot be dealt with in the absence of
mechanical ventilation. Given some time and a mechanical ventilator, the human
body can often clear the infection on its own. Without help from the ventilator,
patients may die. Manufacturers of current ventilators have attempted to
reconfigure their existing offerings to meet the stockpiling demand.
Unfortunately none of these devices are able to match the price/performance
ratio needed to make stockpiling in large numbers economically feasible.
Building upon an innovative platform for mechanical ventilation developed in
Phase I, the project intends to develop a ?gold standard? device for pandemic
preparedness and emergency use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to
develop a novel and much needed medical device ? a mechanical ventilator
suitable for pandemic use and emergency stockpiling. If a severe pandemic were
to strike the United States, the number of patients in need of mechanical
ventilation has been estimated to be over 700,000. Of these, the most severe
cases are often in the very old and the very young. There are currently 62,274
ventilators in use in the United States, of which only 23,485 are capable of
supporting pediatric patients. Research and development activities will provide
opportunities for creating new intellectual property, new technology, and new
clinical methods for managing respiratory distress. This research and
development project is divided into two Aims. In the first, the company will
conduct extensive design research to analyze and understand the clinical need
and all product requirements. We will then design, build, and test a series of
prototype concepts using sophisticated software modeling, benchtop test
platforms including mechanical and electronic lung simulation, and real-world
user feedback. In the second Aim the company will address manufacturing and
supply chain requirements, integrate design for manufacturing, and build and
test a final series of near-production prototypes. These late-stage test
procedures will include clinical performance and accuracy in accordance with
regulatory standards, electromagnetic interference, and mechanical durability
including vibration, noise, and water ingress in preparation for FDA regulatory
clearance.