* 1430296
* CRCNS: US-French Research Proposal: Synaptic plasticity rules under physiological conditions for hippocampus and cerebellum
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Nicolas Brunel, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 508,741.00

One of the central hypotheses of neuroscience is that memories are stored in the
brain through modifications of synaptic connectivity. This synaptic plasticity
has been studied extensively in vitro, and these experiments have led to the
formalization of mathematical rules that describe how specific patterns of pre-
and post-synaptic activity lead to changes in synaptic strength. However, the
vast majority of these experimental studies have been performed in conditions
that are far from physiological. In particular, calcium is known to be critical
for the induction of synaptic plasticity in many preparations, but the
extracellular calcium concentration used in most studies is significantly higher
than the experimentally measured concentration in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the present collaborative project is to understand the rules of synaptic
plasticity under physiological conditions in two major brain structures, the
hippocampus and the cerebellum. It groups together a theoretical team (Brunel)
with expertise in synaptic plasticity models, and two experimental teams with
expertise in hippocampal plasticity (Debanne) and cerebellar plasticity
(Barbour). The theoretical team has recently discovered that in a calcium-based
model of synaptic plasticity, lowering the extracellular calcium concentration
drastically changes the standard plasticity rules that have been widely assumed.
Preliminary experiments performed by both the Debanne and Barbour teams have
confirmed that plasticity is reduced, or even completely abolished, in protocols
that induce plasticity at higher calcium levels. This project will investigate
further plasticity rules under conditions that are far closer to in vivo
conditions than traditional in vitro studies, through a tight collaboration
among the three labs. In particular, the collaborators will investigate whether
neuromodulation and/or realistic patterns of activity can rescue plasticity that
they found to be absent at physiological calcium levels. They aim to produce
minimal biophysical models of synaptic plasticity that will fit the recorded
data, and explain how plasticity is determined by a few key biophysical
variables: extracellular calcium concentration, nitric oxide, and
neuromodulators. Such a mathematical description of plasticity rules under
physiological conditions will serve both the theoretical community, by enabling
efficient simulation and analytical calculation, and experimental research, by
offering insight into key mechanisms of plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to scientific exchanges between the US and France. Joint
workshops will be held in both countries and their participants will contribute
to a tutorial-based Masters course combining theoretical and experimental study
of research problems in neuroscience. A companion project is being funded by the
French National Research Agency (ANR).