* 1430945
* Investigating The Relationship Between Environment And Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Eric Jones, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 125,236.00

The formation of complex societies - those with hierarchically organized social,
political, and economic systems - is a watershed occurrence in general human
cultural evolution. 10,000 years ago, everyone lived in egalitarian societies;
today, almost everyone lives in a complex nation-state. With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Eric Jones will conduct archaeological research at Late
Precontact (AD 1000-1600) sites in the southeastern United States to determine
the landscape factors that influenced the formation of complex societies in this
region. Examining the processes and circumstances surrounding how complexity was
formed helps to determine the long-term social, political, and economic
trajectories that have created modern conditions. Although archaeologists have
made great strides in understanding how and why this process occurs, they are
still learning. In particular, the reasons why complex societies arose and
persisted in specific locations has rarely been studied and is thus not well
understood. It is an important topic, however, because it can reveal the
historical and cultural processes that have shaped the last 10,000 years of
human history with regard to complexity. Specifically, it can improve
understanding of historic and modern human geography because the distribution of
societies of varying complexity impacted Native American-European interactions
during the colonial period. Further, it can provide information about human
interactions with the environment in relation to varying complexity.

The Southeast, particularly the Piedmont, is an ideal area to study the spatial
and landscape components of complexity because it was one of the few areas of
North America occupied simultaneously by complex and non-complex societies.
Furthermore, this area has a long history of archaeological research and
detailed accounts from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. This three-year
study will examine the environmental and cultural landscape features that
influenced the patterning of societies of varying complexity. It will do this
using a combination of archaeological excavation and survey, modeling of past
landscapes using historical, geological, geographic, and environmental data, and
geographic information systems (GIS)-based spatial analyses. The results will
explain why some locations saw the development of social and political
hierarchies and others did not.

With regard to broader impacts, Dr. Jones' research will be one of the few
projects to examine and compare the landscapes of non-hierarchical and
hierarchical societies in North America. Understanding the origins of social
hierarchies and related landscapes has the potential to inform about our own
social structure, specifically with regards to interactions with the
environment. Undergraduates will be involved in all levels of research,
including archival work, fieldwork, artifact and spatial analyses, and the
presentation and publication of results. Each year Dr. Jones and students will
organize public archaeology events inviting students, local residents, and
representatives from local Native American communities to engage in
conversations about local history, the importance of cultural historic
preservation, and Native American cultures and history. Information from this
research will also be integrated into the Wake Forest Museum of Anthropology and
will be made available as a digital database for other researchers.