* 1430048
* RAPID:   Long-duration AUVs as tools to explore Mesoscale feature-Aggregate Interactions (MAGI)
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Tracy Villareal, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2017
* USD 153,898.00

Remote areas of the ocean are difficult to sample for short-lived or episodic
features. This project will use a new sampling platform, the Wave Glider, and
provide a continuous presence in the central North Pacific gyre. The six month
duration of the mission will allow repeated sampling as well as spatial coverage
previously unavailable. This mission will incorporate phytoplankton specific
sensors as well as a set of optical sensors that will provide information on
distribution, physiology and aggregation of a unique diatom-nitrogen fixing
cyanobacterium symbiosis. When completed, this program will have generated the
first data sets that follow these diatom blooms over extended periods in the
region. Access to this instrumentation was facilitated by the PacX challenge, an
international competition to produce high quality research from long-duration
autonomous vehicles in the North and South Pacific Ocean. As a result of winning
that competition, the principal investigator has been awarded the use of 6
months of the Honey Badger Wave Glider time in 2014. The Wave Glider is a wave-
powered surface vessel capable of extended duration missions. In order to
maximize this the principal investigator will outfit the glider with advanced
sensors to quantify zones of intense diatom activity and aggregation along
mesoscale features in the Pacific (Project MAGI: Mesoscale feature-AGregate
Interactions). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will recruit a Hispanic
graduate student and thus address the NSF's interest in increasing STEM
diversity. This research effort will develop a novel sampling platform that
demonstrates the ability to sample the physical environment simultaneously with
relevant physiological data on important components of the phytoplankton. The
project will engage the public by creating a web-based presentation of the data
that will be available both on the web as well as in a public large screen
display in the University of Texas at Austin Marine Science Center visitor
center (40,000+ visitors per year). The availability of the data will also allow
for the creation of specific educational exercises for classroom use and
workshops for teachers and create programs that teach marine concepts aligned
with state educational benchmarks.