* 1430998
* SBIR Phase II:  Magnetic Capture Device for Rapid Isolation of Rare Cells
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Matthew Kerby, CytoMag, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 921,601.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a technology to enable
personalized healthcare for patients. This project will create a separation
device to recover rare cells, including circulating tumor cells (CTC) from
cancer, which can be analyzed for genetic mutations. In the long term, this
information could direct cancer therapy for each patient. Currently available
CTC tests only count rare cancer cells, which is of limited value to doctors.
This SBIR project will produce an automated system to capture cancer cells from
blood, and recover live cells for analysis. Through a small sample of blood, a
cancer patient's tumor may be genotyped, which may enable custom therapy in the
future. The platform has many research and clinical uses for any type of rare
cell capture and analysis. The proposed automated cell separation device will
enable the translation of basic research to clinical application by simplifying
the rare cell isolation process. This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop
an improved device for the detection and analysis of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) shed into the blood from cancer sites. CTCs are part of the process of
spreading cancer, and early detection is key to improved treatment. Detection,
quantification, and characterization of CTCs has the potential to transform
oncology, yet isolation under routine conditions of these rare, one-in-a-billion
cells, remains problematic. The proposed CTC sample preparation technology under
development is low-cost, rapid, and potentially may provide a highly informative
analysis of captured cells. It promises to enable a new generation of cancer
diagnostics that impact patient care. During this Phase II project, the goal is
to design and produce the separation device, a fluidic workstation, and supply
kit; then, evaluate its ability to capture and recover CTCs from the blood of
cancer patients. The Phase I data demonstrate the feasibility of this approach.
The results of this study will evaluate alternative means of capturing and
recovering CTCs, with the goal of >90% recovery of cells in a procedure
requiring 60 minutes or less. A secondary goal of Phase II is to evaluate the
potential of the device for the isolation of fetal cells from maternal blood,
which could enable noninvasive prenatal diagnostics.