* 1430803
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Focus Association in Superlative Expressions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Barbara Tomaszewicz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,442.00

Behind the seemingly effortless use of language for conveying information lie
extremely complex processes of encoding and extracting meaning. Sentences mark
information as old, shared by speaker and listener, or as new, and thus in
focus, through word order and prosody. Some of the real-time processes
underlying the comprehension of words and sentence structure are fairly well
understood by now, but processes involving the interaction between the
structure, prosody and meaning of a sentence are just beginning to be studied.
The researchers will obtain experimental evidence concerning the role of focus,
marked through prosody and word order, in the interpretation of superlative
expressions (e.g. 'the most expensive cake'). In English, prosodic focus
expressed through the placement of accent (indicated by capitals) results in the
different interpretation of sentences with identical word order: compare 'John
gave MARY the most expensive cake' and 'JOHN gave Mary the most expensive cake'.
In other languages, changes in word order have similar effect on the meaning of
sentences with superlative expressions. The project aims to obtain evidence that
focus, expressed through prosody or word order, guides processing during real-
time comprehension of text. Understanding the role of focus in superlative
expressions is important for linguistic theories of sentence structure, meaning,
prosody and the interactions among them. Understanding the role of prosodic
focus may have applications in natural language processing and speech
technology. The findings will also have implications for other disciplines that
study cognitive function such as psychology and neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers have previously identified cross-
linguistic differences in the range of interpretations available to sentences
with superlative expressions. They have explained these differences through the
generalization that certain grammatical environments preclude focus-affected
interpretation. The novel proposal that in a certain configuration the meaning
contributed by the superlative is determined by focus can be tested
experimentally. The researchers will investigate whether the hypothesized "focus
association" effect, which results in a particular reading of a superlative
sentence, is computed during real-time sentence processing in Polish. Polish,
unlike English, shows both a wider range of interpretations in sentences with
superlatives, and a syntactic way to manipulate the available interpretations,
allowing manipulation of word order and silent prosody. (It has been shown that
implicit accent placement is obligatory in silent reading.) The researchers will
test whether the hypothesized focus association effect obtains in a parallel way
to well-known cases of focus association involving the adverb 'only' (e.g. 'John
only gave Mary a CAKE', 'John only gave MARY a cake'), in a self-paced reading
experiment (Experiment 1) and in an ERP experiment (Experiment 2). The self-
paced reading and ERP methodologies complement each other, and address the issue
of the time-course of the cognitive operations that underlie native speakers'
comprehension of sentences with superlatives.