* 1430878
* SBIR Phase II:  New Fluorescent Biosensors for Drug Discovery in Living Cells
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Anne Quinn, Montana Molecular LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2017
* USD 692,381.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that it will generate new live cell assays
for the discovery of new drugs. Roughly half of the drugs sold today target G
protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) in the body, so finding better drugs that
target these receptors, with fewer side effects, is an important societal goal.
Many of the GPCRs, in many different organs of our body, signal through changes
in cyclic AMP (cAMP). Indeed cAMP signaling is used in the brain to form
memories, it controls the excitability of our hearts, and it plays an important
role in diabetes. Our goal is to develop a genetically encoded, fluorescent
biosensor that can be used in living human cells to report when a drug is
activating a GPCR and causing changes in cAMP. These new biosensors will enable
drug discovery teams to search for new drugs in the context of the very living,
human cells that they want influence. Being able to screen for drugs in the most
relevant biological context will make it possible to find better drugs with
fewer side effects faster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
generate genetically encoded fluorescent sensors for cAMP signaling in living
cells. Traditionally, cAMP signaling has been measured with single, destructive
end-point assays. These assays ignore the fact that cAMP signaling is tightly
controlled in time and space within a cell: simply measuring total cAMP
accumulation over an extended time period can miss important signaling events.
Worse, there are many different signaling pathways that can change the levels of
cAMP, and single end-point assays cannot distinguish among them. In Phase I, we
created a series of green or red fluorescent prototype cAMP biosensors that
demonstrated it is feasible to create robust cAMP sensors for use in automated
screening platforms. The goal of this proposal is to 1) optimize the brightness
and signal produced by our green fluorescent sensor by screening ~2,500 variants
for optimal properties, 2) create analogous red fluorescent sensors based on
what we have learned from the green sensors, 3) combine these red and green
sensors with color complementary diacylglycerol sensors to create multiplex
sensors for distinguishing signaling pathways and 4) package the genetically
encoded sensors for viral delivery and expression in automated drug screening
facilities in a variety of human cell lines.