* 1430792
* Control Mechanisms In A Context Of Empire
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Donna Nash, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,511.00

Political expansion is a common occurrence in the modern world. Researchers are
interested in this process because colonizations, territorial annexations, and
conquests have stimulated major transformations in history. Empires in
particular have relocated populations, reworked local economies and changed the
daily lives of millions. Archaeology provides the long term perspective to
examine the consequences of political expansion. Like historical documents,
monuments and cities tell the story of the conquerors, those who came to power;
however archaeology also allows investigators to describe the impact of
imperialism on common people. This study will assess how imperial control
changed many attributes of daily life in a community incorporated by the Wari
Empire (600-1000CE) of Peru. Excavations and related fieldwork will provide
advanced training for graduate students and a study abroad archaeological field
school to undergraduates. Research opportunities will be open to students at all
levels. The project team, composed of US and Peruvian professionals and
students, will participate in multinational conferences and publications. This
study will generate a detailed data set for comparative analysis that social
scientists can use to understand the general processes associated with political
expansion in the past and present.

Since political expansion can have far reaching consequences it is important for
social scientists to collect data from a variety of contexts. Without written
history political expansion can be difficult to identify, especially since there
are several ways an empire can control subject polities; however, from an
administrative standpoint states and empires must have consistent ways that
officials interact with each other and present information as it moves to the
upper levels of the political hierarchy. Standardized practices generate
patterned material remains, both facilities and artifacts which can be used by
researchers to determine the difference between colonization and control in
areas of political expansion. Theoretically if leaders are controlled by an
empire they will adopt features of its political practice and exhibit similar
patterns. These changes, as well as the extractive agenda of the empire, will
impact daily life. To identify these standardized practices and assess the
impact of imperial control the project team will excavate houses at Las Peñas, a
village occupied before and after Wari political expansion and analyze the
recovered materials (e.g., stone tools, pottery, plant and animal remains) using
archaeological and geochemical techniques (XRF). The research site is located in
the Torata Valley of Moquegua, Peru, which was sparsely populated until Wari
colonization and nearly 600 km from the empire's capital. The villagers
experienced dramatic transformations and witnessed their familiar landscape
transformed by imperial engineers who terraced the steep hill slopes and
designed aqueducts and canals to bring vast areas into cultivation. Las Peñas
should provide an excellent data set to examine changes linked to political
practices such as rituals, the style of wealth items, and the design of
gathering spaces, as well as shifts in trade networks, food production, and
local technologies among other consequences of political expansion.