* 1430474
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research:   Food System Governance, Food Sercurity and Land Use in Southern Africa
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Martie Gillen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 120,560.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and The Joint Research Programming Initiative on
Agriculture, Food Security and Climate Change (FACCE-JPI). The Belmont Forum is
a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of global
environmental change research and international science councils. It aims to
accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. This group developed a funding framework to support
multilateral research projects that address global challenges in ways that are
beyond the capacity of national or bilateral activities. Each partner country
provides funding for their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need
for funds to cross international borders. This approach facilitates effective
leveraging of national resources to support excellent research on topics of
global relevance best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that
global challenges need global solutions.

Working together in an inaugural call of the International Opportunities Fund,
the Belmont Forum and JPI-FACCE have provided support for research projects that
seek to deliver knowledge needed for action to mitigate and adapt to detrimental
environmental change and extreme hazardous events that relate to food security
and land use change. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to
cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that bring together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry).

This project seeks to investigate how food production and distribution affects
how land is used and how these choices are affected by changes in the
environment. This project will focus on Southern Africa as a case study and will
develop an international group of partners from 4 countries who will work
together to understand the relationships between the demands for food, food
distribution networks and how land and natural resources are used. Results of
this study are likely to help understand these interactions in other countries,
including the United States.