* 1430911
* SBIR Phase II:  A Highly Efficient GridBridge Grid Energy Router for Grid Modernization
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Chad Eckhardt, GridBridge, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,639,703.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
cornerstone for reliable electricity and a modernized grid able to evolve
alongside emerging customer demands. Reliable electricity is key component of an
industrialized market, critical for the information age, and an enabler for non-
industrialized regions evolution and eventual world economic contribution. The
societal benefit therefore of GridBridge's commercially feasible Grid Energy
Router is colossal, as it is the step-function change required to truly
orchestrate a grid to match this era. This project will enable numerous hindered
technologies and scientific understanding related to energy storage,
photovoltaic and other renewable generation, as well as electric vehicles and
their correlated fast chargers. Energy savings are also a monumental aspect and
are expected to be in the trillions of dollars. Society needs electricity to
maintain civilization and an updated grid is imperative for supplying that
electricity to an evolved consumer base. GridBridge?s Grid Energy Router will be
the crucial component for the modernized grid an enabler for numerous
complementary technologies. GridBridge's GER will eventually replace millions of
installed legacy grid technologies throughout the world. Furthermore, the
continued GridBridge-ERC relationship establishes FREEDM ERC's commercialization
ecosystem, which includes 200 diverse students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project combines various research
aspects to commercialize the company?s third breakthrough product for electric
utilities, the Grid Energy Router (GER). GridBridge?s Grid Energy Router will be
cornerstone for an evolved grid that can integrate renewables and storage, offer
dynamic efficiency gains, and intelligently route power. Although there has been
early work with power electronics merely focusing in the area of high-voltage
conversion, the approaches thus far limit commercialization and
manufacturability. GridBridge will combine over three years of company market
research and utility voice of the customer, a unique product roadmap, and
cutting edge research in the areas of feature implementation and voltage
conversion. Keeping in mind the end market, electric utility requirements have
been incorporated: highly efficient, cost-competitive, manufacturable within a
specific market window, and scalable both to high power and high voltage. This
project facilitates a cost-effective and electrically-efficient product design
ready for industrialization and ultimately grid integration, while
simultaneously incorporating valuable features that justify utility expenditure
and meet a market window of need.