* 1430721
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Cost, Nickel-Based Metallization Pastes for Solar Cell Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Craig Peters, PLANT PV
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,191,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project goes well beyond lowering the metallization
costs for silicon photovoltaic (PV) cells. In the PV space, the introduction of
nickel based metallization pastes can make solar cell modules cheaper and more
sustainable. With global demand for energy expected to increase by approximately
40% from its current level of 17 terawatts (TW) to 24 TW by 2035, PV module
production must increase from 35 gigawatts (GW) per year in 2013 to >150 GW per
year to satisfy a meaningful portion of this new demand. Silver based
metallization pastes used in solar cells currently consume 5% of all annual
silver production, making large increases in PV production unsustainable in the
long-term. In addition, the fundamental mechanism of protecting base metal
particles from oxidation at elevated temperatures has far reach implications
that can address problems in the integrated circuits and electromagnetic
interference shielding industries.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will commercialize
nickel (Ni) based metallization pastes as replacements for silver (Ag)
metallization pastes on silicon photovoltaic (PV) cells. Silver (Ag) based
metallization pastes are used in over 90% of solar cells being manufactured
today. However, the high cost of Ag results in the pastes accounting for roughly
7-10% of the cost of the completed silicon solar cell, making alternatives to Ag
highly desirable. The spot price of nickel is fifty times less than Ag and
orders of magnitude more abundant. Previous attempts to use Ni in metallization
pastes have failed due to the rapid oxidation of Ni particles in air when fired
at normal processing temperatures for solar cells. This Phase II project will
commercialize a technology that protects the Ni particles in the metallization
paste from oxidation while allowing the resulting conductive film to remain
solderable for connecting cells together in a module. During this project the
nickel-based metallization paste will be scaled up and tested on pilot lines of
large silicon PV cell makers and show equivalent performance, yield and
reliability when compared to standard Ag metallization pastes.