* 1430725
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated People Information Discovery and Mining
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Soyeon Park, Whova
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,399,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project results from its potential to transform
professional networking from passive to pro-active. People-information is
valuable for business professionals in sales, marketing, recruiting,
fundraising, M&amp;A and business development, to establish connections,
generate leads, and generally maximize opportunities. This project will further
commercialize big data analysis techniques to quickly capture, filter, and
analyze people related information from the whole Internet, and present such
information to users via mobile and web services for various use cases such as
networking at events, etc. These services will enable mobile users to plan in
advance whom they should meet at events, and equip them with much deeper
insights regarding their prospects than are currently available, so that they
can generate business more efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is intended to further develop and
commercialize the company's big data analysis and mining technology for people-
information, with specific emphasis on making professional networking at
events/meetings more productive and efficient. It provides a real-time, instant,
"people research" capability on mobile devices to enable effective networking at
business events, trade shows, conferences and private/Meetup meetings. It goes
beyond existing "name-based" keyword search provided by commonly-used search
engines, and is complementary to social network sites, which rely purely on
subjective information provided by users themselves. Based on the company's
current collaboration with large event organizers and their marketing/sales
teams, the project will further extend the event mobile solution for enterprise
customers by providing an organizer self-service (SaaS) platform, integrating
with their CRMs, and leveraging Beacon technology to track attendee activities
and interests in trade shows. In addition, it will include more advanced
features to motivate individual users to use the app more frequently, including
outside such events. Finally, it will build a platform with APIs to allow OEM
partners to generate and use the people-information in activities such as
recruiting, marketing, etc.