* 1430932
* SBIR Phase II:  Development and Commercialization of Nitrate-Selective Sensors for Precision Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Calden Stimpson, SupraSensor Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 428,038.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project both stem from the need
to understand the post-application spatial distribution of nitrate below ground.
Simply put, the market pull for fertilizer management tools stems from the
amount of nitrate fertilizer applied annually (~59% of all applied fertilizer,
12.29M tons domestically), and the estimated waste rate of &gt;30%. This lost
input over 442M acres of US farmland results in huge operational expenditures
with little to no correlation to yield or profitability increase, and is
responsible for the degradation of waterways and groundwater both in the US and
abroad. Increasing our food production capacity by two-fold in the next 30 years
while concurrently decreasing the environmental impact of agricultural nonpoint-
source pollution has been identified as one of the ?Grand Challenges? facing the
chemical and engineering sciences. On a global scale the development of a low-
cost and universal probe for soil quality would offer developing areas a novel
method for optimizing yields and enabling self-sufficiency in food production,
regardless of remoteness or laboratory availability. Additionally, a tool for in
situ nitrate measurement will offer an important tool for tracking and mapping
organic contaminant plumes during groundwater remediation
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase 2
project will enable wafer-level processing and pilot-scale production of
chemically modified field effect transistors (CHEMFETs) containing a novel
molecular receptor for nitrate anion. These sensitive components will be
incorporated into patent-protected modules that achieve direct, in situ
measurement of nitrate in soils without sample preprocessing. Current methods
for measuring nitrate anion in soil all require on-site or in-lab preprocessing
of the samples due to limitations of the ionophore in competitive media,
especially in the presence of common chloride anion. Phase I development showed
that by incorporating a molecular receptor with high sensitivity and specificity
for nitrate, systems comprised of CHEMFETs containing these molecular receptors
yield sensors capable of reporting nitrate concentration at single digit parts
per million (ppm) resolutions in the presence of &gt;3 orders of magnitude
greater chloride concentrations. Phase 2 will develop a wafer-level deposition
process that is compatible with the molecular receptor while avoiding
incompatible mask/de-mask processes. Ultimately, this development process will
prove the manufacturability of these sensors, and provide the foundation for
large-scale distributed beta testing by customers and end-users at the
completion of Phase 2.