* 1430292
* Faculty and Curricular Development in Remote Sensing and Space Sciences (RSSS) at the University of Illinois
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2024
* William Sanders, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,331,036.00

Space scientists are becoming ever more valuable to our society as we rely more
heavily upon technical systems sensitive to conditions in the space environment,
such as global positioning systems and high-speed communications networks.
Communications, navigation and energy production and distribution are
significantly affected by Space Weather, and the climatology of the near-Earth
space environment. The ability to forecast disturbances which may impact these
technologies hinges upon detailed knowledge and understanding of the connected
Sun-Earth system, comprising the disciplines of solar physics, heliospheric
physics, magnetospheric physics and aeronomy. This project is funded under the
Faculty Development in Space Sciences program, the aim of which is to ensure the
health and vitality of solar and space physics on university teaching faculties.
Through the creation of new tenure-track faculty positions within the
intellectual disciplines that comprise the space sciences, research topics in
solar and space physics will be integrated into basic physics, astronomy,
electrical engineering, geoscience, meteorology, computer science, and applied
mathematics programs, and lead to the development of space physics graduate
programs capable of training the next generation of leaders in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a new tenure-track faculty
position in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Campaign (UI), with the purpose of expanding
the breadth and depth of the research and teaching expertise within the Remote
Sensing and Space Sciences group. Specifically, the new hire will target several
high priority areas in space science, including: high-performance scientific
computing and numerical modeling and simulation of the space environment; novel
electro-optics technology for probing the space environment; novel sensor
technology for distributed (constellation) sensing of the space environment; and
space flight hardware design and development. Building on existing key courses,
the new faculty member will work with senior faculty members in the group to
develop a full, formal curriculum in remote sensing and space sciences, which
does not currently exist at UI. Further, UI is pioneering the development of
Massive Open Online Courses, through which the new hire will have a unique
opportunity to impact space science education on a global scale. The additional
hire will further strengthen and grow existing partnerships with several
departments and centers and will also be encouraged to pursue new partnerships
broadly with the space sciences community. To this end, funds are included in
the budget for the new faculty member to host small targeted workshops in the
2nd and 4th years of the program on a research topic of their choice to
encourage outside partnerships. Utilizing several established and successful
departmental and institution wide programs the project will work to ensure a
strong focus on increasing diversity in the recruiting both of students into the
program and of the new faculty member.