* 1430118
* Belmont Forum - European Joint Programming Initiative Collaborative Research: Hydro-social and environmental impacts of sugar cane production on land use and food security
* GEO,ICER
* 08/15/2014,02/28/2015
* Cristina Milesi, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 02/28/2015
* USD 0.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and The Joint Research Programming Initiative on
Agriculture, Food Security and Climate Change (FACCE-JPI). The Belmont Forum is
a high level group of the world?s major and emerging funders of global
environmental change research and international science councils. It aims to
accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. This group developed a funding framework to support
multilateral research projects that address global challenges in ways that are
beyond the capacity of national or bilateral activities. Each partner country
provides funding for their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need
for funds to cross international borders. This approach facilitates effective
leveraging of national resources to support excellent research on topics of
global relevance best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that
global challenges need global solutions.

Working together the Belmont Forum and JPI-FACCE have provided support for
research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action to mitigate
and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous events that
relate to food security and land use change. This award provides support for the
U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at
least three of the participating countries and that bring together natural
scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers,
regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).

This project will involve researchers from the UK, USA, India, Brazil, South
Africa and Australia who will work together to develop an international network
to understand the environmental and social benefits and trade-offs that arise
through the continued global expansion of sugarcane production, and its broader
consequences for land use and food security. The project will focus on the
agricultural economies especially those that under pressure to improve resource
efficiency and increase resilience. The group will identify and assess the
factors contributing to increased sugar cane production; how this increased
production is affecting land-use, water resources and ecosystems and the broad-
range of socio-economic impacts, benefits and tradeoffs related to how the land
is being used.