* 1430777
* SBIR Phase II:  Bamboo Fiber Processing for Use in Reinforced Composites
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2018
* William Riddle, Sunstrand, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,433,958.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will eliminate
remaining barriers to the production of bamboo fibers for use as a reinforcement
in polymer composites. The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be an increased usage of sustainable materials, increased revenue for US
agriculture, and increased domestic and international sales of a new and
innovative product line. Success in this project will also lead to domestic job
creation needed to support the research, manufacturing, and sales of these
composites. The processes to be finalized during this Phase II project will
support the growth of a nascent based on US-manufactured, environmentally-
friendly products. Within three years of launch, it is expected that over $4
million in revenue will be generated by sales of bamboo fiber. Moreover,
increases in bamboo cultivation as a result of these new products will help
mitigate adverse environmental impacts and improve public health. This will be
done by the inherent sequestration of carbon dioxide in the plant growth cycle,
and a reduction in the pollution associated with the use of high-energy glass
fiber and plastics processing techniques.

This Phase II project will address the following research topics: species
variations, manufacturability, additional high value products, additional
composite properties, processing and treatment optimization, and commercial
scale-up. The team will assess the mechanical and physical implications of
variations in feedstock by the use of filament tensile testing. Surface
treatments specific to bamboo fibers will be finalized, with the goal of
increased fiber-matrix interfacial adhesion, mitigation of water absorption, and
compatibility with at least three major resins systems. These treatments will be
evaluated via composite tensile testing, filament testing and water immersion
testing. Manufacturing studies will be performed to verify compatibility with
commercial scale manufacturing equipment. The design and manufacture of a small
scale, batch plant will address technological and automation challenges. This
plant will provide a bridge to a commercial-scale plant designed to produce 6
million pounds of fiber yearly. Additional innovative aspects to the project lie
in the assessment of a bamboo species compatible with climates in the US,
automation of raw bamboo processing, and implementation of a fully optimized
multi-step material functionalization process.