* 1430633
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Hydrodesulfurization Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Juan He, Advanced Energy Materials, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 891,661.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in removing sulfur compounds from various
fuels such as diesel, gasoline and mixture of refined fuels known as transmix.
It is critically important to reduce sulfur levels below 10 ppm as the emissions
from transportation vehicles can cause acid rain and associated undesired
effects. Sulfur removal from fuels is even more critical for implementation of
fuel cell technologies due to fuel reformer catalyst poisoning at sulfur levels
as low as 1 ppm or below. Finally, there is a need for sulfur-tolerant catalysts
and sulfur removal processes in value added chemical production using bio-
derived and fossil derived fuels. The global market for hydro-desulfurization
catalysts in the transportation fuel segment is estimated at over $1B and
growing fast. The company's proposed catalyst could address a market size of
$150-200M/yr or more. It may find additional applications in commercial markets
in ultra-low sulfur diesel, fuel reformer technology and sulfur tolerant
catalysts. The development of a scalable manufacturing method for advanced
materials undertaken in this project will contribute to U.S. competitiveness and
strengthen Cleantech and energy sectors in the state of KY.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
development of high performance catalysts needed for the removal of sulfur from
hydrocarbon fuels. However, sulfur removal at concentrations below 50 ppm is
difficult due to the presence of hetero-cyclic thiophenic species. During Phase
I, the company developed a catalyst product and demonstrated its performance in
terms of ultra-deep hydrodesulfurization activity, reducing sulfur levels from
200 ppm to much lower than 1 ppm in a variety of fuels. Phase II studies will
allow optimization of the catalysts for hydrodesulfurization activity and
mechanical properties. Catalysts with bi-functional activity toward aromatics
hydrogenation and hydrodesulfurization will reduce several process steps,
thereby reducing the costs involved in hydroprocessing of fuels. Phase II
studies will enable development of a process for scalable production of
nanowires. The fundamental insight from the performance can be extended toward
designing various high performance catalysts using nanowire supports. Some
beneficial effects using nanowire supports include unique active metal/support
interactions; single crystal surfaces for uniform morphologies for active metals
and their alloys and management of active sites. Specifically, in the case of
hydrodesulfurization, nanowire supports provided an easier diffusion pathway for
sulfur transfer to maintain active metal sites for desulfurization activity.