* 1430799
* Affect contagion: Exploring the catalytic effects of status
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Wendy Mendes, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 489,729.00

People detect the emotions, thoughts, and intentions of others from multiple
sources - their voice, posture, facial expressions, and behavior. Affect
contagion, the spread of emotional states (e.g., stress, feelings, evaluations)
from one person to another, is studied in a variety of ways in the social
sciences: sociologists find that happiness is contagious within social networks,
social psychologists show that mimicking the behavior of others increases
liking, and neuroscientists demonstrate that observing someone experience pain
produces similar neural activation as experiencing pain. In this project, the
researcher team will examine the precursors and consequences of affect contagion
in groups, including the role of social status. This work provides new knowledge
on group dynamics that will identify how and why emotions spread between
individuals. These findings can enhance our understanding and improvement of the
interpersonal processes influencing team members from a variety of groups
important to American society such as the military, families, and medical teams.
The research team also plans to work with the San Francisco Exploratorium, a
science museum and learning laboratory for all ages, to develop exhibits that
teach visitors how to achieve interpersonal synchrony and how it influences
human social interaction.

The research team proposes three studies examining affect contagion. To examine
this, the researchers will assess physiological responses. The first study will
examine how different types of affect (i.e., positive or negative) and arousal
intensity influence affect contagion. The perceived status of the paired
participants will also be assessed. The second study will examine how status
roles influence affect contagion by focusing on medical students who are paired
with lower status (undergraduates) or upper status (residents) partners; the
last study will experimentally manipulate status within dyads. Integrating
sophisticated psychophysiology measures and statistical modeling, these studies
will thoroughly examine how affect spreads within a dyad and the important role
of social status in catching others' emotions.