* 1430434
* SBIR Phase II:  High Throughput Static Light Scattering Platform for Monitoring of Aggregation and Stability of Protein Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Michael Drenski, Advanced Polymer Monitoring Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,204,294.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project, if successful, will have immediate value for
the pharmaceutical industry by accelerating research and discovery of new drugs,
and also increasing production efficiency and safety. The technology also is
applicable in many other sectors; e.g., monitoring natural polymers, such as
dissolution of gelatin used in food or pharmaceutical applications, flocculation
of impurities by water purification polymers, entrapment of oil by surfactants
and other agents used in combating oil spills, and more. The quantitative
kinetics of molecular weight changes during all these processes will allow
deeper understanding of the fundamental physical and chemical forces that drive
them. Therefore, many commercial and scientific opportunities exist for the
proposed technology, yielding the potential for significant impact across
multiple industries. With demonstrated feasibility on applications in protein
therapeutics and early adoption by several key users, the initial market for
this technology and instrumentation could expand quickly, and sales could reach
$10M within several years of delivering a commercial product. The overall market
for the technology will increase in time as other application sectors are
developed.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop a new technology for monitoring
aggregation in therapeutic protein solutions, which will have wide-ranging
impact in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. Protein aggregation
is a major problem across these sectors engaged in developing new protein
pharmaceuticals. Protein aggregation can elicit immune responses against the
protein itself, severely reduce bioavailability, and is a significant hurdle in
the drug development pipeline. This new technology can simultaneously and
quantitatively monitor the stability of many independent protein formulations
for hours, days, months, or longer, all under the control of a single instrument
and without any significant human intervention. Because the technology is based
on laser light scattering, it provides a rigorous means of monitoring the
protein aggregation process. It is based on fundamental laws of physics, and not
on empirical or inferential means. The implementation and use of this technology
could revolutionize drug discovery, formulation, and quality control dimensions
and accelerate development of new drugs while making existing ones safer and
more efficiently produced. The technology can be used wherever proteins are
under development for fighting diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer's, diabetes,
and various forms of cardiovascular disease.