* 1430778
* Memory for Repeated Events
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Colleen Kelley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 07/31/2018
* USD 293,807.00

How repeated experiences affect human memory is a fundamental question in
cognitive science that is applicable to issues in education, training, and law.
Because events and contexts tend to change over time, repeated experiences are
rarely identical to prior experiences, but instead contain elements of earlier
experiences. Science has established that a prior experience with something will
generally affect memory for a later variant of its occurrence. Sometimes this
effect is beneficial and sometimes it is detrimental to later memory. Whereas
some events that contain repeated elements of prior experiences are remembered
better than events that are completely new, others are actually remembered more
poorly than events that are new. This project aims to better understand why some
previous experiences facilitate memory for later variants of those experiences
and others instead seem to interfere with it. The research has relevance to the
development of effective learning programs and training systems, as well as to
educational practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One factor shown to impact whether a
later variant of an earlier experience will be remembered better or worse than a
new experience is whether the repeated elements remind the person of the earlier
experience or not. If reminding occurs, the repeated event is remembered better
than a new event; if reminding fails, the repeated event is actually remembered
worse than a new event. Much of what science has established thus far about how
repeated experiences affect memory is based on test performance, which involves
controlled attempts to remember in response to prompts. Yet in everyday life,
reminding is often brought on spontaneously by cues in ongoing experience,
without a test explicitly prompting the person to remember. This project will
employ experimental manipulations of the relations between earlier and later
events to determine what elicits spontaneous reminding, how spontaneous
reminding differs from deliberate attempts to remember, and how these two types
of reminding affect later memory. This research will increase understanding of
the operation of human memory processes across ongoing experience, and the
impact that these processes have on later memory.