* 1430979
* SBIR Phase II:  New Low Cost and Large Scale Manufacturing of Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jacqueline Siy-Ronquillo, Navillum Nanotechnologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,022,052.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) phase II project is in removing key manufacturing barriers that
are currently hindering commercialization of semiconductor nanocrystals in
diverse market segments worldwide. The unique size- and shape-related properties
of these materials make them ideal for light emission applications (including
lighting and displays) and light harnessing applications (solar panels). If
successful, nanocrystals will be produced in large quantities, inexpensively,
and uniformly, resulting in a disruptive advance for existing markets and
emerging applications. With greater availability and affordability, nanocrystals
can be more easily utilized for more energy efficient lighting and displays,
improve color quality in displays (laptops, tablets, cameras and mobile
devices), increase efficiency of solar panels, and penetrate more widely into
advancing applications in medical research, diagnostics and treatment. Emerging
applications include the use of semiconductor nanocrystals for biofuel cells,
lasers, fiber optics, electronics, security and surveillance, aviation and
geothermal tracers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
continues the work initiated in Phase I on development of a low cost
manufacturing method for production of large-scale and consistently high-quality
semiconductor nanocrystals quantum dots urgently needed for their
commercialization. The proposed research activities directly address this need
through an innovative proprietary low-temperature wet chemical synthesis route.
Compared to the conventional high-temperature synthesis route, this method can
more precisely control the size and shape of products - properties that are
necessary for successful incorporation of these products into end-user
applications. Additionally, it circumvents scaling limitations of conventional
high-temperature synthesis routes. In Phase I, we have successfully demonstrated
scale up of high quality CdSe nanocrystal quantum dots in a laboratory scale
while lowering cost of production using our method. This Phase II funding
focuses on demonstrating scaled-up production of larger quantities of high-
quality nanocrystals, including heavy metal free quantum dots using our low-
temperature method. It will also focus on post-synthesis processing of CdSe
quantum dots developed in Phase I to meet Original Equipment Manufacturers?
specifications. Scale up to commercially viable amounts will be studied by
developing a continuous flow model as well as by improving purification
efficiency of the low temperature method.