* 1430818
* Promoting Student Education &amp; Outreach at the 18th Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* David Constable, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

ABSTRACT TITLE&lt;br/&gt;Promoting Student Education and Outreach at the 18th
Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award supports student
travel, registration, poster session, and workshop for the 18th Annual Green
Chemistry &amp; Engineering (GC&amp;E) Conference sponsored by the American
Chemical Society Green Chemistry Institute? (ACS GCI) and its organizing
committee made up of scientists from other non-profit organizations, U.S.
government agencies, academic institutions, and industry. The theme of the
conference is Advancing Chemistry, Innovating for Sustainability. The conference
will be held June 17-19, 2014, in Bethesda, MD. The PI for the award is Jennifer
J. MacKellar of the ACS GCI. Green chemistry and engineering are areas of study
that are essential to providing sustainable solutions to global problems. Green
chemistry looks for ways to make new or existing chemicals without using or
producing harmful materials; green engineering looks for ways to manufacture new
or existing materials less expensively and with less harm to the environment and
public health. This conference attracts important researchers and business
leaders in green chemistry and engineering and, thus, is an excellent
opportunity for attracting the most talented students to plan a career in this
area. Additionally, students participating in this conference are exposed to
topics not commonly encountered in traditional university courses and
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference emphasizes, through the
design of chemical products and processes that reduce or eliminate negative
impacts on human health and the environment, green chemistry and green
engineering approaches to achieve the twin goals of economic prosperity and
sustainability. Green chemistry and green engineering are important tools in
preventing pollution at the source and providing solutions to global
sustainability challenges. Educating the innovators of tomorrow is a crucial
part in securing the well-being of the future. This highly successful
interdisciplinary conference and workshop provides a proven opportunity for
students to receive and apply information that will propel them into research
for and development of innovative and sustainable solutions. Workshop
participants will learn about the latest developments in green chemistry and
engineering while being challenged to consider the broader economic, social and
political context in which these developments occur. Through the student
workshop, students will learn how to conduct outreach activities and advocate
for green chemistry and engineering within their local community. The 2014
GC&amp;E Conference will provide participants the opportunity to explore
international green chemistry educational collaborations as part of revitalizing
efforts of the GCI International Student Chapters.