* 1430280
* Track-2: The Smart MATerial Design, Analysis, and Processing (SMATDAP) consortium: Building next-generation polymers and the tools to accelerate cost-effective commercial productio
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2018
* USD 3,251,051.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are
strongly aligned with the statewide plans for development in science and
technology for both Louisiana and Mississippi. Both states have significant
research talent in chemistry, materials, and computations which are synergistic
with the significant economic impact of the polymer industry of the region. The
development of computer software to monitor and control polymer synthesis has
the potential to impact the Gulf region and national polymer industry by
advancing the capabilities for materials synthesis. Software development will be
used to offer polymer characterization workshops and catalyze the development of
new patents in materials synthesis. Regional manufacturers will play a role in
using the results from computational and materials research and will participate
by providing internships for participating graduate students. Advancing polymer
manufacture and control will increase efficiency in the use of energy, non-
renewable feedstocks, and plant and labor time, while reducing emissions and
increasing safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is aligned with the Materials
Genome Initiative?s goals of accelerating advanced materials development, with
computational research serving as a key component for discovery and processing
guidance. With its scientific focus on developing and proving the next-
generation polymerization monitoring platform, the research promises to overcome
barriers in bringing stimuli responsive polymers (SRPs) to market and strengthen
regional economic competitiveness. Research activities are aligned along the
materials design and process design paths to develop new experimental and
computational tools for accelerating materials development and bridging polymer
synthesis to manufacture. New SRP materials will be designed using polymer
synthesis, molecular modeling, and computational control. Outcomes will include:
self-assembled polymers for drug delivery and environmental remediation, self-
healing polymer networks, and smart nano-composites using SRP-modified
nanoparticles as building blocks. The results have the potential to transform
medical and sustainable materials applications.