* 1430505
* 2014 Cooperative Election Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,913.00

The Cooperative Election Study is a data infrastructure project involving the
collaboration of research teams from over 70 different academic institutions.
Collectively, these research teams have fielded national surveys of 35,000
adults in 2006, 37,000 in 2008, and, with partial funding from NSF, 54,000 in
2010 and 55,000 in 2012. Each research team that wishes to be involved in the
project purchases a 1,000 person sample survey from the same firm. Each
individual team determines half of the questions on its survey. The other half
of the content, Common Content, is created by a design committee, drawn from the
participating teams. Common Content consists of questions that every team would
like to measure or questions that are of broad interest and require a very large
sample. The project, thus, fields as many as the there are teams and also
produces a single large sample survey that consists of the Common Content. With
35 teams in 2006, there were 35 individual team surveys each with a sample of
1,000 and a single common survey of 35,000 cases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
survey, through the use of modules, encompasses a vast range of research topics
that individual teams seek to answer. Researchers have used their team modules
to conduct standard survey research on particular themes and questions for which
appropriate public use data are not available. Others have used their modules to
conduct experiments with political advertisements, pictures of candidates,
information about the economy, and other treatments. Since its inception, the
survey has produced studies that have appeared in over 100 journal articles and
dozens of books. These include over a dozen articles that appeared in the top
journals in the discipline as well as articles in law, sociology, statistics,
and economics. Studies utilizing this data have focused on a wide variety of
topics including elections, voting behavior, public opinion, political parties
and polarization, the opinion on wars and other military
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The survey has helped to create and sustain
a network of researchers interested in state and national elections, survey
design, and public opinion. Participants have included graduate students and
undergraduates who not normally have access to surveys of this size. These
participants develop research skills especially in the area of questionnaire
design, and generate further research ideas that can be pursued through this or
other vehicles. Additionally, the scholars involved in this project will
continue to use the data to develop educational material relating to the survey
that can be adopted widely as part of Political Science undergraduate and
graduate curricula.