* 1430723
* SBIR Phase II:  Asymmetric Block Copolymer Membranes for Ultrafiltration
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Rachel Dorin, TeraPore Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,412,318.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the high costs of manufacturing
protein therapeutics, or biologics. Biologics are a growing category of
therapeutic that can treat a range of diseases from rheumatoid arthritis to
ulcerative colitis to Alzheimer's. Unfortunately, producing these highly
effective therapeutics is extremely expensive, with most of the cost stemming
from the purification of the target protein from a complex mixture. This Phase
II project aims to develop a new filter device that makes purifying biologics
faster and cheaper. The filter media will increase overall throughput, thereby
easing bottleneck steps in the purification process. In addition to decreased
manufacturing costs, the expedited purification also increases the overall
capacity of the manufacturing line. This high throughput filter device is
designed to fit seamlessly into existing purification modules, making it easy
for end users to increase production efficiencies.

This SBIR Phase II project aims to dramatically improve the performance of
ultrafiltration membranes used in protein separations. Currently existing
ultrafiltration membranes suffer from either prohibitively low throughputs or
broad pore sizes, limiting their efficacy in separation processes. This project
takes advantage of a unique class of polymeric materials, known as block
copolymers, to make membranes that overcome the previous structural limitations.
Namely, the block copolymer membranes have very high throughputs and very
uniform pore sizes. These important features are possible due to the distinct
ability of block copolymers to self-assembly into periodic, ordered structures
with length scales relevant for protein separations. Using a combination of
block copolymer self-assembly and non-solvent induced phase separation,
membranes with targeted pore sizes can be made in scalable way. The research
objectives for this project are to increase the porosity of the supporting block
copolymer material, attach the block copolymer membrane to a fabric backing,
evaluate the performance of assembled membrane sheet stock, and package the
sheet stock into a device configuration. Accomplishing these research objectives
will result in a mechanically robust, easy to implement membrane material that
can increase the rate of protein filtration by 3-10 fold.