* 1430854
* Economic Statistics and the Challenge of Democratic Control
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Thomas Stapleford, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 104,530.00

Government economic statistics are Janus-faced. On the one hand, they have an
extensive role in modern governance in which they are treated as apolitical,
empirical facts: Statistics are used to guide policy, and to allocate or adjust
resources automatically. In these roles, the non-partisan character of official
statistics is essential. On the other hand, methodological decisions must be
guided by a clear set of measurement goals; yet, every major economic statistic
has many such possible goals, and even economists frequently argue about the
proper objectives. However, insofar as these statistics are simultaneously used
to guide, evaluate, or enact policies, then a decision about measurement goals
is defacto a decision about the policy objectives for the relevant programs.
These two competing aspects of economic statistics pose a challenge: how can
official statistics be subject to democratic oversight and control while
retaining their non-partisan character and serving as a bulwark against the
abuse of political power? This project aims to explore and resolve this
challenge.

This project aims to transform the way Americans construct and understand
economic statistics, a goal that requires both theoretical analysis and broader
outreach. Funding for the project will support the design of a new undergraduate
course on the conceptual foundations of economic statistics that will become the
basis for a text book targeted toward undergraduates, policymakers, and
journalists. Second, funding will support the construction of a website on price
indexes for these audiences that will explain basic conceptual issues, digest
recent methodological research, and provide an ongoing, non-partisan commentary
about policy issues connected with these statistics. This site will be a pilot
program for a future, expanded version that will cover all major macroeconomic
statistics.