* 1430815
* SBIR Phase II:  Electric-Field-Controlled Nonvolatile Magnetic Memory
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Inston Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,048,872.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in addressing the novel hardware challenges
of energy and speed associated with big data applications. The electronics
industry is quickly transforming from a compute-centric model to a data-centric
model, where the key to success in the market place is the ability to store,
manipulate and access large amounts of data in a fast and energy-efficient
manner. The existing memory technologies cannot meet these challenges. This
changing landscape offers a major potential for emerging memory technologies
that can successfully address these new emerging demands. The Electric-Field-
Controlled Nonvolatile Magnetic Memory technology developed under this project
offers the most viable low-cost, low-power, and high-endurance solution to these
new demands. Conservative estimates project a rapid growth in the emerging
memory technologies market, reaching $2B in 2018. We expect that Electric-Field-
Controlled Nonvolatile Magnetic Memory will be able to capture a significant
part of this emerging market. More broadly, it can be used in many general
computing and information processing systems, and hence it can potentially
impact a major part of the $300B semiconductors industry by enabling ultra-low
power green and instant-on electronic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase II project will focus on the development of
prototype Electric-Field-Controlled Nonvolatile Magnetic Memory chips and
arrays. This memory technology uses a fundamentally new way to write information
into the nonvolatile memory bits, providing major advantages in terms of power
dissipation, cost, density, and scalability. This project will result in chip
prototypes, providing significant advantages in terms of energy efficiency,
density, and scalability when compared to alternative existing or emerging
memory technologies. They also provide virtually unlimited endurance. Circuit
design for memory product development will also be performed, as well as
modeling in support of circuit development and device optimization.