* 1430540
* Progress through Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2021
* David Bressoud, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,299,892.00

This project of the Mathematical Association of America will build on the
insights from a previously funded project "Characteristics of Successful
Programs in College Calculus" in order to continue to explore the factors
influencing student success over the progression of introductory mathematics
courses that begins with pre-calculus and continues through the full year of
single variable calculus. This mathematics sequence is required of most STEM
majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two focal areas for the research the
project will investigate using three distinct methods. First a national census
survey of universities offering advanced degrees in Mathematics, second, case
study visits to selected universities, and finally, a nationwide effort of the
mathematics community for gathering of longitudinal data. Focal Area 1) What are
the programs and structures of the pre-calculus to calculus sequence as
currently implemented? How common are the various programs and structures? How
varied are they in practice? What kinds of changes have recently been undertaken
or are currently underway? Focal Area 2) What are the effects of structural,
curricular, and pedagogical decisions on student success in pre-calculus to
calculus? Success will be assessed on a variety of measures including
longitudinal measures of persistence and retention, performance in subsequent
courses, knowledge of both pre-calculus and calculus topics, and student
attitudes. The answers to these questions will be leveraged to develop a
theoretical model that can be used to guide mathematics departments in deciding
how to allocate resources so as to most effectively improve student success in
Calculus and persistence in STEM. While much is now known about why students
leave STEM fields, there is little connection between this theoretical knowledge
and the actual structures and programs of the pre-calculus to calculus sequence.
The project will provide that link, helping departments to more rationally
decide how to invest their limited resources. A national census survey of
institutions offering graduate programs in mathematics will produce a
comprehensive picture of the ways that pre-calculus to calculus sequences are
structured and implemented across the country. Detailed case studies will
investigate connections between aspects of pre-calculus to calculus structures
and student success. Success will be assessed using a variety of measures that
will characterize it along multiple dimensions, including retention and student
learning. Traditional dissemination efforts will actively draw upon the
resources and reach of the MAA to broadly disseminate findings to the entire
mathematics community.