* 1430860
* Collaborative Research: Vulnerable Transitions and Cumulative Embodied Stress Among Teens in High-Risk, High Stakes Pastoralism
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bilinda Straight, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 161,413.00

The years between childhood and adulthood are universally recognized as a stage
in normal human development. But despite the fact that scientists know that
adolescence is understood and experienced differently in different cultures and
societies, most studies of adolescents have taken place in Western societies.
Therefore, much remains unknown about this significant period of human
development. For this reason, anthropologists have recently directed increased
attention to studying adolescents cross-culturally. This particular award is to
a research team who ask a particularly important and timely question about the
adolescent years: what are the effects of growing up in a violent environment?
Unfortunately, violence is part of the daily reality for many adolescents around
the world, including many in the United States. Examining the effects of
violence on the adolescent years in a non-Western context will allow social
scientists and policy makers to differentiate between effects that are local and
cultural, and those that are universal, which is essential for developing
effective strategies for buffering the effects of violence on adolescents
wherever they might live. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is comprised
of cultural anthropologist Dr. Bilinda S. Straight (Western Michigan University)
and biological anthropologist Dr. Ivy L. Pike (University of Arizona). The
research will be carried out in a conflict-ridden pastoralist zone of East
Africa where the researchers have previously collected comparative, longitudinal
data on 215 households in pastoralist communities that vary by their exposure to
violence. The researchers will build on that data with a sample of 660 young
people. They will (1) examine the daily movements of adolescent girls and boys
(ages 10-19) between settlement and pasture, cattle camp, and other activity
sites; (2) monitor energy expenditure with fitness tracking devices and activity
recall combined with nutritional assessments using anthropometry and dietary
recall; (3) measure adolescent psychosocial stress through multiple bio-markers,
validated assessment instruments, and intensive ethnographic interviews; and (4)
elicit the choices, explanations, and emotions of adolescent boys and girls in
the context of their varied daily experiences.