* 1430993
* SBIR Phase II:  An Online Professional Development Science Game for Pre-Service and In- Service Teachers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Michael Brewster, Triad Interactive Media
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 752,186.00

This SBIR Phase II project will enhance the science content knowledge of
elementary school pre-service and in-service teachers and increase their
effectiveness in teaching science. Studies show significant deficiencies in many
elementary teachers? conceptual knowledge of science topics, and this lack of
scientific understanding inhibits their ability to teach science effectively.
Research also shows that students learn more from teachers with strong
comprehension of the subject matter being taught than from teachers with weak
content understanding. Using research from cognitive psychology, game-based
learning, and multimedia learning theory, this project creates problem-based
scenarios and built-in assessments that challenge teachers to solve problems and
ensures that they grasp scientific principles. By improving teachers?
understanding of science, this project will therefore improve student
performance and give students the foundational knowledge needed to pursue
careers not only in science, but also in engineering and technology. Increasing
the number of young people entering scientific and technical fields has an
impact not only on the individuals entering these professional careers, but also
on the nation?s productivity, competitiveness, and tax base since science and
technology are key drivers of innovation and growth in the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The product is a Web-based learning system
consisting of a suite of inquiry-based activities designed to (a) strengthen the
science knowledge of pre-service and in-service elementary teachers and (b)
increase their confidence in and enthusiasm for teaching science. To motivate
the learner, the product includes an overarching science fiction narrative with
engaging 3D art as well as game-based science learning activities. All science
content aligns with The Next Generation Science Standards as well as curriculum
focal points and provides learners with immediate and easily accessible data on
their science understanding, both procedural and conceptual. Because learners
become engaged by the narrative and interactive science experiments, they are
less focused on the intervention as a teaching instrument and on their
deficiencies in scientific understanding. During engagement, learners are
carefully scaffolded through 6 levels of difficulty, and move up and down the
levels seamlessly based on performance. Also, learners collect rewards along the
way to further motivate them to engage.