* 1430954
* Investigating The Origins Of Social Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Brigitte Kovacevich, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 259,218.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, co-PI's Dr. Brigitte
Kovacevich and Dr. Michael Callaghan will carry out a two-year research project
including archaeological field and laboratory work focused on the site of
Holtun, Guatemala with an international team of scholars. This research will
focus on the development and maintenance of social inequality. Inequality is a
defining characteristic of all prehistoric complex societies and and is of
contemporary relevance because it characterizes all societies which exist in the
world today. Archaeologists speculate that it first became formalized within and
between households, although little is currently known about how households
contributed to emergent ideologies and were innovators and creators of that
ideology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of this research is to determine
how households contributed to social inequality at the Preclassic-period (900
BCE-150 CE) site of Holtun, Guatemala. The investigators central hypothesis is
that social inequality developed at Holtun circa 300 BCE, and social complexity
circa CE 25, with the support of both emergent elite and commoner households at
the site through the medium of communal ritual and the economy associated with
it. The central hypothesis will be tested by, 1) identifying and studying the
development of social inequality through variation in Middle Preclassic-period
(600-300 BCE) household inventories, 2) identifying and studying the
differential contribution of households to communal ritual and economic activity
through time, and 3) identifying the source and changes in ritual practice and
symbols within and between households through time. Principal methods include
excavation into domestic and monumental architecture, and analysis of artifacts
using both traditional and contemporary approaches including: ceramic and lithic
typological classification, petrography, lithic microwear analysis and
replication studies, faunal analysis, X-ray Fluorescence, stable-isotope
analysis of human bone, Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis, and soil geo-
chemistry studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote teaching,
training, and learning by employing graduate, undergraduate, and Dallas-area
high school students to engage in archaeological research, training, and
experimental studies. The research includes underrepresented groups,
specifically women in science. While the number of women attaining doctoral
degrees in the social sciences has risen, women in archaeology still have not
achieved equal employment and representation in the field. The research also
incorporates Latino high school students from one of Dallas Counties poorest
cities and provides training for an international team including Guatemalan
undergraduates. The results of this research will be broadly disseminated to the
international community at conferences and meetings. Results will be published
in annual archaeological site reports and available online at a project website
through SMU's server with data available to the public on tDAR and/or the Open
Science Framework.