* 1430489
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Construction of Risks and Remedies in Food Allergy Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michael Lynch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 6,327.00

Under the supervision of Prof. Michael Lynch, Ph.D. candidate Danya Glabau will
conduct ethnographic research to understand how people with food allergies,
patient advocacy organization staff, and physicians conceive of "safety" for
food allergic people and how they use treatment technologies to manage the risks
to life posed by the illness. The co-PI will conduct semi-structured interviews
with members of these three groups, observation of biomedical allergy treatment,
participant observation in an online food allergy support community, and
participant observation at three allergy-related conferences, to learn how
patients understand and deploy three treatment strategies: epinephrine
injections, immunotherapy, and elimination diets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include improved communication between
clinicians and patients and important contributions to the clinical literature
on allergy. The most efficacious treatment strategy, eliminating allergenic
foods from the diet of allergic people, requires both individual and collective
actions. The individual must take care to avoid foods they are allergic to; but
this is only possible if food manufacturers uniformly and consistently disclose
ingredients and processing conditions on food labels and if there are mechanisms
by which to exclude allergens from public spaces. Understanding what individual
and collective measures would most effectively safeguard the health of Americans
with chronic conditions is important. By amplifying patient voices, this project
will offer a platform for a relatively common but often overlooked patient
constituency to contribute to identification of new approaches. The co PI will
also identify existing weaknesses of food allergy treatment strategies and
communicate these to the life science entrepreneurship community in the hopes of
fostering collaborations that might lead to advances in nutrition substitutes or
food processing methods that are healthy, palatable, and safe for people with
food allergies who otherwise struggle to maintain a balanced diet.