* 1430411
* DiD: MIning Relationships Among variables in large datasets from CompLEx systems (MIRACLE)
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* C Michael Barton, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 124,989.00

Some of the most pressing questions for social scientists -- ranging from
efforts to better understand the interactions between humans and the environment
to predicting how an aging population will impact the US and global economy --
require making sense of large amounts of data. As a result, social scientists
are increasingly using new computational modeling methods to explore the
dynamics and consequences of human interactions. These new methods, including
agent-based models, provide ways to explore research questions that cannot be
investigated using traditional statistical approaches. But appropriate methods
to mine, analyze, and synthesis large-scale complex model output data in order
to answer social science research questions are still lacking. Traditional
analysis methods are designed for data that are linear, continuous, and normally
distributed, while data from models of complex socio-ecological systems are non-
linear, discontinuous, and power-law distributed. In this project, the
researchers seek to address these challenges by developing, applying, and
disseminating an integrated environment for analysis and visualization of data
generated by complex systems models. An important broader impact is that the
research will lead to tools that will allow stakeholders, policy makers, and the
general public to explore, interact with, and provide feedback on otherwise
difficult-to-understand models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on
ongoing research by the project team, and uses the NSF-supported CoMSES Net
Computational Modeling Library as a platform to make this suite of
collaborative, open-source tools broadly available. This community environment
will allow any users to post model output along with associated metadata,
visualize and analyze output data, comment on and share analyses, and conduct
comparative and meta-analysis, drawing on data from other projects. This cyber-
infrastructure will provide semi-automated means of discovering relationships
that can lead to new theories about how social systems work, test the realism of
simulations against knowledge from empirical systems, and propose new research
directions to explore.