* 1430981
* SBIR Phase II:  Sensors for InLine Certification Capability for Robotic Welding and Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Lijun Song, SenSigma LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2016
* USD 723,106.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in influencing the whole metal manufacturing
and materials processing industries by providing the capability of "Certify as
You Build". The in-situ measurement/prediction of composition, phase
transformation and manufacturing defect using the proposed spectroscopic sensor
may also allow for the fabrication of near net shape and property (NNSP)
components with heterogeneous structures and complex geometries for additive
manufacturing industry. The project's vision is to achieve "zero-scrap"
materials processing and metal manufacturing operations, enabling dramatically
reduced post-processing to identify composition, microstructure and
manufacturing qualities. The project would provide sensing and process control
to reduce waste and save time during welding and additive manufacturing
processes. These savings would directly convert to dollars for the manufacturer,
so there is strong motivation for adoption. Thus the proposed smart optical
monitoring sensor will significantly contribute to the much needed
transformation of the U.S. manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation is to use optical
emission spectroscopy of plasma to dramatically improve welding and additive
manufacturing processes. The innovation actually goes far beyond sensing to
categorize defects and predict composition and phase transformations. Its
success relies heavily on signal processing and understanding the physical
mechanisms of the manufacturing processes being monitored. The sensor and
associated algorithms will lead to much more efficient manufacturing because of
improved feedback control afforded by the process information provided. The key
challenges lie in demonstrating on the shop floor 1) in-situ monitoring and
control of phase transformation and composition by systematic diagnosis of the
laser induced plasma, and 2) ability to detect and categorize manufacturing
defects through understanding the effects of different defects on plasma and
designing effective algorithms to interpret plasma signals. Phase II activities
are directed towards meeting those challenges and establish the sensor?s
reliability for its earliest possible commercialization. The project will
contribute to the competitive advantage for American metal manufacturing
industry with "Certify as You Build" capability with its spectroscopic sensor
called, minimize material wastage and lost labor time, and increase long-term
product quality.