* 1430124
* PFC:  Center for the Physics of Living Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2023
* Yann Chemla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* James Shank
* 07/31/2023
* USD 10,750,164.00

Describing complex living systems in a quantitative, physically-based manner is
extremely difficult. Through this Physics Frontiers Centers award the Center for
the Physics of Living Cells (CPLC) brings experimentalists and theorists
together to address the technical challenges at the interface of physics and
biology specifically on the cellular level. By the development and deployment of
novel techniques from experimental, theoretical, and computational physics, the
CPLC will create a dynamic narrative of living cells, expanding the physical
description from molecular scales to whole cells and multicellular collections.
Exploring such topics as real-time molecular mechanics and the statistical
physics of intermediate size systems will inform and advance areas in both
biology and physics. CPLC activities will foster the training and development of
multidisciplinary scientists at the junction of physics and biology, including
''bootcamps'' and summer school workshops for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers. The CPLC will also operate diverse outreach programs
targeting high school teachers and students, bilingual communities, and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPLC seeks to transform the
understanding of how cells function from molecular to macroscopic scales,
communicate, respond to external stimuli, and even evolve. These goals will be
approached through a variety of research activities including the development of
new biophysical techniques that can measure individual molecules and cells and
observe how cells interact to create new phenomena. Another activity concerns
the quantification of intracellular complexity, including the measurement of RNA
and protein dynamics. Further investigations involve probing how the properties
of multicellular systems arise from the interactions of single cells.
Experimentalists and theorists at the CPLC will collaborate closely to develop
novel multi-scale computational tools to simulate systems on a wide range of
times, scales, and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Physics Frontiers
Centers award is co-funded by the Physics Frontiers Centers program in the
Division of Physics and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division
of Chemistry within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and
by the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences within the Directorate for Biological Sciences.