* 1430556
* Workshop on Logic and Systems Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* James Lynch, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Systems Biology is a new area of science that studies living systems comprised
of many interacting parts. These could be molecules within a cell, cells within
an organism, or individual organisms within an ecosystem. It differs from
classical biology, which has largely focused on understanding the behavior of
the fundamental units of living systems, whereas systems biology is concerned
with properties of the entire system. It is necessarily an interdisciplinary
subject, using approaches from biology, chemistry, computer science,
mathematics, and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer science is central to
systems biology. Because biological systems are so complex, traditional methods
of analysis and modeling are inadequate or too inefficient to be practical.
There are striking similarities between some of the major problems of software
analysis and systems biology. Researchers in both areas must deal with systems
that cannot be understood by intuitive, informal methods. This has led to the
development of software aids for describing and testing systems. The experience
gained by computer scientists working on software analysis could be very useful
when applied to systems biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop on Logic and Systems Biology is affiliated with the
2014 Logic in Computer Science (LICS) Conference in Vienna, Austria and is
scheduled for July 13. It will consist of one day of invited lectures and a
session for discussion of open problems and future research. The talks will
cover a variety of connections between computer science and biology, with
emphasis on the uses of formal logic in modeling biomolecular interaction
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems biology presents challenges and
opportunities for computer science. Although the number of computer scientists
who work on systems biology is growing, they still represent a small fraction of
the population. The lectures are intended to be accessible to computer
scientists who have some knowledge about the use of formal methods for analyzing
software and hardware, but who may not have much experience with biology. The
speakers will also be invited to submit more technical versions of their talks
to a refereed proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;The
lectures will explore connections between biology, computer science, and
mathematics, with the goal of encouraging collaborations between researchers in
the different groups, leading to new applications of logic and raising
interesting theoretical questions. Students and postdoctoral fellows will be
especially encouraged to participate in the workshop. Since the talks will be
partly expository, this will be an opportunity for them to broaden their
perspective, with future benefits to their research and teaching.