* 1430601
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: Concepts of Information in Neuroscience
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Peter Godfrey-Smith, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 74,858.00

This research project will provide a conceptual analysis of the notion of
information for the purposes of contributing to foundational research in
neuroscience. The project is both timely and important since explanation within
contemporary neuroscience relies heavily on various concepts of information that
are seldom if ever explicitly defined. Neuroscientists have often stressed the
need for more foundational thinking in their field but seldom have the chance to
step back and address these issues. An empirically-informed philosopher of
science will work collaboratively with colleagues in neuroscience to make
significant contributions to the field by addressing a highly specific concern
about the different uses made of concepts of information in particular kinds of
explanation from neurophysiology of receptor cells to fMRI studies about sensory
or motor systems.

The results of this research will benefit society by facilitating public
understanding of neuroscience. There is a large interest among the public about
how our brains work, as made evident by the stream of popular science books,
news articles, and TV documentaries on this topic. The appeal to information is
standard in these offerings to the public, but mired in the same confusions that
exist in the scientific literature. Clarifying and revising the information
concepts as used in neuroscience should therefore also have a significant impact
on its public understanding.