* 1430912
* SBIR Phase II:  A Cloud-Based Service for Audio Access to News and Blogs
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Radhika Thekkath, AgiVox, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 761,756.00

This SBIR Phase II project will research the algorithms for automatic discovery
of topics of interest for a user based on existing written content such as news
and blogs. These topics can then be used to dynamically create a personalized
content reader with high quality synthesized audio. Applications created from
this cloud-based project will enable a car driver to get instant and relevant
information without taking her eyes off the road, a must for today's lengthy
commutes and in-car safety. Other applications will allow the same audio access
to Internet news and blogs via a smartphone for those who are vision-impaired or
vision-busy with exercising, gardening, etc. This project has a societal impact
among the blind, aging eyes that have difficulty reading small print and small
screens, and the car driver, since it provides the ability to find contextual
news and blogs in an "eyes-free" manner and with an easy listening experience.
The fundamental research components from this project can be re-applied to other
content and similar fields of research. This project's applications have the
potential to generate a revenue stream which will in turn create jobs and have
an overall impact on the economy.

The goal of the research is to determine whether topic information extracted
from a large corpus of unrelated documents using unsupervised machine-learning
can be used for content discovery, improving the quality of synthesized speech,
and discovering user preferences for a recommendation system. The research uses
topic-modeling, a machine learning algorithm, to uncover topics across thousands
of RSS feeds, and natural language processing to improve the quality of
synthesized speech. Retrieval of specific RSS channels per user's topic
preferences is then possible by using the probability of mappings between topics
and RSS channels. Since content scanning by listening is a slower process than
visually scanning for relevant responses, the current research proposal will
improve this process by combining user preference with information retrieval for
a better user experience. The topic discovery research will include three key
components: discovering multiple levels of subtopics to create topic hierarchies
for easier browsing, a method for identifying trending topics, and determining
current and relevant topics for automation of audio content. Once this project
is shown to produce effective results, the same techniques can be applied across
other document collections.