* 1430872
* SBIR Phase II:  Low cost shortwave infrared (SWIR) spectral imaging microscope camera based on Compressive Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Lenore McMackin, InView technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 791,197.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to open price-
sensitive research, medical imaging and surveillance communities to the benefits
of the shortwave infrared (SWIR) waveband without the complexity or expense of
traditional hyperspectral systems. The multispectral SWIR imager developed in
this project supports medical microscope and small animal imaging of infrared
fluorescence for cancer detection, localization and excision. SWIR fluorophores
produce no autofluorescence background while simultaneously enhancing tissue
penetration depth and efficiency by factors of 10 or more. InView?s imaging
platform can build large markets by the development of specialized image
processing and analytical methods for specific applications in pharmaceutical
manufacturing, food safety, solar panel and semiconductor inspection, machine
vision, and navigation. InView?s camera platform embodies the revolutionary new
sampling theory of compressive sensing, a field whose applications in
information processing have grown exponentially. The innovative architecture and
the state-of-the-art software already embedded in the camera and user interface
can enhance and possibly transform lab and clinical modalities in dynamic multi-
fluorescence imaging, in vivo functional imaging, tissue viability and pathology
studies, and advanced imaging modalities such as optical coherence
tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project will result in an operational low-cost, multi-color shortwave
infrared (SWIR) camera that can be directly mounted on microscopes for
supporting compelling micro-imaging applications in scientific, industrial and
biomedical imaging. The electro-optical, opto-mechanical, and processing
software architecture of the camera is based on Compressive Sensing, a new
sampling technique that reduces data collection requirements for high resolution
imaging to well below Nyquist limits. This design does not use expensive sensor
arrays or complicated spectrometers. Instead, high-resolution pictures are
computationally constructed from single-detector measurements. The ?single-pixel
camera? architecture was commercialized by InView as a monochromatic SWIR
imager. In Phase 1, InView successfully demonstrated that only simple
modifications to its monochromatic camera design can produce full color imaging.
The objective of Phase 2 is to modify only the components that are necessary to
transform the existing monochromatic camera into a multi-color imager with the
overall design goal of maintaining the existing camera size, weight and cost so
that InView can offer low-cost multispectral SWIR imaging to the price sensitive
microscopy community.