* 1430519
* Collaborative Research: Imaging and Controlling Ultrafast Dynamics of Atoms, Molecules, and Nanostructures
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Anthony Starace, University of Nebraska
* Cooperative Agreement
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,999,994.00

Non-technical Description The atomic, molecular, and optical (AMO) research
groups in Nebraska and Kansas will form a collaborative consortium to study and
develop ways to control fundamental processes of electron motion in atoms,
molecules, and nanostructures that occur at ultrafast (femto (10-15) to atto
(10-18) second) time scales. The project will bring together experimental and
theoretical physicists, chemists and electrical engineers from the University of
Nebraska at Lincoln (UNL), the Kansas State University (KSU), and the University
of Kansas (KU) as well as the facilities for AMO research at the James R.
Macdonald Laboratory (JRML) at KSU, Extreme Light Laboratory at UNL, Physics and
Chemistry departments at KU, and the computing resources at the partner
institutions to explore novel states of matter. The project team plans to engage
in synergistic activities to expand and diversify the STEM workforce by engaging
students, teachers, and researchers at broad ranging educational levels.
Research and educational collaborations among the consortium partners as well as
at national and international levels and the preparation of a diverse, globally
engaged STEM workforce training are expected to be sustained beyond the award
period.

Technical Description The projects will use femto to atto second pulses of light
to trigger different types of reactions in matter and use pump-probe
measurements, high harmonic generation, and ultrafast electron diffraction
methods to study and image atomic and molecular motions. Detailed experimental
and theoretical studies will be carried out to understand the molecular
ionization processes caused by the interaction of strong laser fields and
molecules. Participating researchers will build an electron spectrometer with
angular resolution, improve the accuracy of extracting the molecular structure
parameters, and establish an improved ionization theory for polyatomic
molecules. Another aspect of the project will focus on experimental and
theoretical studies to investigate the interaction of nanostructures to
ultrashort pulses of extreme ultraviolet and infrared radiation. Applications
such as ultrafast optical free electron beam switches will also be explored. The
project will leverage the infrastructure and education, diversity, and outreach
programs established by Kansas and Nebraska Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) to engage and inspire students at all levels.
During the three years of this Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2
project, the program expects to provide 19 person-years of postdoctoral training
and support 48 graduate students, 18 undergraduates and 18 faculty members from
two-and four-year colleges, 18 high school students, and 30 high school teachers
in research.