* 1430913
* Modeling Shoreline Morphological Evolution
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 829,576.00

Many coastal areas are undergoing tremendous morphological change, resulting in
deterioration of habitats and livelihoods, and altering the exchanges between
land and ocean. For example, near Katama Bay, Martha's Vineyard, Massachussetts,
sediment transport and morphological evolution is affecting water quality,
oyster farms, tourism, and homes and structures. Waves from Hurricanes Irene and
Sandy combined with strong currents caused 2.5 meter of erosion and accretion
near Katama Inlet. In addition, the inlet is migrating hundreds of meters per
year, and eventually will close until a storm again breaches the barrier beach
separating the bay from the ocean. This project will use a combination of
existing field observations and numerical model simulations to determine the
causes of such morphological evolution. By investigating the effects of tides,
waves, and currents on the dynamic coast of Martha's Vineyard, this research
project will lead to an improved understanding of the processes driving
shoreline evolution on ocean beaches and in or near inlets. The team will
collaborate with U.S. Geological Survey scientists on model development for
addressing a range of future scenarios and will work with local stake holders
and managers to provide simulations and information about possible changes to
the shoreline in response to different forcing and management choices, as well
as to help plan for inlet closings and the associated changes in water quality
and access. The project will also produce video lessons for high school students
on relevant STEM topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address the
hypotheses that: (i) migration of the inlet is owing to a combination of large
nor'easters and hurricanes, more frequent, but more moderate wave events, and
strong tidal flows, (ii) the timing of storms relative to flood and ebb flows
and the storm duration are important to the morphological evolution, (iii)
accretion inside the bay is caused by sand carried alongshore and subsequently
transported into the inlet during flood flows, and (iv) closure of the inlet
occurs when a large storm coincides with one or more spring flood tides,
carrying sand into the inlet. The large morphological signal combined with
existing observations of waves, currents, and the changing bathymetry make this
site an ideal location to address hypotheses for shoreline morphological
evolution, to calibrate, test, and improve numerical models that simulate the
observed evolution, and to use models to predict future changes for different
scenarios. Although this study will focus on the Martha's Vineyard site where
there is substantial observational data and model infrastructure, the results
will be applicable to a wide range of shoreline systems, with or without inlets.
The dominant processes may differ from site to site, but the fundamental physics
incorporated in the model are similar.