* 1430262
* CRCNS US-French Research Proposal: Bayesian Models of Sensory Integration, Adaptation and Calibration
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Michael Landy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 09/30/2017
* USD 498,020.00

A fundamental question in perceptual and cognitive science concerns how
decisions about incoming sensory information unfold over time. The influx of
available sensory information must be balanced across time with the need for
quickness versus accuracy in making a decision. Sensory systems are flexible in
response to changing context, resulting in several dynamic aspects of perception
at multiple time scales, including the trade-off between speed and accuracy in
decisions or actions, adaptation for repeated sensory stimuli, and long-term
recalibration in response to a consistent change in stimulation or error. This
proposal attempts to advance theoretical understanding of these processes by
unifying disparate threads in modern perceptual theory while developing models
of the dynamics of sensory integration and decision-making. The research could
ultimately have implications for the design of virtual reality systems, lighting
and sound systems, visual displays, and artificial vision and sound processing
systems.

A large literature on multiple cue integration, or how observers integrate
multiple sources of information for making a perceptual decision, suggests that
human behavior compares favorably with the predictions of optimal Bayesian
models for combining multiple sources of information (including prior
knowledge). However, this literature examines decisions under static conditions.
There is a mostly distinct literature on speeded decision-making that instead
asks how information is accumulated over time, leading to the combined decision
of both what response to make and when to make that response. The novelty of the
proposed research is to unify these two threads of perceptual theory by
developing and testing a model that incorporates both a dynamic decision-making
model for evidence accumulation (a diffusion process) and multiple-cue
integration. Each cue contributes independently to the dynamic process of
evidence accumulation. The experimental work proposed to test the model covers a
wide range of sensory decision-making phenomena and thus is expected to have a
strong impact on the field of perceptual science. However, the wider impact will
result from the unifying models to be developed, as the combination of optimal
cue integration with dynamic decision-making models has extremely wide
applicability in cognitive science generally. A companion project is being
funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR).