* 1430208
* CRCNS US-Israel Research Proposal: Understanding single neuron computation by combining biophysical and statistical models
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Robert Kass, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 930,000.00

What make a neuron become active? This question, central to our understanding of
brain processes, is both a biophysical question about underlying biological
mechanisms, and a statistical question about the features of incoming stimuli to
which a neuron responds. The overall goal of this project is to forge a link
between the biological mechanisms of neuronal activity and the computational
process by which neurons encode features of incoming stimuli. More specifically,
this project seeks to understand the biological underpinnings of stimulus coding
by neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical models of neurons that incorporate
detailed information about the ion channels that these cells express provide a
detailed, biophysical account of neuronal activity. These kinds of models have
been used widely and can incorporate and constrain an impressive amount of
biological detail. Unfortunately they provide little insight into the meaning of
neuronal activity or into the kinds of computations and transformations of
stimuli that neurons are performing. On the other hand, models derived from
statistical approaches are able to capture the often-noisy and complex
relationships between neural activity and the stimuli that a neuron receives.
These models provide insight into how specific features of incoming stimuli are
extracted and combined by populations of neurons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
approaches will be combined through collaboration of a team at Carnegie Mellon
University (Urban and Kass) and one at Bar-Ilan University (Korngreen) with
expertise in the application of statistical and biophysical models to single
neuron data. The work will focus on two neuron types that have several important
features in common. Olfactory bulb mitral cells and layer 5 neocortical
pyramidal cells are two classes of large neurons that receive distinct sources
of input inputs onto different divisions of their elaborate dendritic trees. To
forge this connection between dynamic and statistical models, this project will
develop detailed biophysical models using recently described methods and extend
the framework of current statistical models to allow the interpretation of the
functional consequences of ion channels and their localization on specific
classes of inputs. Applying these improved methods, and examining the
consequences of changing biophysical properties on the ability of neurons to
robustly and effectively represent stimuli will generate a novel account of the
linkage because biological mechanisms and single neuron computation. A companion
project is being funded by the Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF).