* 1430219
* Investigation of Fe Isotope Fractionation During Magmatic Differentiation at the Skaergaard Intrusion
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Adriana Heimann Rios, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2018
* USD 257,127.00

Magma evolution is responsible for the wide range of igneous rocks observed on
Earth as well as their varied chemical compositions and the genesis of
associated economic mineral deposits. Of fundamental importance for
understanding magmatic evolution and planetary formation processes are detailed
geochemical studies of large simple igneous systems. Layered mafic-ultramafic
igneous complexes are not only useful for understanding magmatic differentiation
processes but also important economically for being the main source of platinum
group elements, Cr, Ni, Cu, and Fe ore deposits. Iron isotope studies can help
unravel the formation processes of these igneous complexes as well as their
mineral deposits because the different isotopes of Fe can potentially partition
into different phases during diverse processes, including crystallization of
minerals from the melt, assimilation of country rocks, and reactions between
rocks and late-stage hydrothermal fluids. Within individual crystals Fe isotopes
can also diffuse through various minerals at different rates and may also
reflect equilibrium (magmatic) or non-equilibrium (kinetic) processes.
Improvements in the precision of Fe stable isotope measurements of bulk rocks
and minerals by multi collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
(MC-ICP-MS) show that significant variations exist in high-temperature mafic and
ultramafic terrestrial crustal and mantle igneous rocks, lunar mafic rocks, and
meteorites. These findings promise success for understanding magmatic
differentiation and planetary formation processes. However, the current
knowledge of Fe isotope compositions of individual minerals and fractionations
among them in these rocks is still limited, and the causes, mechanisms, and
implications of Fe isotope fractionations in high-temperature terrestrial and
extraterrestrial igneous systems are still poorly understood. Only a very
limited number of igneous intrusions have been investigated in detail with Fe
isotopes. In addition, in situ Fe isotope measurements of individual minerals in
extraterrestrial rocks are not available and only very few exist for terrestrial
rocks. This means that Fe isotope compositions previously measured in bulk
minerals may well be, in many cases, an average of the complex compositions
recorded during crystal growth, diffusion, or late-stage hydrothermal
alteration. This project will determine the extents, causes, and mechanisms of
Fe isotope fractionations in a simple high-temperature magmatic system combining
Fe and O isotope analysis of bulk-rocks and minerals with high-spatial
resolution in situ Fe and O isotope analysis of minerals by femtosecond laser
ablation (fs-LA) MC-ICP-MS and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS),
respectively, in the mafic-ultramafic layered intrusion of Skaergaard,
Greenland, the most studied intrusive complex on Earth. This intrusion
exemplifies a highly differentiated magma chamber originated from a single,
large, magma body that underwent extensive, closed-system evolution through
fractional crystallization that later underwent hydrothermal alteration. The
results of this research will help understand the processes of formation of
mafic-ultramafic layered intrusions and their host magmatic mineral deposits and
has implications for understanding planetary differentiation
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis of this project is on systematic,
high resolution, inter-mineral Fe isotope fractionations and in situ intra-
mineral Fe isotope compositions (by fs-LA-MC-ICP-MS). Because fs-LA-MC-ICP-MS is
a new technique in geochemistry, this research will help develop the method that
may ultimately benefit the broader geoscience community. Detailed bulk-rock and
mineral Fe and O isotope compositions combined with in situ Fe isotope
compositions, mineral chemistry, O isotope cooling temperatures, bulk-rock major
and trace element compositions, and modeling will produce the most comprehensive
and detailed study of a single large igneous intrusion. Oxygen isotope
compositions will help discern high-temperature magmatic Fe isotope compositions
(equilibrium) from kinetic and late-stage hydrothermal effects. All these data
together will help identify the origin of the measured fractionations
(fractional crystallization, chemical diffusion, thermal diffusion, late-stage
hydrothermal alteration). The inter-mineral Fe isotope fractionation factors as
a function of temperature calculated for Skaergaard will be useful for
understanding those in other terrestrial igneous systems, lunar and Martian
rocks, and other planetary bodies. Because large samples are hard to obtain from
meteorites, this study will provide much needed information to determine the
best approach for extraterrestrial sample studies. The results of this work will
improve our understanding of large-scale evolution of Fe isotopes at the
intrusion level as well as small scale, Fe isotope heterogeneities within
crystals. This project combines the expertise of mineralogy, petrology, economic
geology, geochemistry, and Fe and O isotope geochemistry of the PI and
collaborators from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. This project will
support an early career female scientist, fund two M.S. theses and undergraduate
student researchers, and support the development of the physical infrastructure
for research on state-of-the-art high-temperature isotope geochemistry at East
Carolina University. This collaboration will also provide graduate and
undergraduate students at ECU the experience of working with state-of-the-art
analytical facilities at UW-Madison and interact with top leaders in
geochemistry.