* 1430682
* SBIR Phase II:  High Performance MOF-Based Storage and Delivery of Electronic Gases
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Mitchell Weston, NuMat Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2016
* USD 1,249,930.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the development of a new hazardous gas
storage and delivery system for semiconductor fabrication that will
significantly promote worker health and safety benefits at a reduced cost. The
new system incorporates a new class of ultra-high performing absorbents, namely
Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs), that will greatly mitigate the environmental
and public health risks by reducing incidents of toxic gas release, chances of
equipment damage, and fabrication facility evacuation. Moreover, the use of MOFs
enables an increase in the storage capacity while providing savings in
ventilation energy, and reducing the risk of leakages over both high pressure
mechanical cylinders and sub-atmospheric carbon-based storage. Given the current
vast market share of activated carbon cylinders, the higher capacity MOF filled
cylinders offer the prospect of substantial decreased in per wafer production
costs by minimizing gas cylinder change-outs and fabrication facility downtime.
Furthermore, this technology represents the first large scale commercial
application for MOFs, thus opening the doors for this promising class of
materials for other gas storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
increase the capacity of gas cylinders for the storage and delivery of highly
toxic gases, such as arsine (AsH3), phosphine (PH3), and boron trifluoride
(BF3), that are commonly used in semiconductor fabrication. As a safety measure,
these highly toxic gases are currently stored at low pressure in activated
carbon-filled cylinders. However, the capacity of activated carbon adsorbents is
severely limited by their ill-defined internal pore structure. NuMat is
developing higher capacity gas cylinders by focusing on the following key
technical objectives: 1) Design highly porous, well-defined, crystalline MOF
absorbents to be integrated into cylinders, allowing for high capacity storage
of these highly toxic gases at sub-atmospheric pressures, 2) Develop
industrially relevant MOF scale-up procedures to minimize the cost of
production, 3) Maximize the volumetric storage of MOFs in cylinders by
developing high density MOF pellets, and 4) Integrate high density MOF pellets
into cylinders to displace the lower performing activated carbon filled
cylinders currently used this commercial application. Additionally, the
technical milestones achieved in this project will help to establish the
necessary foundation for incorporating this class of ultra-high performing
materials (MOFs) into other gas storage applications.