* 1430608
* WORKSHOP: Data Management and Data Sharing Workshop for Science and Technology Studies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* John Parker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 39,268.00

This award will fund a workshop that will bring together key members of the STS
community to engage in intensive discussions about data management issues. The
need for the meeting is initially driven by a recent requirement implemented by
NSF; each research proposal is now required to have a suitably adequate data
management plan. The requirement is generally formulated; NSF recognizes that
there is a vast array of scientific research cultures with differing practices
of data management. Moreover, these many such cultures (including STS) address
pertinent data-management issues in widely different ways. Issues include what
constitutes data, and how data should be characterized, formatted, securely
stored, and made broadly accessible for re-use by others, while also addressing
concerns of privacy and the need at times to grant only limited access. The
workshop will focus on articulating current needs, as well as proposed responses
and solutions, for development of effective data management principles and
routines in the STS domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organizers have
four distinct goals: (1) to generate provisional templates for data management
plans for individual projects across the diverse fields of STS. (2) To produce a
workshop report that summarizes the discussions with a focus on current and
future needs and existing and possible solutions (including the templates); the
report will be made broadly available on an existing secure, open-access
repository at Arizona State University. In addition, they will produce two white
papers. One white paper is (3) to be circulated to members of the STS community
and to other research communities through professional societies to solicit
input and work toward a shared understanding of infrastructural needs. Another
white paper will (4) outline opportunities for computational work that will
become possible only if the communities establish robust data management
strategies; it will outline future strategies for taking advantage of
opportunities for computational work in the diverse STS fields represented that
is predicated on available and accessible data. The white papers will address
how STS fields can implement strategies of data driven science and will consider
what benefits would accrue from doing so.