* 1430992
* SBIR Phase II:  Analysis and Rewriting of Binary Code for Performance and Security
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Aparna Kotha, SecondWrite
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,049,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will result from it enabling (i) faster and
more productive computer software and (ii) a significant improvement in the
ability to counter cyber threats. Many enterprises, such as financial firms and
online retailers, operate software platforms that are central to their business.
Even a few minutes of reduced platform performance can lead to financial losses
in the millions of dollars. The first project outcome will enable enterprises to
automatically detect and rapidly resolve such performance problems, leading to
more efficient information systems, more satisfied consumers and more profitable
companies. The second outcome will boost the defenses of our nation's computers
against cyber-attacks. President Obama recently cited cyber threats as one of
our most serious economic and national security challenges. Losses from theft of
intellectual property are estimated to cost American companies around $250
Billion annually. The company's malware analysis technology will detect some of
the most advanced attacks that defeat today's defenses, leading to safer
consumer and enterprise data, and reducing financial losses. Overall the
company's technology enhances the technical understanding of binary code, an
important class of software employed in a range of enterprise software and most
modern cyber-attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project will develop a software tool called a binary rewriter
that can understand and modify binary code. Although software applications are
developed in human-readable programming languages, a large fraction is
translated to binary code to be executed on hardware. Binary code is difficult
to understand and modify. In addition, modern sophisticated techniques such as
packing - employed by malware writers - further complicate this task. The
intellectual merit of the project is based around the development of a novel
binary rewriting mechanism that fulfills critical requirements that cannot be
simultaneously achieved by any existing rewriting tool. The new rewriting
mechanism will be able to reliably rewrite every binary program, including
programs containing sophisticated techniques such as packing, without
compromising the critical requirement for low run-time and memory overhead. It
will also provide a novel mechanism for (i) monitoring the performance of
enterprise applications as part of an advanced performance monitoring framework;
and (ii) detecting, and therefore providing a means to stop, infection from
evasive malware, a sophisticated class of malware that deliberately hides its
malicious behavior.