* 1430754
* The Development Of Integrated Faunal Databases In tDAR
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Bonnie Styles, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 184,080.00

This project will integrate data from multiple sources to permit researchers to
examine how various factors such as environmental change and human behavior
impacted food resources over a period spanning almost 7,000 years. The research
is important and relevant today for several reasons. Faunal data in the form of
recovered animal, bird and fish remains provide a valuable tool for
understanding human - environment interactions but different data sets can be
extremely difficult to integrate because of the varying ways in which they are
collected and the varying factors which affect recovery of bone. This project
will develop techniques which are generalizable and which can be applied to both
prehistoric and recent data. The long term perspective adopted here and which
archaeology allows, opens the door to understanding processes which may play out
slowly and are not discernable over shorter time
intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers involved in this project will
explore how people living in the forested regions of interior Eastern North
American variously used fish, freshwater mussels and waterfowl between
approximately 10,000-3,000 years ago during a period known to archaeologists as
the Archaic Period. After 7,000 years ago, hunter-gatherers living in some
interior Eastern locales intensively utilized these kinds of aquatic animals,
while in other places these resources were never heavily utilized. This
project's unprecedented integration of faunal data sets, generated by
significant archaeological projects over the last half century, will allow
analyses at multiple scales and provide insight into the causes of the increased
use of aquatic animals in the diets of Archaic hunter-gatherers, as well as
contribute to current theoretical debates in archaeology. It also will make
significant data on past animal populations and their exploitation by humans
available to scientists interested in environmental change, biodiversity and
other fields as well as to other archaeologists. Through the involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students, the creation of a publicly accessible
teaching module for undergraduate students as well as public lectures, a
magazine article, and an online exhibit about the project at the Illinois State
Museum, this project will engage the broader audience, acquainting them with the
nature and significance of these zooarchaeological data and what they reveal
about the North American past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporal and spatial
variability during the Archaic traditionally has been attributed to
environmental diversity and to climatic and other environmental change. Recent
challenges argue that this traditional, ecological perspective is outdated, has
arrested theoretical development, and has prevented archaeologists from
considering the role of cultural or ethnic identities, sociopolitical
interactions, and ritual practices in Archaic hunter-gatherer lifeways and in
related structuring of archaeological remains. These challenges can be addressed
using the datasets collected by this project. At least nineteen extant faunal
databases and nearly 280,000 specimens will be preserved in tDAR (the Digital
Archaeological Record; http://tdar.org ), an international repository for
digital data, images, and documents that provides open access and includes
integrative tools for analysis. The record of animal utilization can be studied
in detail at local, sub-regional, and regional scales providing perspective on
the correlation between environmental, demographic, and cultural variables
across time and space. Through the creation of an Eastern Faunal Working Group
(EAFWG) of zooarchaeologists who have analyzed key Archaic Period faunal
datasets, we will involve knowledgeable specialists in data preservation and
integration, explore the comparability of these datasets, and foster
methodological and theoretical collaboration. Not only will this project
overcome the limitation of current syntheses by using each researcher's original
dataset, it also will transform disparate variables into shared classificatory
schema without changing the original databases. Thus, this approach will model
efficient data integration at multiple scales for other zooarchaeologists,
archaeologists and other researchers.