* 1431021
* SBIR Phase II:  High Speed Laser Crystallization of Aluminum Doped ZnO Nanoparticles for High Performance Transparent Conductors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Callahan, Greentech Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 917,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project lies in reducing manufacturing costs in the $32
billion touchscreen module market and eliminating use of the rare-earth metal,
Indium. Touchscreen modules are used in mobile phones, computers, point-of-sale
terminals, and other display products. Existing methods to produce the
transparent conducting film in touchscreen modules require many process steps
and have low throughput. . By using much higher-speed processes and greatly
reducing the number of process steps, this method enables 80% cost reduction in
production of touchscreen sensor films. The phase II project will further
develop the process to produce patterned sensor films over large areas and
integrate with equipment that scales well to manufacturing. Analysis shows that
the payback time on capital expenditure for new equipment required by the
process will be under one year. Cost reductions enable gross margin increases of
50% and make US-based manufacturing of touchscreen modules
feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project will develop high speed laser crystallization (HSLC) of printed
aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) nanoparticle layers on glass to replace indium
tin oxide (ITO) for the Touch Panel Industry. Sputter deposition of ITO layers
for touch panels has been the Industry standard for many years. Sputtered ITO
requires costly vacuum systems with slow growth rates during ITO deposition. In
addition, touchscreen sensors require expensive patterning using slow and costly
photolithography process steps. Indium is a rare-earth material used in multiple
large volume markets which has experienced high price volatility. R&amp;D in
Phase II will focus on producing patterned AZO films and working prototypes over
large areas with a figure of merit higher than industry standard touch films
with a projected cost structure lower than what is currently capable in large
volume manufacturing . HSLC rapidly converts nanoparticles into crystalline
films with superior properties at energy efficient ambient conditions. The
advantages of this environmentally benign process include high throughput, high
efficiency, high optical transmission, and low cost. Technical results will also
advance printable electronics for other applications and markets.