* 1431276
* Strategy and Organization of Mobile Innovation and Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Timothy Bresnahan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 706,238.00

Entrepreneurial innovation is a key driver of economic growth, but managing
innovation in entrepreneurial firms presents difficult problems. Firms must
choose among fast and slow product update cycles, simultaneous vs sequential
experimentation and must align innovation and marketing. These problems vary
with the firm's existing capabilities, resources and technology, and also with
demanders' needs and with the available institutions to reach out to new
adopters. The explosion in mobile app entrepreneurship is an unprecedented
opportunity to identify failures and successful paths to innovation in a large-
scale empirical setting. Understanding the alignment of firm decisions to
environment is an important frontier in entrepreneurial studies, and our
research will create new and large datasets to examine the sources of
entrepreneurial success in product innovation and marketing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a multi-method approach. Preliminary
case interviews for this research and inferences from the innovation and
entrepreneurship literature suggest specific ways in which innovation strategies
are linked to the extent to which a new market inherits capabilities, resources,
technology, demand preferences and expectations from related markets. Further
case interviews and a follow-up survey of developers to collect data on
organizational structure, process, and culture will permit refinement of the
linkages between entrepreneurial innovation strategies, market characteristics,
and organizations. This project will collect and analyze the "big data"
currently available for entrepreneurship in the mobile applications ecosystem to
understand how different experimentation strategies and organizational
structures that lead to successful innovation link to variations in market
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The market
characteristics, innovation strategies, and organizational choices studied in
this project are not specific to the mobile app ecosystem. The findings from
this project generalize to inform our understanding of how successful
entrepreneurial innovation strategies and organizational choices vary with
market characteristics overall. Identifying these specific market contingencies
reveals the optimal policy, investment and organizational underpinnings of
effective innovation. Public release of the data will be a critical public good
for other research on platform competition, entrepreneurial organizations,
resource acquisition, and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Entrepreneurial innovation is a critical national issue that is central to
economic growth and national competitiveness. The platform structure
characterizes nearly all information and communications technologies sectors, so
study of this setting benefits policies supporting applications entrepreneurship
in many STEM-related industries. These findings may yield more general
suggestions about how policies to promote economic growth through successful
entrepreneurial innovation in all new industries (whether founded on platforms
or not) should differ by market characteristics. The case studies will benefit
teachers and partnerships between academics and industry, and the data will
immediately provide research opportunities for scholars at the undergraduate
level and above.