* 1431717
* Collaborative Research: Advancing the Dissemination of the Creative Art of Structural/Civil Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Sanjay Arwade, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2019
* USD 127,167.00

Recent reports from the Office of the President of the United States and the
National Academy of Engineering (NAE) urge the nation to increase student
retention in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), and to
educate a STEM-literate populace (i.e., STEM education for non-STEM majors).
Uninspiring introductory courses, poor teaching, and lack of effective
dissemination of best-practices are major obstacles that stand in the way of
achieving these goals. Faculty members from Princeton University, Virginia Tech
and the University of Massachusetts Amherst are partnering on a project entitled
"Advancing the Dissemination of the Creative Art of Structural/Civil
Engineering" with the aim of overcoming these obstacles through supporting the
dissemination and implementation of an introductory civil engineering course
that is to be enhanced with research-based pedagogy. The target populations are
both STEM and non-STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this
proposal are to: (1) transform an introductory engineering course with
dramatically improved interactivity and accessibility for non-STEM students; (2)
ensure that the course takes a form that can be readily adopted into the
engineering and general education curricula of many types of institutions of
higher education (e.g., undergraduate institutions, research universities,
etc.); and (3) facilitate dissemination, adoption, and continuous improvement of
the courses beyond the audience already being reached. The objectives will be
met by implementing four strategies, which include conducting customer
development interviews that identify the challenges and needs for adoption in
institutions of various cultures and curricula; creating course modules,
comprised of different subjects (e.g. suspension bridges, towers, dams, etc.)
and a library of lectures and active-learning activities; developing a website
and central repository of information for teaching the course; and hosting
annual workshops to mentor faculty who want to adopt the
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An assessment and evaluation plan is proposed to
measure the effectiveness of the course enhancements with active learning
pedagogies and dissemination into other institutions. The course to be
disseminated will emphasize the creativity of the engineer along with the
technical content. One thesis to be tested is if disseminating engineering as a
creative art changes perceptions and increases the appreciation of engineering's
role in society. The outcomes of the project hold potential to advance knowledge
regarding the effect that false perceptions of engineers being "technicians" as
opposed to creative artists has on STEM attrition and attraction; challenges and
successes in teaching introductory engineering courses in institutions of
different cultures and curricula; and strategies for supporting the successful
adoption of an innovative course across diverse institutions.