* 1431667
* Collaborative Research: Assessing and Expanding the Impact of OpenDSA, an Open-Source, Interactive eTextbook for Data Structures and Algorithms
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Susan Rodger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 12/31/2018
* USD 183,398.00

OpenDSA is an open source project with international collaboration that has the
potential to fundamentally change instruction in courses on Data Structures and
Algorithms (DSA) and Formal Languages and Automata (FLA). By combining textbook-
quality content with visualization and a rich collection of automatically
assessed interactive exercises, OpenDSA helps students better understand the
behavior of algorithms and their effects over time on data structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will scale up OpenDSA in a number of ways.
The highly successful JFLAP software for interactive instruction on FLA will be
redeployed within the OpenDSA framework using HTML5 standards, thereby
increasing access. A wide range of colleges and universities will be involved in
disseminating OpenDSA and assessing its impact on student learning, and
OpenDSA's use in a number of innovative instructional settings will be explored.
The OpenDSA infrastructure will be enriched, allowing instructors to tailor the
materials to their specific classroom needs, and encouraging new content
contributions from these instructors. A number of technical pedagogical
experiments will be conducted, such as measuring the effects of augmenting
content with audio narration in slideshows, and navigation through topics with
concept maps. A study of how these materials can improve teaching in a range of
courses for which relevant content was created. These efforts will have an
impact on future active eTextbook projects by demonstrating successful ways to
integrate content, interactivity, and assessment in an open-source, creative-
commons environment by focusing on the effects on student learning of
integrating content with visualizations and a rich collection of practice
exercises with automated feedback. In addition, this project will study how
using eTextbook materials affects the evolving pedagogical approaches of
instructors of DSA and FLA courses and will experiment with new models of
dissemination for open-source content in conjunction with commercial online
content publishers.