* 1431127
* Advanced Comprehensive Analysis of Rain Drop Shapes, Oscillation Modes, and Fall Velocities Using High-Resolution Surface Disdrometers, Polarimetric Radar, and Numerical Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2019
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 530,342.00

Raindrops do not stay in a constant state as they fall towards the surface. They
can change shape, size, and speed. Weather radars can measure some of these
aspects, but need to rely on assumptions about others. This project will combine
observations of droplets with numerical modeling to provide researchers a better
idea about how many of each size of drops there are, how the drops interact when
they collide, and how the radar views the droplets. The result will be better
data for the estimation of precipitation from radars, which impacts flood
forecasting and hydrology. The project will also provide training opportunities
for students, the next generation of scientists.

The research team will combine observational analysis with numerical models in
order to increase the accuracy and completeness of rain drop sizes,
oscillations, and fall speeds. Knowledge of these quantities will enable a new
evaluation of the importance of collisional-forcing of drop oscillation in
moderate-to-intense rain rates. The observations and modeling will also allow
the PIs to create new "drop-by-drop" calculations of scattering matrices and
polarimetric radar observables. The observational part of the project will take
place at a highly instrumented site near the University of Alabama-Hunstville
campus. The main instruments to be used will be the Meteorological Particle
Spectrometer, for imaging and measurement of small drops, and the low-profile
2D-video disdrometer (2DVD) for overlap and larger drops. Modeling work will
consist of extending the "drop-by-drop" scattering methodology to include both
symmetric and asymmetric shapes, the latter computations to be based on advance
method-of-moments surface-integral-equation techniques.