* 1431773
* Collaborative Research: The Pacific Northwest Alliance to Develop, Implement and Study a STEM Graduate Education Model for American Indians and Native Alaskans
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Sweeney Windchief, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2021
* USD 614,519.00

Washington State University, the University of Montana, the University of Idaho
and Montana State University are collaborating to create the Pacific Northwest
Alliance: Collaborative Opportunities for Success in Mentoring of Students (PNW-
COSMOS). These alliance schools also partner with Salish Kootenai College,
Montana Tech of the University of Montana, Northwest Indian College and Heritage
University. This project was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF
14-505) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T track targets
strategic alliances of institutions and organizations to develop, implement, and
study innovative evidence-based models and standards for STEM graduate
education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM career preparation that
eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote positive practices for URMs.
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Pacific Northwest AGEP-T Alliance is to increase the
number of American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) students who complete STEM
graduate programs with specific emphasis on doctoral degrees, by developing,
implementing and studying a model of culturally congruent STEM graduate
education and academic STEM career preparation. This project is contributing to
foundational knowledge about the recruitment, retention and graduation of AI/AN
graduate students in STEM. The emphasis on culturally-relevant and culturally-
immersive activities is a unique intervention approach for graduate students and
their mentoring faculty in STEM. PNW-COSMOS has the potential to provide results
that may transform the way the field engages and works with URM graduate
students in rural environments and in regions of the country where there are
AI/AN in STEM. The lessons learned as this project progresses, and the ultimate
results from the work, will provide information that will be beneficial to
educators, administrators and policymakers, as well as the general public.