* 1431544
* Can the Spacing Effect Improve the Effectiveness of a Math Intervention Course for Engineering Students?
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Patricia Ralston, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 11/30/2015
* USD 93,031.00

For engineering undergraduates, mastering and retaining the material taught in
the introductory mathematics sequence is essential to successful completion of
their baccalaureates in engineering. "Spaced retrieval" is one factor that
cognitive scientists have shown to affect mastery and retention of a subject. In
spaced retrieval, once a concept is introduced, students practice the concept in
multiple sessions distributed across the semester rather than massed in a single
session at the time the concept is taught. Research in cognitive psychology has
established that the act of retrieving a piece of information from memory
increases the likelihood that the information will be retained at a later date,
this is referred to as the retrieval practice effect. Moreover, any given number
of retrievals will have greater impact if they occur non-consecutively versus
consecutively (the spacing effect). This project will study the effect of spaced
versus massed practice in two introductory engineering mathematics courses at
the University of Louisville. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In many mathematics
classes, practice problems are massed (the opposite of spaced); that is, all of
the problems related to a specific learning objective are assigned
consecutively, and students complete all the problems over a fairly short period
of time. For many engineering students, retaining mathematical knowledge from
one course to the next is a requirement for success. The transfer of knowledge
from one course to the next is an area faculty and researchers regularly
identify as problematic. This project will use the online homework and tutorial
system MyMathLab, to manipulate spacing of practice problems covering a subset
of objectives in a sequence of two math courses: "Introduction to Calculus for
Engineers" and "Engineering Analysis I." The students will be pseudo-randomly
assigned to treatment and control groups to ensure comparable distribution of
student characteristics across groups, including race, gender, high school GPA,
and ACT math score. The study's research questions are: 1) Is overall
performance in the second course better for students for whom some practice
problems in the first course were spaced than for students for whom all practice
problems were massed?; and 2) Is objective-specific mathematical knowledge
better retained when accompanying practice problems are spaced versus massed? If
results indicate positive effects from spacing, the findings could motivate the
use of spacing in foundational mathematics courses to reduce the number of
students transferring out of STEM majors due to inadequate mathematical
knowledge. Since the analysis will include demographic data, the project has the
potential to identify whether spacing retrieval has a different impact on
students from a number of diverse groups.