* 1431799
* Advanced Multifunctional Biomaterials for Neuroprosthetic Interfaces (Revision) in San Francisco, CA, on April 21-25, 2014.
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2014
* George Malliaras, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 12,785.00

PI: Abidian, Mohammad Reza &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1431799&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Materials Research Society&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Advanced Multifunctional Biomaterials for Neuroprosthetic Interfaces (Revision)
in San Francisco, CA, on April 21-25, 2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
seeks support primarily for students and young investigators from US
institutions to attend the Advanced Multifunctional Biomaterials for
Neuroprosthetic Interfaces Symposium that will be held at the 2014 Materials
Research Society meeting, San Francisco, CA, April 21-25, 2014. The main theme
of this interdisciplinary symposium is the study and application of biomaterials
that interface with biological systems, especially neural cells and tissues.
Session topics will highlight the latest efforts to achieve safe and effective
strategies to communicate with neurons. As such, the scientific content and
timing of the symposium are both appropriate. The list of confirmed invited
speakers includes prominent investigators in their respective areas of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural prostheses are critical in treating or assisting
people with disabilities of neural function. In spite of recent advances in
neural interface technology, engineering stable and reliable electronic-neural
tissue interfaces for long-term functionality remains a critical issue. The
challenge for material science is to design and develop advanced multifunctional
biomaterials to safely integrate with neural tissue with minimal biological
response. Furthermore, the implant should match the mechanical properties of
surrounding tissue to prevent injury due to micromotion and allow for adequate
exchange of nutrients and waste so that the surrounding tissue remains healthy.
This symposium will focus on the latest advances in biomaterials to
control/engineer neuron-electronic interfaces to produce stable and functional
implants with greater longevity than what is possible today.