* 1431661
* Collaborative Research: Databases for Many Majors: Customizable Visualizations to Improve STEM Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Don Goelman, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 145,211.00

Databases are important in many disciplines for the storage and retrieval of
information. However, database courses for undergraduates are typically only
available as an upper-level elective course for computer science or business
majors. This project builds on the successes of an earlier research project that
introduced database concepts to students in many majors through animations using
a visual and dynamic presentation with images and color. Visualization is an
effective technique for instruction because it engages student interest and
enhances their learning. In the earlier project, two animations were developed:
one to introduce what databases are and a second to introduce how to retrieve
the information stored in a database by asking questions, called queries. The
goal for this project is for educators in diverse academic disciplines to
incorporate the animations in their existing courses. To support this goal, the
animations are customizable to different examples for various majors. Another
goal is to develop an additional animation on how to organize data for storage
in a database using visual diagrams. An enhancement to all animations is planned
to provide a built-in quizzing mechanism so that the student can receive
immediate feedback on what they are learning. The quizzes encourage student to
learn and review the animation and do not to provide a grade to an instructor.
Another goal of the project is to develop visual tools to assist instructors
with the customization of the animation example to their discipline. As part of
this project, the animations will be customized to additional STEM domains,
specifically statistics, forensics, and ecology.

This research is expected to provide valuable contributions for improving STEM
learning by providing customizable animations with self-assessment that
introduce students from many majors to various database concepts. Another
significant contribution is the investigation of a customizable self-assessment
framework to incorporate within it the extensible animations for these database
concepts. This self-evaluation is a necessary component for providing formative
feedback to a student progressing thru these database concepts using the
animations to improve their comprehension. Finally, the ability to customize the
animations and the assessment questions is an important component of the
research. This customization process uses XML technologies within the
development environment, thus developing visual tools to assist in the
customization of the animations for other disciplines.