* 1431372
* RAPID: Field Test on Application of Microbial Calcite to Reduce Desertification
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Sangchul Bang, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 90,000.00

The main objective of this Rapid Research Award (RAPID) study is to identify the
feasibility of using natural fibers and bio-degradable synthetic fibers in
conjunction with microbial calcite to control airborne dusts caused by wind
erosion through field tests. The long-term goal is to apply this technology for
the reduction of the spread of global desertification that is being occurred in
many parts around the world. The field tests are therefore planned to be
conducted in desert environments, including two control sites, two sites with
sand mixed with different amount of medium only without bacteria, two sites with
sand mixed with different amount of medium containing bacteria, and four sites
with sand mixed with different amount of medium containing bacteria and natural
or bio-degradable synthetic fibers. Detailed field instrumentation will identify
the weight loss per unit surface area of desert sand by measuring the average
sand surface elevation change over a period of approximately four months.
Relative effectiveness of utilizing medium, bacteria, and fibers will then be
evaluated through a quantitative analysis of weight losses.

Dust suppression has been one of the most critical problems associated with
construction earthwork, quarries, open pit mining, unpaved roads, landfills,
etc. Currently available methods of dust suppression are predominantly chemical
or mechanical. By virtue, they are known to be associated with certain health
and environmental problems. Effective but safe dust control method will
therefore have significant positive impacts in many ways. This study introduces
a new, advanced and innovative approach for dust suppression that is
environmentally safe and friendly. Eventually, the developed technology is
expected to be used to reduce the spread of desertification that is currently
being occurred in many parts around the world. Results of this study may also
provide an important inroad for many difficult engineering problems that have
challenged engineers, including the expedition of soil consolidation,
improvement of extremely soft soils, reduction of soil permeability, containment
of contaminated aquifers, etc., using bio-based geotechnology.