* 1431112
* Promoting a Diverse Computing Workforce: Using National Survey Data to Understand Persistence Across Undergraduate Student Groups
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Burcin Tamer, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2020
* USD 783,973.00

The need for increased participation of individuals from underrepresented groups
in computer science is well documented. This project makes use of a large,
diverse data set to better understand the issues of identify and self-efficacy
that contribute to persistence in underrepresented groups in computer science.
The project capitalizes on an existing NSF-funded infrastructure that annually
surveys a national sample of students enrolled in a diverse array of computing
programs. Specifically, this project leverages the Computing Research
Association's (CRA) Center for Evaluating the Research Pipeline (CERP), which
collects large scale, cross sectional survey data concerning the experiences of
students pursuing computing career tracks from a variety of institution types
and from a wide array of demographic groups. By evaluating self-efficacy and
identity across a large and broad data set from a diverse population of students
and institutions, a much better picture of factors influencing student
persistence is being generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
interested in predicting persistence among a variety of student groups in
computing. The hypotheses that will guide this study are: (1) Self-efficacy,
occupational values, and social identity threat predict engagement and
persistence in computing, (2) Group differences in perceived threat will predict
group differences in self-efficacy and, subsequently, group disparities in
engagement and persistence, and (3) Social support will attenuate the negative
effects of self-efficacy and social identity threat on engagement and
prediction. Two surveys will be administered over the course of the project to
assess the proposed theoretical model of student persistence. The first survey
will be administered to a national sample of undergraduate and graduate
computing students that will measure engagement and intentions to persist in
computing and their hypothesized predictors. The second survey will measure
engagement and intentions to persist again (i.e., changes over time), as well as
actual persistence. A series of analyses will examine each of the hypotheses
implicated by the theorized model. A structural equation modeling will be used
to assess overall model fit and examine relations among
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research informs the development of best
practices and new interventions that positively impact retention of a wide
variety of underrepresented populations in computer science nationwide. This
project combines a strong theoretical background and unique social science
perspective with an unmatched data collection infrastructure provided by CERP.
Project evaluation is conducted by an advisory board throughout all phases of
the project. The objectives that will be measured are the scope of the
dissemination of the data produced and the number of interventions developed by
educators and administrators who use the data. Consistent contact with an
advisory board results in the collection of high caliber data from a diverse
population of students and the dissemination of results in a way that is a
accessible and useful to a general audience with interest in STEM education.