* 1431063
* Making words disappear or appear: A neurocognitive and behavioral investigation of effects of speech rate on spoken word perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Devin McAuley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2018
* USD 246,997.00

Understanding how humans comprehend speech is an unsolved and challenging
problem, in part because factors such as different speakers, dialects, and
speaking rates introduce a great deal of temporal and spectral variability into
the speech signal. The focus of this research is on the influence of temporal
context on perception of segments, syllables, and words. Results of the research
may offer insights into treatment of disorders that involve disruption of speech
rate (e.g., dysarthria, stuttering, Parkinson's disease, and aphasia), inform
approaches to improve speech technology applications (e.g., enhanced automatic
speech recognition, more natural sounding computer-generated speech), and lead
to new discoveries related to brain mechanisms involved in understanding spoken
language. The investigators will also involve students in the research,
including those from a primarily undergraduate institution collaborating on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will test different accounts of
temporal phenomena in the perception of speech. They propose two interacting
cognitive mechanisms controlling phenomena at lexical and phonetic levels, each
driven by a different neural timing mechanism. The hypothesis is that effects of
lexical rate primarily stem from top-down, speech-specific temporal
expectancies, while phonetic rate effects originate in bottom-up, transient
rhythmic expectations that are not specific to speech. This hypothesis will be
assessed using psychoacoustic studies, non-invasive measures of brain activity,
and theoretical modeling in order to identify the processing characteristics
revealed by neural representations of temporal properties of speech.