* 1431437
* Collaborative Research: The Ciliate Genomics Consortium Model for Sustainable Teaching-Research Integration
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Naomi Stover, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 77,911.00

Engaging more undergraduates in research experiences is a priority for improving
science education and course-based research experiences are a promising approach
to reaching larger numbers of students. The Ciliate Genomics Consortium (CGC) is
a student-centered, nation-wide collaborative learning community that uses
scalable functional genomics research for integration into courses in a variety
of biology sub-disciplines. The CGC employs an integrative teaching and research
model that combines both inquiry-driven class laboratory activities and
collaborative consortium pedagogies to advance faculty research. Previously, the
CGC developed modular course-based research curricula that, when adopted by the
research community using the ciliate Tetrahymena, effectively engaged greater
numbers of students in authentic research while advancing faculty research. This
work expands the consortium by creating new or improving tested curricula to
promote their broad adoption, creating more opportunities for teaching/research
integration. If successful, this project provide evidence that students in
classroom settings can contribute substantially to faculty and community
research priorities with a variety of model organisms.

To achieve project goals, the CGC will: 1) develop curricula adaptable to
faculty research interests, integrate consortium activities with research
community resources, and assess student learning gains; and 2) disseminate the
CGC model through training workshops and assess the impact on faculty teaching
and student learning. Curricula are disseminated through annual workshops and
test whether research communities can foster learning communities that promote
faculty adoption of classroom-based research as a high impact teaching practice.
In this model, members of a research community form a professional learning
community to enhance and apply best STEM teaching practices. To learn more about
the effectiveness of this approach for both students and educators, the project
will assess the pedagogy and report any conceptual gains this research-based
curriculum offers over other instructional models, and present limitations and
challenges observed. Several validated instruments will be used to measure
confidence and learning gains with newly developed assessments to evaluate
predicted cognitive gains. Cohorts of students at each institution are
identified, not engaged in the CGC curriculum, to control for instructor and
institutional factors.