* 1431903
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Tracks College Edition: Investigating Marine Migrations in a Changing Ocean
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ruth Krumhansl, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,440,201.00

In a world that is increasingly data-intensive, there is an urgent national need
to equip students with the scientific reasoning capacities and data inquiry
skills that are required in modern scientific occupations and the broader
workforce. To address this need, scientists, educators, and researchers at
Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC), the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, and Stanford University have been conducting research that has led
to the development of a unique Web interface called Ocean Tracks for use by high
school students. This interface provides easy access and a set of student-
friendly analysis tools to facilitate the study of large-scale data collected
through global oceanographic research projects and earth-orbiting satellites.
This project, The Ocean Tracks College Edition (OT-CE), will build and expand on
this prior work by developing new curriculum resources and active learning
experiences for students at the undergraduate level. OT-CE educational materials
will help students at diverse undergraduate institutions acquire critical
scientific inquiry and data analysis skills as they use the Ocean Tracks
interface to investigate questions of current scientific interest related to the
migrations and habitats of top marine predators in the Pacific Ocean. An
extensive research component will investigate the impact of OT-CE on student
learning and the relative effectiveness of OT-CE in online and face-to-face
formats. This research will build the knowledge base on how to support student
learning and skills development in working with large data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Tracks College Edition (OT-CE) project will
develop and research a learning model that allows undergraduate students to
engage in scientific practices using authentic data. The data are accessed using
the Ocean Tracks interface, a tool developed using an NSF DR K-12 exploratory
grant in 2012-2014. During the first year of the project, the OT-CE team will
gather baseline data on how oceanography and marine biology faculty at community
colleges and four-year undergraduate institutions across the country are using
authentic, large-scale databases in their undergraduate instruction, and how the
Ocean Tracks Web interface and curriculum could be designed to meet diverse
undergraduate teaching and learning needs. During the second year, the team will
co-develop and test curriculum materials and lab modules with two faculty
members and their undergraduate students at Palomar College, a two-year
community college, and Scripps Institution of Oceanography, a four-year research
university, both in California. Research will focus on collecting formative data
as faculty and students engage with online and face-to-face versions of OT-CE
materials. During the final year, the team will conduct a randomized experiment
of the revised online OT-CE curriculum with approximately 250 students at
Palomar College. An external summative evaluation will collect feedback from a
sample of undergraduate science faculty on the potential feasibility of
implementing online or face-to-face versions of OT-CE in their college courses.
The OT-CE project will produce new knowledge that can be generalized across
multiple fields about how to engage students in scientific inquiry with large-
scale datasets. By studying the impacts of OT-CE in both online and face-to-face
learning formats as well as at two-year and four-year undergraduate
institutions, the project will also yield important insights into the design of
undergraduate curricula that are effective in promoting data science skills in
varied educational delivery modes and among diverse undergraduate populations.