* 1431147
* Neural habituation: A unified account of visual identification dynamics across tasks
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* David Huber, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,281.00

People often fail to see things that appear right before their eyes. This can
occur in many different situations and for many different types of information,
ranging from failing to identify where or when something appeared to not
noticing that it appeared it all. This project aims to explain failures of
detection across a wide range of situations using a unified theoretical
framework. Understanding the mechanisms of visual detection failure and its role
in normal visual processing is important for many societal problems that involve
continuously monitoring visual information, including forensic applications. For
example, accurate screening of baggage at security checkpoints or monitoring
security video requires an understanding of when human detection is likely to
fail. Also, designing successful artificial vision systems requires an
understanding of why some types of detection failure are actually necessary for
the processing of continuous visual information. The brain's mechanism for
separating what is different from what is the same in the constant stream of
visual information may come at a cost in some situations. This is relevant to
designing real-time computer vision systems that can process ongoing visual
information accurately.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The theory under investigation in
this project is that visual detection failures are often due to neural
habituation, which occurs when a neural representation within a network becomes
temporarily over-activated after prolonged visual exposure. During the
habituation period, the neural representation is temporarily less accessible,
which can lead to a failure to consciously notice or detect that particular
piece of information if it appears again during the habituation period. The
hypothesis tested is that the brain uses transient neural habituation to track
information that is constant versus changing. For example, by becoming
habituated to recently viewed faces, the brain avoids confusing the attributes
of those faces with a currently viewed face, helping to tell people apart. The
cost is that people often fail to detect recently seen attributes if they re-
appear during the habituation period. To probe visual detection and detection
failures, scientists often use rapid serial visual presentation tasks, in which
multiple visual images are presented in quick succession. This project aims to
explain detection failure across a wide range of such tasks with a unified
theoretical model of neural habituation. This effort will increase current
understanding of how processes occurring at the level of neural networks can
explain processes occurring at the level of visual detection and awareness.