* 1431874
* Computational Creativity to Improve Computer Science Education for CS and non-CS Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Duane Shell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 873,250.00

Both computational and creative thinking are frequently cited as critical
workforce attributes. This project, at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, will
build on work previously funded under the TUES program (DUE-1122956 "Integrating
Computational and Creative Thinking"). The project team will produce a final
suite of validated, high quality Computational Creativity Exercises (CCEs) and
an associated computational creativity course. They will also carry out rigorous
research to understand the efficacy of the CCEs, how that is affected by
collaborative interactions and student learning processes, and the impact CCEs
have on enrollment and retention in computer science (CS) and science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses. CCEs provide an
opportunity to creatively solve problems that require a CS principle without
writing program code. The exercises encourage development of creative
competencies and have already been implemented across a set of introductory CS
courses that have common core content but are tailored for different student
populations based on their declared majors. In this new project the research
team will expand the dissemination and implementation of the CCEs and gain
increased understanding of the factors that influence efficacy of the exercises.
In addition to dissemination of the exercises and project outcomes, and a
workshop for interested faculty, the project impact will be further broadened
because the resulting Computational Creativity Course can be delivered via
distance education. In addition, the project team will update and enhance K-12
versions of the exercises that have been deployed on Google's Exploring
Computational Thinking site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundation of this
project is that both computational thinking and creative thinking are viewed as
cognitive tools. The CCEs are anchored in instructional design principles such
as problem-based learning, written analysis, and reflection. The CCEs correspond
to the learning principles of the Unified Learning Model, a learning theory
derived from research in cognitive neuroscience, cognitive science, and
psychology. The main contribution of this project will be to study what
implementation conditions impact exercise effectiveness, how student
characteristics impact exercise effectiveness, and why exercises produce an
effect on learning. There is an extensive evaluation plan that utilizes many
types of data including assessments embedded within the exercises, surveys and
focus groups, course and exercise grades, and metadata that will provide
measures of engagement with specific elements of course material. In addition to
project results and artifacts, the substantial database of data and metadata
collected will also be made available to other researchers.