* 1431149
* Crossroads Project- Intersecting Workshops, Learning Communities and Research in Biology to Promote Student Success in STEM
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Loretta Brancaccio-Taras, CUNY Kingsborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2020
* USD 577,634.00

Improving the success and retention of community college students in STEM,
especially underrepresented minority students, is crucial for increasing the
number of STEM graduates nationwide. CUNY Kingsborough Community College, which
serves a largely low income and highly diverse population of students, proposes
to develop, implement, and evaluate a comprehensive set of proven approaches
that target the major barriers of unpreparedness, lack of support networks,
financial burdens, and inability to connect STEM education with daily life for
students in their beginning biology courses. Improving student success in these
early biology courses will lead to improvements in retention and increase the
number of STEM students graduating and transferring to 4-year institutions.

Three types of activities are proposed for students selected to participate in
this program. First, a Strategies for Success in STEM workshop will be offered
prior to General Biology I to strengthen basic reading, math, and study skills.
Second, a community of biology learners will be established for students to
collaboratively review biological principles, build camaraderie, and interact
with faculty outside of the classroom setting. Third, a campus as a research lab
approach that leverages the existing campus aquarium, farm, beach, and marine
technology facilities will provide relevant research experiences and one-on-one
faculty mentoring. Support will also be provided for faculty to develop and
implement new pedagogies, receive training in assessment of classroom
activities, and participate in opportunities to communicate their work both on
campus and with the larger community. The goals are to improve student
performance and retention; foster greater understandings of nature, science, and
citizenship; and enhance the capacities of the faculty to engage students.

Each of these activities will be carefully evaluated through student interviews,
concept inventories, assignments in community of biology learner meetings that
explore misconceptions about biological concepts, and reflection papers about
their campus as a research lab experiences. Evaluation of faculty activities
will include interviews, surveys, focus groups, publications, presentations, and
tracking of faculty involved in the project. Progress will be measured by the
degree to which the project met its benchmarks. The mixed methods evaluation
will provide valuable information, models, and materials that other community
colleges can use as they struggle to improve STEM learning, retention, and
transfer for low-income and underrepresented minority students.