* 1431823
* Collaborative Research: Improving the recruitment and persistence of women in the Geosciences: Exploring deliberate mentoring approaches aimed at undergraduate students
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Sandra Clinton, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2020
* USD 260,389.00

Women continue to be largely under-represented in the geosciences. Female role
models and mentors can play an important role in the lives of female students,
especially when choosing and committing to a career path. This project is
providing a pathway for STEM undergraduate women into the geosciences through a
combination of formal and informal, professional and peer mentoring. The
research is also providing insight into why mentoring is beneficial to STEM
women. This project recruits first-year college women interested in the
geosciences (from any STEM major) from institutions in two geographic regions:
the Front Range of Colorado and the Carolinas. During their first year, these
women are invited to a regional mentoring workshop to i) learn more about
geoscience careers, ii) meet peers with similar academic interests, iii) gain
better self-awareness of their values, strengths, and abilities for a career in
the geosciences, and iv) expand their psychological, social and institutional
resources for a career in the geosciences. After the workshop, the program
participants have access to peer mentoring and resources through a web platform.
Through this platform, they are able to interact with each other via discussion
forums. In addition, they have access to in-person mentoring with female role
models via scheduled get-togethers at each institution. The research is focused
on quantifying i) the impact of the workshops and mentoring on participants'
intentions and behaviors related to geoscience career choices, ii) the impact of
the workshops and mentoring on the skills and resources participants use to
overcome career-related barriers, and iii) the key features of the workshops and
mentoring strategies that predict positive changes in participants' perceptions
of and beliefs about the geosciences.

Experimental research on the effectiveness of mentoring has been largely absent
from the mentoring literature. This project will fill the gap in the literature
by conducting a randomized experiment wherein undergraduate women at Colorado
State University and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte will be
matched based on their initial interest in geosciences, academic record, and
demographic characteristics. Matched pairs will be randomly assigned to
intervention (workshop and mentoring) or control conditions. Thereafter, women
in both groups will participate in a biannual web-based survey with questions
concerning their identification with math, their sense of potential fulfillment
in careers in the sciences in general and geosciences specifically, their gender
stereotypes of the geosciences, and their experiences with mentors. In addition,
interviews will be conducted with the women in the intervention group to examine
supports and challenges, and the role of the intervention in their interest
and/or persistence in geoscience educations and careers. Dissemination of
results will be accomplished through publication in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations at professional meetings.