* 1431906
* Collaborative Research: A New Computer Science Faculty Teaching Workshop
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Leo Porter, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Erlinger
* 05/31/2016
* USD 33,040.00

New Computer Science Faculty Teaching Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a collaboration between University of California-San Diego, Skidmore College,
Stanford University, and Georgia Tech. The experienced PI team will develop a
workshop for new computer science (CS) faculty, based on evidence-based
instructional practices. Most other STEM disciplines have some form of teaching-
specific workshop which addresses faculty teaching practices, informs new
faculty about evidence-based instructional practices, and encourages educational
research. This project will develop such a workshop model for computer science.
In addition to developing the workshop itself and running it three times, the
project team will form a Community of Practice among the workshop participants
which will help them develop teaching competence, enhance their view of teaching
as a scholarly activity, and encourage them to use evidence to evaluate the
effectiveness of their teaching practices. The long term impact of this project
can be substantial given the large number of students who will likely be taught
over the teaching careers of the workshop participants. This project will be
funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education through the IUSE
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will itself be built
around a number of teaching practices that have already been shown to be
successful, thereby giving participants firsthand experience as "students" with
practices they can later employ in their own classrooms. Workshop participants
will work with underlying theory about ways that effective teaching can draw out
student preconceptions, the importance to students of deep foundation knowledge
and a conceptual framework, and the development of metacognitive abilities. The
workshops will also draw on theory about growth and fixed mindsets and the
development of expertise. The specific pedagogic practices utilized will be peer
instruction and flipped classrooms, with additional use of live coding, pair
programming, discussion of how best to use teaching assistants, and discussion
of how technology can support learning. Online community support and the
development by each participant of a teaching portfolio will help solidify use
by participants of the practices they learn in the workshops. Project evaluation
will be carried out by the Western Michigan University Center for Research on
Instructional Change in Postsecondary Education. This will focus on the extent
to which the project positively impacts the participants? teaching expertise, to
what extent the in-person workshop and online community contribute to the
development of a community of practice, and how participation helps moderate the
barriers that often dissuade faculty from focusing on teaching.