* 1431407
* Effective Implementation of a Classroom Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE): Testing, Optimizing, and Extending a Bioinformatics Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sarah Elgin, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 625,046.00

A major goal of current efforts to improve life science education is to provide
opportunities for students to engage in original research and to strengthen the
analytical habits of mind that come with developing scientific questions and
seeking evidence to resolve them. The Genomics Education Partnership (GEP) was
founded to engage undergraduates in a genomics research project. While the
technology is new, the basic concept is students learn by doing, and student
excitement is generated when learners make novel contributions to the knowledge
base. During the past 8 years over 100 faculty have partnered with members of
the Biology Department, Computer Science Department, and The Genome Institute at
Washington University (WU) to bring a bioinformatics research experience into
the curriculum at their schools. This project capitalizes on the diversity of
partners and curricular approaches in the GEP and will identify best practices
for bioinformatics-based Classroom Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs).
The project will also develop, test and disseminate a curriculum aimed toward
the recruitment and retention of beginning students.

The GEP provides undergraduates with an opportunity to participate in a large-
scale genomics research project, currently on the structure and function of the
dot chromosome of Drosophila. Students engage in sequence improvement and
annotation of the dot chromosomes from different species, characterizing the
genes and deciphering the evolution of the chromosome. The goals of this project
are to (1) identify and test strategies to maximize the effectiveness of a
bioinformatics-based CURE, in the process generating a better understanding of
how research experiences impact student learning and self-identification as a
scientist, and (2) develop a modified version of the CURE curriculum and
engagement strategy to make bioinformatics-based genome research more accessible
to beginning college/university students. Results will be assessed using a mix
of student quizzes, surveys, interviews, focus groups, and measures of
persistence coupled with analysis of faculty journals, surveys, interviews, and
focused discussions. Lessons learned should contribute to foundational knowledge
on how to help our students to acquire the intellectual habits and self-
confidence that lead to success in the sciences.