* 1431020
* SBIR Phase II:  High-throughput Small RNA Sequencing
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Masoud Toloue, Bioo Scientific Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2017
* USD 899,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a technology to
accurately measure small RNA expression. This is an enabling life science
research tool. Small RNAs are ubiquitous gene regulators found in the body.
Products of the same microRNA gene that vary in length by one or two nucleotides
may be involved in a host of diseases, including cancer. The value for
developing a method to measure the true profile of microRNAs in a sample would
be immense for the research community studying transcriptional regulation, and
would open the doors to those interested in drug development and diagnostics.
The goal of this proposal is to develop a library preparation kit for non-biased
small RNA libraries for Next Generation sequencing. These kits will increase the
quality and rate at which global microRNA profiles may be determined for
research and clinical applications.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop next generation sequencing
technology for small RNA more quantitative and less biased. High throughput
sequencing has transformed the landscape of genomic research with its ability to
produce gigabases of data in a single run. This has enabled researchers to
perform genome wide and high depth sequencing studies that would normally not be
possible. Despite this capacity, amplification artifacts introduced during
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays increase the chance of duplicate reads
and uneven distribution of read coverage. Accurate profiling using deep
sequencing also has been undermined by biases with over- or under-represented
microRNAs. The presence of these biases significantly limits the incredible
sensitivity and accuracy made possible by next generation sequencing. The goal
of this proposal is to develop novel bias-reducing technology for making small
RNA libraries. The proposed kits and protocols will increase the rate at which
global microRNA profiles can be determined, and between-sample and within-sample
differences (as well as newly discovered small RNAs) can be subsequently
validated. This product will result in a major shift in the way small RNA
sequencing is performed, and will pave the way for the discovery of new small
RNAs.