* 1431566
* Collaborative Research/Workshop: Educational Needs and Opportunities in Additive Manufacturing; Arlington, Virginia; April 10-11, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2015
* USD 42,000.00

This Collaborative Research award supports the conduct of a workshop to engage
participants from academia, industry, and government in discussions related to
preparing and enhancing the Additive Manufacturing (AM) workforce through novel
educational partnerships. While several workshops have been held to discuss
advances in AM technology and research, there has not yet been a dedicated
workshop to address the gaps in the workforce's AM knowledgebase. The
workforce's limited knowledge of the capabilities of AM technologies is a
critical barrier to widespread AM adoption. The intellectual merit of the
workshop lies in developing novel educational partnerships to prepare and
enhance the AM workforce. The workshop will identify synergies between existing
AM efforts (e.g., those by America Makes, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, and American Society for Testing and Materials) and funding
opportunities to realize new educational partnerships to prepare and enhance the
AM workforce.

Advancing the understanding, utilization, and adoption of Additive Manufacturing
will require an interdisciplinary workforce that has the knowledgebase for
synthesizing new materials, integrating advanced process controls, establishing
quality control standards, and formulating new design and communication
methodologies. The workshop will provide a strong foundation for preparing the
workforce for the paradigm shift in design and production that is enabled
through AM technology. By working with a variety of non-profit organizations and
government agencies, the workshop will identify new ways to work effectively
across a wide spectrum of educational needs--graduate, undergraduate, community
colleges, technician training, industry practitioners--while harnessing the
excitement of the Maker Movement and numerous K-12 outreach efforts involving 3D
printing that are fueling the science, technology, engineering and mathematics
career pipeline. The workshop organizers will leverage collaborations with
America Makes (the National Additive Manufacturing Innovation Institute) and the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers to disseminate workshop outcomes to
students, faculty, and industry practitioners.