* 1431649
* Can Student Characteristics be Used to Effectively Identify Students At-Risk in the Online STEM Environment?
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Claire Wladis, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 02/28/2019
* USD 719,108.00

The EHR Core Research Program funds proposals that will help synthesize, build
and/or expand research foundations in the following areas of STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) Education: STEM learning, STEM
learning environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation
in STEM. The STEM education pipeline narrows significantly in college. Community
colleges serve some of the most diverse audiences, and are increasingly using
online learning as a cheaper way to provide STEM instruction; additionally
Massive Open Online Courses (commonly known as MOOCs) are being proposed as
alternatives to credit-bearing instruction. Prior research shows that online
learning environments impact different kinds of students differently. This
research project based at a community college asks questions such as the
following: Is this move towards STEM learning online at the community college
level likely to impact underrepresented groups more than others, and will it
have positive or negative impact? Can we identify which students are best served
by online vs. face-to-face instruction or conduct interventions for students
'at-risk' in the online environment? This project aims to answer these questions
by using two important datasets: one is a dataset to be assembled from six
schools in the CUNY (City University of New York) system, which serves one of
the most diverse student bodies in the country, and in which over 50,000
students have taken STEM courses online. The second is a large-scale national
dataset from the National Center for Education Statistics which contains
demographic, academic, personal, and financial
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only a small proportion of the research
conducted on online learning has controlled for student self-selection into
online courses in a rigorous way. This study will explore the extent to which
students with particular characteristics fare better or more poorly not only in
online STEM courses, but in college afterwards, with a matched comparison to
students who take comparable face-to-face STEM courses. The project uses mixed
methods. Quantitative analysis will include principal component factor analysis,
logistic regression, linear regression, analysis of variance and covariance,
generalized linear mixed models, propensity score matching, and sensitivity
analysis to examine course and college outcomes including course retention
(attendance through the end of the tenth week of classes) and successful course
completion (earning a C- or better in the course), whether students re-enrolled
in the semester immediately following the course, and persistence at one, two,
three, and six years. Overall grade point average, the number of credits
accumulated, and transfer and graduation rates at these intervals will also be
used. Independent variables and covariates to be modeled include online vs.
hybrid vs. offline STEM course format, and a variety of demographic variables
including effort capital, social capital, cultural capital, financial capital,
human capital, and habitus. Qualitative interviews and in-depth surveys will be
used to explore the trends found in the large scale datasets, and a survey will
be conducted specifically with online instructors in the CUNY system. Data will
be explored to model what variables contribute to differential 'risk' online.
The intellectual merit of the project rests on advancing our understanding of
how online options differentially help or hinder different kinds of
postsecondary STEM students. For broader impacts, the results of the model could
be used as the basis for implementation of targeted interventions, either by
providing at-risk students with additional mentoring, tutoring, technical
support, advisement, or training in skills and behaviors necessary to succeed in
an online course; or by advising them to enroll in a comparable face-to-face
course instead. These policy implications will be discussed at a culminating
one-day conference on elearning hosted by the project.