* 1431725
* Exploring Potential Learning Trajectories for the Energy Concept in Middle School
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Joseph Krajcik, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,799,754.00

Energy is a critical concept in every branch of science, yet relatively little
is known about how to best build students conceptions of energy over time so
that their understanding becomes more integrated and more useful for making
sense of phenomena. Some of the most pressing social and environmental issues
that face the nation (e.g., energy conservation, climate change, biodiversity
loss, and natural resource economics) are fundamentally related to energy.
Recent work has shown that effective K-12 energy instruction can play a crucial
role in helping students develop an understanding of energy that is
scientifically accurate, useful for interpreting everyday events and valuable
for solving problems, but the lasting impact of different instructional
approaches is not well understood. The project investigates three promising
approaches to energy instruction in an effort to understand how each affects
middle school student understanding of energy and the ability to engage in
subsequent energy-related learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate
alternative approaches to energy instruction, two research questions are
investigated: (1) How do three different approaches to teaching energy lead to
different trajectories in the development of students' understanding? and (2)
How can metrics be designed to track the development of students' knowledge of
energy during middle school? The first research question is addressed by
researching the impacts of three instructional units using different
instructional approaches, and gathering data (student interviews, classroom
observations, and written assessments and artifacts) intended to reveal
differences amongst the approaches. Middle school teachers will teach each of
the three units. To assess the reliability of results and track students over
time, the study includes two cohorts of students, separated by a year. The
second research question will be addressed through the development of new
instructional metrics in order to track student development across time. Unlike
assessments that reveal whether students can recall or directly apply key ideas
about energy, the new metrics will be designed to track whether and how students
connect energy ideas as they reason in new contexts. Further, the assessments
will be designed to investigate the impact of student sense of self-efficacy on
the ability to use energy concepts effectively and in new settings. The research
will contribute to understanding of how to best teach middle school students
about energy and how new assessments can be developed that focus on the types of
learning that will likely set the stage for productive future learning and
citizenship.