* 1431984
* Designing and Studying of Maker Oriented Learning to Transform Advanced Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gregory Abowd, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 718,753.00

In a rapidly changing world, it is essential that students develop the ability
to transfer and apply their learning in new contexts. This project, at Georgia
Institute of Technology, will explore the incorporation of Maker activities into
upper-level computer science courses. The project hypothesis is that maker
activities will improve knowledge transfer, and lead to stronger undergraduate
STEM communities who can better carry out interdisciplinary work. The PIs are
concerned with the physical environment that is used for maker-oriented courses,
and the development of a physical environment that will facilitate learning in
addition to making. Project outcomes will include a model for the physical
environment and artifacts that will support maker-oriented learning, as well as
a framework for maker-oriented learning that builds upon previous work on
problem-based learning and studio-learning environments. This project will be
funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education through the IUSE and S-STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will incorporate maker-
oriented learning into two advanced computer science courses, Mobile and
Ubiquitous Computing, and Human-Computer Interaction. The project team will
utilize Design-based Research (DbR) methods to determine how maker-oriented
learning environments facilitate skills transfer to new contexts, how maker-
oriented learning activities encourage reflection in computer science learning
environments, and how the structure of maker-oriented learning approaches impact
the development of a community of learners. The project team will use
observations, interviews, surveys, and data collected on tools and equipment to
aid their iterative course design process. This data will also be provided to
the project evaluator, SageFox Consulting Group. The evaluation team will use
the ISE Informal Education and Outreach Framework, focusing on factors including
understanding, engagement, attitudes, behavior, and skills, ultimately reporting
on both the progress of the project team as well as the overall effect of the
educational intervention on the students.