* 1431631
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Project TECHNO:  TECHnology-Centered Mathematical NOticing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Cindy Jong, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 07/31/2019
* USD 209,012.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE) Program, this project will address the national need for high
quality mathematics teaching in elementary schools. In particular, the project
will represent a research and materials development effort aimed at helping
prospective elementary teachers to develop responsive teaching skills and
practices in the areas of numeracy and early-algebraic thinking. These
responsive teaching practices, referred to as professional noticing (of
children's mathematical thinking) are comprised of three interrelated
components; namely, (i) observing and attending to the child's mathematical
actions and words, (ii) interpreting these actions and words with respect to a
particular developmental progression, and (iii) responding with an appropriate
instructional or diagnostic decision. Researchers from Northern Kentucky
University (lead institution), Morehead State University and the University of
Kentucky will collaborate to develop online and classroom materials and conduct
research to push the field of professional noticing forward to provide teachers
of elementary mathematics with valuable tools to help improve teaching and
student learning. The project will build on earlier work by the investigators
regarding prospective teachers' development of professional noticing skills. The
previous project focused exclusively on noticing with respect to individual
children's numeracy strategies; whereas, this project will investigate
prospective elementary teachers' development of professional noticing skills in
group and whole-class contexts in a more sophisticated, but essential
mathematical domain - early algebraic thinking. The project will also engage
personnel from Appalachian State University, Eastern Kentucky University and
Western Kentucky University to use the materials developed and provide important
feedback. Each university has committed to institutionalize the project
activities as part of their teacher education programs. In connection with this,
the project will directly impact over six-hundred (600) prospective (pre-
service) teachers across the State of Kentucky as well as parts of North
Carolina during the period of the grant funding. These teachers, in turn, will
collectively have impact on thousands of elementary students throughout their
teaching careers. Making the developed and well-researched materials available
online will further enhance the overall impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly speaking, professional noticing is an
ability to recognize and act on key indicators significant to one's profession.
In connection with this, the Project Team will develop online and in-class
modules for teaching professional noticing to pre-service elementary teachers
(PSETS) and, in turn, will investigate research questions related to the extent
to which the innovative learning experience for pre-service elementary teachers
(PSETs) focused on the professional noticing of children's numeracy and early-
algebraic thinking will enhance PSETs' teaching and observation skills. The
research questions include: (1) To what extent can teacher educators facilitate
the development of PSETs' capacity to professionally notice children's
mathematical thinking in the context of early numeracy in individual settings?
(2) To what extent can teacher educators facilitate the development of PSETs'
capacity to professionally notice children's mathematical thinking in the
context of algebraic thinking in whole class settings? (3) To what extent do
PSETs' professional noticing skills in individual settings relate to their
professional noticing skills in whole class settings? (4) To what extent do
PSETs' professional noticing skills relate to PSETs' mathematical knowledge for
teaching and attitudes towards mathematics? (5) What differences (if any) occur
in PSETs' professional noticing skills, attitudes towards mathematics, and
mathematical knowledge for teaching when professional noticing modules are
administered via an online format when compared to a traditional face-to-face
format? Researchers will use proprietary video-based professional noticing
measures to determine changes in PSET skills in this area and will administer
according to a pre-, mid-, and post-assessment design with a video-based
professional noticing assessment. Mathematical knowledge for teaching and
attitudes towards mathematics will be assessed on the same time schedule.
Assessment instruments will be the LMT-TKAS and the Mathematics Experiences and
Conceptions (MECS) instrument, and interviews also will be conducted with PSETs
to understand their experiences with the modules and their professional noticing
skills.