* 1431172
* CAREER: Ruthenium(II)-Cobalt(II)/Cobalt(III) Mixed-Metal Complexes for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production from Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Alvin Holder, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 275,317.00

Through this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Alvin A. Holder of the Old Dominion University
(ODU) will be applying his expertise in the area of catalysis towards the
development of photocatalysts. The work targets the important problem of
developing improved catalysts capable of photolytic hydrogen generation in
aqueous media. It will address the synthesis and characterization of
ruthenium(II)-cobalt(II)/cobalt(III) mixed-metal complexes, and investigate
their photocatalytic properties using homogeneous schemes. These photocatalytic
schemes will exploit reductive quenching pathways that should lead to
significantly enhanced catalytic turnovers. In addition, Professor Holder will
integrate the chemistry of energy and catalysis into undergraduates and graduate
courses at ODU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will make
key contributions to the fundamental knowledge base of converting solar energy
to environmentally-friendly, carbon-free, combustible chemical fuels. In
addition, the interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work is expected to
impact diverse fields, including synthetic chemistry, analytical chemistry,
photochemistry, materials chemistry, electrochemistry, and catalysis. The
research further involves several teaching points which will be integrated into
educational activities at all levels, and involve groups generally
underrepresented in science and technology.