* 1431148
* Building a Unified Research Agenda for K-12 Online Learning Environments to Improve STEM Outcomes for Students with Learning Disabilities and Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Marianne Bakia, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 661,146.00

Students with learning disabilities and those with autism spectrum disorder
represent the largest and fastest growing groups of students with disabilities
in U.S. public schools. These students are underperforming in STEM achievement
as compared to their non-disabled peers, and these students are underprepared
for college entry and success. This capacity building project will contribute to
foundational knowledge about what is already known, and what needs to be
studied, about K-12 online STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) education for students with learning disabilities and those with
autism spectrum disorder. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leaders at SRI
International will engage expert researchers to conduct a synthesis and gap
analysis about K-12 online STEM education for students with learning
disabilities and those with autism spectrum disorder. The results of the
synthesis and gap analysis will be published and made available to the public.
The research team will use the results from the synthesis and gap analysis to
create a research agenda about K-12 online STEM education for students with
learning disabilities and those with autism spectrum disorder. Expert education
researchers will engage in debate about the components of the research agenda,
which will also be published and made available to the public. The agenda will
help education researchers identify future education research pathways and
priorities focused on K-12 online STEM learning for students with and without
disabilities, a rapidly growing practice in our nation's schools.