* 1431324
* Cognitive and neurocognitive individual differences in native and nonnative language processing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2018
* USD 407,876.00

High proficiency in multiple languages provides economic advantages, as
linguistic flexibility in business and government discourse facilitates
communication in an increasingly globalized world. However, the ability to reach
high levels of proficiency and fluency in a second language (L2) during
adulthood is notoriously variable, with individuals showing marked differences
in the rate of L2 acquisition and the eventual level of proficiency. A complete
understanding of the roots and implications of these differences - including
documenting individual differences in the brain mechanisms supporting nonnative
language comprehension and learning - is crucial for the development of targeted
language instruction methods and interventions. Such targeted interventions can
lead to tangible gains in language learning outcomes. Moreover, emerging
research now shows that even monolinguals show systematic, qualitative
individual differences in the neural mechanisms responsible for language
comprehension. However, as with L2 learning, the causes and consequences of
these differences are poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will use a multidimensional approach to investigate individual differences in
language comprehension and language learning across several populations:
monolinguals, classroom-instructed L2 learners of Spanish, and Spanish-English
bilinguals in the United States. The research will combine novel behavioral and
brain-based measures of language processing, cognitive executive functions, and
cortical organization for language. The investigators will link these with
measures of language proficiency and language experience to isolate the
cognitive, neural, linguistic, and experiential factors related to differences
in how individuals build interpretations during the course of sentence
comprehension. In particular, electroencephalographic recordings during language
comprehension and executive processing will allow the investigators to document
how these processes unfold in the brain millisecond-by-millisecond. Novel
multivariate statistical models will be used to identify factors related to how
different individuals make use of semantic and grammatical cues during reading.
The aim is to elucidate the cognitive, neural, and linguistic bases of
individual differences in language learning and language comprehension, and tie
them closely to a neurobiological model of language. As such, the findings will
have clear and practical implications for language training.