* 1431015
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of high-volume manufacturing processes for variable focus TAG Lens technology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Christian Theriault, TAG Optics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 700,044.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in developing the world?s first ultra-high-
speed variable focus optical lens that can be fully mass-produced with low
manufacturing costs and high yield. The company?s proprietary tunable acoustic
gradient lens technology provides versatile solutions for unmet market needs
across multiple sectors, including health, security, and manufacturing. While
valuable as an add-on to existing systems for imaging and processing
applications, its use can be extended to other applications such as point of
care medical diagnostic imaging and consumer optics/electronics. The proposed
second generation lens is expected to grow the existing market for variable
focus optical lens by a factor of 5 to 10 and help transform this small business
into a major original equipment components manufacturer and
supplier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to engineer a high
volume manufacturing process that will increase product yield, reproducibility,
and reliability for a novel ultra-high-speed variable focus device. The
company?s patented tunable acoustic gradient lens technology uses sound to shape
light, which enables the change of focal position without any moving parts at
rates that are 3 orders of magnitude faster than competing technologies. The
innovation is based on propagation of sound waves that can be controlled by the
modification of the index of refraction by piezoelectric elements within the
liquid lens. Phase II plan is focused on engineering and optimizing new lens
designs that preserve the fundamental functionality and benefits of the first
generation lens while also capturing the unique and industry leading benefits of
the company's core technology. It also includes semi-automated prototype
fabrication, careful system optimization, analysis and testing that pave the
path to a next generation product that can be scaled up for mass-production.