* 1431139
* RAPID: Emergency Evacuations and Risk Communication During the 2013 Colorado Flood
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Hao-Che Wu, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 10/31/2014
* USD 39,162.00

The purposes of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) are to better understand
households' immediate response to a flash flood disaster in the U.S. and the
short-lived aspects of disaster response data (evacuees' lasting memory).
Scientists and emergency managers traditionally have used 100-year flood maps to
demonstrate the occurrence of a major flood; nevertheless, flood risk is not
well understood by the general public. In addition, the time required to
mobilize the resources for a major post-disaster survey delays the collection of
data from households but little is known about whether people's recollections of
their immediate pre-impact beliefs and actions change over time. This study will
use a flexible interview method and household surveys to acquire the data. The
researchers will conduct field work at Colorado State (emergency manager
interviews and household surveys). The interviews will help the researchers to
validate the survey instruments and assess emergency managers' perspectives and
experiences in the flood response. Three thousand households in the flooded
areas will be identified through a random process. These households will receive
the 2013 Colorado Flood response surveys during March and September 2014.
Statistical analyses will be used to analyze the survey data. The researchers in
this study expect to find useful emergency information that could affect the
content of warning messages; risk area residents' perceptions of disaster
information source and flood threat; and the speed of warning receipt and
evacuation response. In addition, the result of this study can also provide
empirical evidence on the recall of disaster response
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will benefit
emergency planning professionals in the United States, as well as throughout the
world by providing important tests of emergency response theories, valuable
information on methods of disaster response recall information for disaster
researchers, and valuable practical information for emergency managers. In
particular, identification of factors that affect people's responses to floods
will improve the ability of government agencies to provide the general public
with more useful information about how to protect themselves and their families.
The interview and survey processes will also have broader impacts on the
investigators' and their research assistants' research, teaching, and learning
experiences. This project will provide graduate assistants at SHSU an
opportunity to participate in data collection, coding, analysis, and analytical
report writing. Furthermore, the emergency manager contacts made during the
field work will catalyze the investigators' future collaborations and graduate
students' job prospects.