* 1431350
* Enhancing Student Success in Biology, Chemistry, and Physics by Transforming the Faculty Culture
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 741,073.00

This project is initiating transformative change in the faculty culture and
behavior regarding teaching and learning within and across the departments of
Biology, Chemistry, and Physics. The success of this project is being judged and
guided by the resulting enhanced student learning and improved success in
completing eight gatekeeper courses in these three departments. The key
processes are coordinated activities that will encourage and support a broad
collection of faculty instructors in these disciplines to utilize the full
breadth of research-based instructional strategies in their teaching of these
lower division courses. Individual participating faculty instructors are
choosing and adapting their own research-based strategies. In this way they are
participating directly in this key aspect of faculty culture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two university resources are particularly important in
supporting this change. Technical guidance and assistance are being provided by
departmental Teaching and Learning Liaisons (TLLs). The TLLs are faculty members
within each department who have received special training and are prepared to
encourage and support the department and individual faculty members as they
increasingly incorporate research-based instructional strategies into a core of
8 gatekeeper courses. Secondly, a unique faculty development component is being
tailored by the Center for the Enhancement of Teaching and Learning (CET&amp;L)
to provide support both for the Teaching and Learning Liaisons (TLLs) and for
individual faculty. This project is proceeding with the full support of the
Provost (who is a PI), the Dean of Arts and Sciences, and the three department
heads. Change strategies are being detailed that will respond differently and
appropriately for the local environments found within specific departments.
Collectively these efforts will provide increasingly supportive environments or,
viewed more broadly, an increasingly supportive ecosystem that will be the
foundation for sustainable increased and increasingly effective use of research
based instructional strategies. A series of assessments will guide and improve
the impact of this effort, and provide useful research knowledge about the
effectiveness of this approach to change.