* 1431503
* Examining Motivation in Engineering Writing Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2017
* James Borgford-Parnell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 09/30/2017
* USD 183,168.00

Writing is an important skill for both academic and professional engineering
success. While low student motivation to master engineering writing is an
impediment to the success of engineering writing classes, it has not been
addressed much in engineering educational research. This project will conduct a
mixed methods research study on student motivation and attitudes on engineering
writing and then use the results of the study to a create tool for instructors
to apply these findings. Research-based insight into student motivation, paired
with an opportunity to learn about motivational psychology, will provide
instructors with both the foundation and tools to understand and positively
influence student motivation and develop student-centered learning in
engineering writing classes.

The first objective of this project is to research the motivation of students of
engineering writing classes to provide an evidence-based portrait of engineering
writing students' motivation and influential experiences. In the second project
objective, personas of engineering writing student motivation will be created as
faculty development tools to foster the translation of this research into the
enrichment of the teaching practices of engineering educators. Personas are
brief narratives that distill research into a set of brief fictional
personalities and narratives, which reduce the abstraction of user data by
illustrating it with a human character, and have been used in the software
development and product design. This research will build on existing
motivational theories, including Expectancy Value Theory, and research to gain
knowledge on student motivation in engineering writing as well as related work
on the development and use of personas to bridge the research-to-practice gap in
engineering teaching and learning. In this mixed methods research study, the
Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ) will be used to survey a
broad and diverse cross-section of engineering writing students. In addition,
the project team will conduct semi-structured interviews to further examine the
attitudes, concepts, and experiences that shape student writing motivation, with
the aim of identifying pedagogies that will provide positive influence on
students' motivation and learning. The development of personas based on the
survey and interview data and dissemination through faculty development
workshops and support will help translate this research into practice and
therefore impact students' motivation favorably. The evaluation plan, which
includes formative and summative, will help ensure that this work has broader
impact beyond the institution and can be adapted at other institutions.