* 1431013
* SBIR Phase II:  Reimagining Sketch in the Digital Age
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Aaron Isaksen, Mental Canvas, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,220,673.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project results from the development of a new class of
graphical-media-design system that lies between today's 2D digital paint systems
and 3D computer-aided design systems. This technology will allow architects,
engineers, artists, and school children to create compelling 3D experiences
directly from their drawings without extensive training. Furthermore, it will
accelerate the creation of interactive 3D content and significantly reduce the
time, cost and expertise currently required to create it. By bridging the gap
between traditional drawings and 3D modeling, this project will provide the
unique ability to reuse and "reproject" drawn strokes, thus enabling the
creation of expressive 3D drawings with minimal effort. The technology developed
in this project will help lower the barrier and generate new business
opportunities in content creation for electronic publishing and for other
creative professionals, such as architects, designers, and ad-agency art
directors. Finally, this project includes specific outreach activities, through
collaboration with the American Museum of Natural History, that will provide
unique educational services to the local community, while simultaneously
introducing this new technology to the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on making the
creation of this new type of graphical media as intuitive and fluid as paper and
pencil. This Phase II project will support system improvements - including user-
interface improvements - to simplify 3D navigation for the consumers of this
media. This will be needed for using this media in digital children's picture
books, which have already been identified as early adopters of this technology
as well as an important market. Another technical objective will be to develop a
hybrid vector-raster representation, which will provide a wider range of
artistic expression, while improving rendering performance of large scenes. A
third objective is to develop stroke deformation algorithms to support direct
manipulation of objects and characters to provide sketch-driven animation
capabilities.