* 1431926
* Development and implementation of the MORE Pedagogy in Introductory Organic and Biochemistry Labs
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Donald Wink, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 218,988.00

This IUSE project seeks to develop a new inquiry-based undergraduate laboratory
curriculum for General Organic and Biochemistry (GOB) courses at the University
of Illinois at Chicago. The proposed courses are intended to prepare students
for careers in healthcare professions by promoting critical thinking and
connecting science to everyday life and human health. This goal will be
accomplished through the creation or revision of 12 experiments that will
utilize conceptual learning, as described by the MORE (Model-Observe-Reflect-
Explain) framework. This approach encourages students to create a conceptual
model in a pre-lab exercise, observe chemical phenomena in lab that confirm or
refute their model, reflect upon their original model, and explain the chemical
phenomena. The learning materials developed will be used by a diverse, urban
commuter student body and should be transferrable to other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key outcomes for this project will be twofold; (a)
relevant lab procedures taught within the MORE framework and (b) associated
training and support materials. Through formative and summative evaluation the
investigators will analyze survey data of students related to their confidence
and ability to understand course content objectives, as well as to the
usefulness of an array of support materials and activities. Findings are
expected to inform and broaden the knowledge base regarding how the
contextualization of chemistry concepts aids student learning and the conditions
that promote success for students. In turn, such results will help inform other
institutions seeking to undertake similar efforts. Feedback from TAs (surveys
and interviews) will also be used to adjust course implementation, to determine
the role that teaching assistants play in delivering and implementing an
inquiry-based curriculum, and to understand their influence on student learning.
Dissemination will involve publication of manuscripts on the survey tool that
has been created for this work and on the adaptation of the MORE pedagogy to the
GOB sequence.