* 1431292
* Collaborative Research:  Multimedia modules for physics instruction in a flipped classroom course for pre-health and life science majors.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Charles Thomas, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 39,956.00

The President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) points out
that the first two years in college are the most critical for recruitment and
retention of students in STEM fields and advocates widespread adoption of
empirically validated practices to address concerns. A concern is that the
medical field has and continues to evolve rapidly and physics education has not
kept abreast of these changes. Introductory physics for the life sciences (IPLS)
courses are outdated and pre-medical education is perceived to be neither
coherent nor well-structured. There is currently little research-validated
teaching material available for undergraduate medical physics courses
emphasizing the key physics concepts underlying clinical and biomedical research
equipment. There is general agreement that the science content in the current
curriculum needs revision in order to improve the education of future healthcare
professionals on relevant science competencies, skills, and learning
habits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is timely and nicely complements
other national efforts designed to create and share effective models for
teaching interdisciplinary science. Project NEXUS (National Experiment in
Undergraduate Science Education) a four year project, funded by HHMI in which
four universities together will create a curriculum that connects biology with
physics, mathematics and chemistry. A session at the American Association of
Physics Teachers (AAPT)Annual Meeting entitled "Physics in a Biological Context"
included a summary of "Three Opportunities to Explore the Intersection of
Biology and Physics: Research and Education" together with a report from an NSF
funded March 2014 AAPT Conference on Introductory Physics for the Life
Sciences(IPLS), which resulted in recommendations on many topics related to IPLS
courses including enhancing IPLS courses with research-based instructional
strategies. A 2014 Gordon Research Conference on Physics Research and Education
was focused on "The Complex Intersection of Biology and Physics."&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In response to these challenges,the project team from Portland State
University,the Oregon Health and Science University and North Dakota State
University will in this 3-year project,develop research-validated multimedia
materials for introductory physics for life sciences (IPLS) courses to be
offered to life science majors and pre-health students. Ten multimedia modules
on the biomedical applications of physics will be developed. These modules will
demonstrates how physicians and biomedical researchers integrate fundamental
physics concepts into the current medical technologies they utilize in their
profession. Special attention will be paid to developing materials that can
assist physics instructors in learning unfamiliar biomedical topics. Alternative
approaches identified by physics education research will be utilized to lead to
better learning outcomes, including: flipped classroom instruction, peer lead
team learning and interactive lecture demonstrations. The proposed course will
include these innovations and provide an approach to physics that is designed to
be useful to students in their later careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A pivotal
research component of this project will be the assessment of the effectiveness
of the material. Extensive formative and summative assessment will be completed
to measure impacts on student learning with in-class assessment tools. Formative
assessment will be informed by the frequent and ongoing monitoring of student
learning that provides rapid feedback to students on their performance. Online
free lecture questions will be designed as formative assessments to provide
feedback for the instructor about their students' understanding of biomedical
and physics content of the expert videos. The course assessment involves several
main activities that include the analysis of log data using the smartPhysics
Framework (spF), pre-post-knowledge tests of individual modules and the complete
Physics in Medicine course, a self-reflection assignment for students, classroom
observations and videotaped exit interviews. The effect of instruction on
attitudes in all introductory general physics courses and Physics in Medicine
will be investigated using the Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science Survey
(CLASS), student surveys and videotaped focus group interviews. Revisions to
materials after each implementation will ensure effectiveness and research-
validated content at the end of the funding. Two intentional feedback loops
providing data about the course materials will be built into the project. The
first will be an expert review of the course modules by advisory board members.
The second will be the suite of assessment activities built into and being
developed for the project. The evaluator will utilize information from the
knowledge pre-post tests, log data, memory, matrices, and minute papers to
evaluate how students are tracking on course objectives and what areas of
improvement are necessary. Each of these feedback loops will require monitoring
of both timeliness and quality of feedback. The evaluator will work with the
project leadership to improve feedback mechanisms and other aspects of the
project plan as needed, in response to formative evaluation findings. Assessment
materials are a key product and will be shared together with instructional
materials with the education community.