* 1431016
* SBIR Phase II:  A High Performance Environment Resistant Inertial Measurement Unit for Commercial Navigation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Sangwoo Lee, ePack, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 908,753.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is an environment resistant inertial
measurement unit (eIMU) for commercial/industrial applications. This eIMU is a
miniaturized navigation device that will enable enhanced GPS navigation down to
centimeter accuracy and will replace GPS when it is not available or reliable.
The eIMU will enable navigation directly to specific items in malls, grocery
stores or department stores. It will also enable reliable navigation for police
or fire fighters inside buildings in emergency situations. This navigation chip
would enable a wide range of precision manufacturing and assembly robots. It
would also enable the navigation of autonomous vehicles that can be used by
police and homeland security in addition to commercial applications, such as
real estate and smart agriculture. The eIMU could also be used to help map mines
and to aid in oil exploration. In the medical industry, the eIMU could be used
for surgical robots and wheel chairs. Scientific applications include
miniaturize micro- and nano- satellites; and autonomous vehicles for underwater
exploration. Overall, the eIMU targets making precision navigation small and
affordable enough to be used throughout our society for enhanced industrial,
security, scientific and personal applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops a new environment
resistant inertial measurement unit (eIMUs). Inertial measurement units (IMUs)
consist of accelerometers and gyroscopes which work together for navigation and
orientation measurements. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) inertial
(motion) sensors are now used for a wide range of consumer applications, but
can?t be used for precision navigation because of their extreme environmental
sensitivity. In particular, the measurement (bias) stability of these sensors is
extremely sensitive to temperature, humidity and stress?making it very
challenging to us them for precision navigation and machine control. The
proposed eIMU will address this by building a micromachined physics package
around the sensitive MEMS sensors in order to actively control their environment
independent of environmental factors. The technical challenges include: i)
developing a process for reliably assembling the IMU dies in to the physics
package; ii) optimizing the physics package for temperature stability and in
order to prevent it from introducing any noise to the IMU and; iii) optimizing
software algorithms for reducing the power required for environmentally
stabilizing the IMU. This packaging technology will also be generic and
applicable to other sensor systems and technologies.