* 1431518
* Mixing in the Equatorial Atlantic's Cold Tongue- Chipods on PIRATA Moorings
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* James Moum, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,500,000.00

The eastern equatorial Pacific and Atlantic Oceans are marked by relatively cool
surface water, referred to as the Pacific and Equatorial cold tongues. Although
smaller than the Pacific cold tongue, the Atlantic cold tongue is expansive,
spanning several degrees latitude across the Equator and tens of degrees
longitude. These cold tongues act as sinks for atmospheric heat and are critical
to the global heat balance. The seasonal cycle in sea surface temperature varies
in magnitude decreasing from east to west along the equator. Peak cooling occurs
in boreal summer, first in the east and progressing westward. The Atlantic's
cold tongue exerts considerable regional influence on both sides of the ocean,
contributing to variable rainfall over Northeast Brazil and to weather patterns
in densely populated areas of western Africa. However, measurements in the
Atlantic cold tongue comparable to those made in the Pacific cold tongue do not
presently exist. This project will close this gap and discern primary
differences between the equatorial mixing regimes in the Pacific and Atlantic
basins. A post-doctoral associate will participate in a broad analysis of the
new observations and be trained in equatorial dynamics. Undergraduate
engineering students will be employed in summer months to help with construction
and testing of instrumentation. The Mary's Peak webcam will continue to be
supported. This is a webcam installed on the roof of the Oceanography building
at the Oregon State University that provides a visualization of natural fluid
flows traced by clouds, providing an educational glimpse into fluid motions in
the atmosphere. This project will also complement ongoing measurements in the
Pacific cold tongue, theoretical analyses of Tropical Instability Waves, and
ongoing international studies in the tropical Atlantic. The data set will be
archived and shared with the community.

Away from the equator, the annual cycle in sea surface temperature (SST) is
related to seasonally-varying solar heating. Despite the fact that the
equatorial oceans are heated year round by the atmosphere, they also exhibit an
annual cycle in SST. Recent, yet distinct, measurements in the equatorial cold
tongues of both Pacific and Atlantic Oceans establish the dominant role that
mixing plays in boreal summer cooling of the sea surface to produce this annual
cycle in SST. At least two significant, and puzzling, differences exist between
the two cold tongues. Firstly, measurements from the Atlantic show that the deep
diurnal mixing cycle (below the mixed layer but above the core of the Equatorial
Undercurrent), which is so critical to mixing in the upper equatorial Pacific,
is not present in the Atlantic. Secondly, climate models predict a Pacific cold
tongue that is too cool and an Atlantic cold tongue that is too warm. The now
well-established PIRATA (Pilot Research Moored Array in the Tropical Atlantic)
array is providing new insight into equatorial Atlantic dynamics and its role in
critical weather patterns on both sides of that ocean. This project will use it
as the backbone to measure the vertical structure and short-time variability of
cold tongue mixing in the Atlantic, for comparison to what has been learned from
the Pacific cold tongue. Five newly-developed mixing meters (chi-pods) will each
be deployed on two equatorial PIRATA moorings at 10W and 23W across the Atlantic
cold tongue for a period of four years. These two moorings have dense upper
ocean sampling, surface meteorology, and vertical profiles of ocean currents to
complement the mixing measurements. These new observations will establish
seasonal and inter-annual variations of cold tongue mixing and how it influences
SST and the observed weakening of the Atlantic cold tongue, and also define the
mechanisms for differences in Pacific and Atlantic mixing that creates the
bipolar climate model responses in SST trends.