* 1431264
* Engaging and Retaining Low-Income and First-Generation Community College Students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rick Reeves, Red Rocks Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2018
* USD 516,018.00

Improving the retention and success of low-income and first-generation (LIFG)
students, overwhelmingly enrolled in community colleges, is critical for
increasing the number of STEM graduates nationwide. Red Rocks Community College,
Lakewood, Colorado in partnership with the Colorado School of Mines will develop
new approaches and models that better engage and support LIFG students in pre-
engineering programs in order to provide deeper and more integrated learning
experiences. This will lead to improved success, retention, and transfer to
four-year institutions for LIFG students in engineering.

Four types of interrelated activities are proposed for the LIFG engineering
students and STEM faculty at Red Rocks Community College. First, faculty
workshops, conferences, and discussions will be used to develop shared
understandings of the challenges facing LIFG students. STEM faculty will serve
as transforming agents by developing new pedagogies and meaningful mentorships
that enrich teaching and learning in the STEM disciplines. Second,
nontraditional mentoring strategies and a STEM 101 course will be developed to
address how social and cultural capital contribute to self-efficacy and academic
success for LIFG students. Students completing STEM 101 will participate in
activities leading to authentic research opportunities in engineering at the
Colorado School of Mines. These undergraduate research experiences will draw on
and reinforce students' STEM knowledge and build expertise in engineering.
Third, students will be provided with opportunities for experiential learning on
engineering projects directly relevant to their lives and their communities.
These will be based on an Introduction to Design and Engineering Applications
(IDEA) program already developed by Red Rocks Community College in collaboration
with the Colorado School of Mines and the Engineering by Doing (EbD) program
developed by the Humanitarian Engineering program at the Colorado School of
Mines. Fourth, the partnership between Red Rocks Community College and the
Colorado School of Mines will be developed as a model for building community
college-university collaborations that provide LIFG students with stronger
academic preparation and more accessible pathways for transfer to 4-year
institutions and for developing careers in engineering.

The project will investigate how these activities contribute to STEM learning
and retention through a pre/post design that will compare a set of metrics that
establish baseline measures of retention, success in gatekeeper courses, number
of STEM students who reach second tier STEM courses, and success in these
courses. Information also will be collected through student and faculty surveys,
inventories, questionnaires, direct observations, and academic capstone
assessments of integrated learning. The goals are to generate models and
evidence on these approaches and provide materials that will be useful for other
community colleges struggling to address the important issues of low enrollment,
poor performance, weak retention, and lack of persistence among low-income and
first-generation students in engineering and STEM.