* 1431229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing a New Framework for Analyzing the Information-Theoretic Interpretation of Quantum Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Bub, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 5,044.00

This doctoral dissertation improvement grant will support the investigator, a
PhD candidate, for one semester of research at the Rotman Institute of
Philosophy at the University of Western Ontario. At the Institute, the
researcher will work with two specialists in his area of specialty, the
foundations of quantum physics. He will work with these experts to develop an
ontological framework for characterizing quantum information as a foundational
approach to quantum mechanics. His mentor advocates a principle-based approach
to quantum information, which leaves open the question of the underlying
ontology. The researcher will show that the principle approach is incomplete,
and that it does not mesh well with the ways in which theorists use quantum
information-theoretic principles in some contexts of active research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's interdisciplinary impact will be
disseminated not just within the philosophical community, but also to physicists
working in related fields. It will have an impact on the researcher's teaching
both inside and outside of the classroom. He plans to design an upper-level
undergraduate course in the foundations of quantum theory, which could be cross-
listed in philosophy and physics departments. In addition, he plans to engage in
scientific community outreach through general audience lectures, and Rotman
sponsored blog posts.