* 1431003
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-Time Biosensor for Measuring Hazardous Chemical Contaminants in Ground Water
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Brian Heinze, OptiEnz Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,156,196.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to increase the efficiency of identifying,
mapping, and remediating water sources contaminated with chlorinated solvents.
Chlorinated solvents are used in vast quantities as solvents and degreasing
agents, and in the dry cleaning industry. The necessity of monitoring
chlorinated solvents in water will continue for many generations due to their
widespread occurrence in water sources around the world, their toxicity, and
their high stability. A significant need exists and will grow for devices that
can continuously measure the concentration of chlorinated organic chemicals in
water, and that can do so accurately and inexpensively. Continuous in-situ data
production in the field of environmental sensing will greatly increase
efficiency in all processes that require a measurement of these chemicals,
having a significant impact on the costs and timelines associated with
remediation of contaminated sites. This sensor will allow for continuous
monitoring of possible contamination sources in the case of a contamination
event. Also, it will afford easy profiling of contamination plumes in aquifers.
This technology will replace the current laboratory-based measurement protocols,
which are not readily adapted for in-situ, on-line, or in-the-field
measurements, and cannot produce data continuously.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop an optical enzymatic biosensor
for continuous, quantitative monitoring of chlorinated solvent concentrations in
water. Chlorinated solvent contamination of groundwater is a widespread ongoing
issue around the world. The biosensing concept will be implemented in an optical
fiber format, in which optical biosensor tips are linked to a small electro-
optical unit. Analyte detection takes place on biosensor tips that are coated
with enzymes and fluorescent chemicals. The scope of the research includes two
parallel strategies for obtaining highly stable detection enzymes such that long
lifetime sensors are achievable, development of a system to deliver required
reagents to the sensing tip, development of signal processing algorithms to
enable high accuracy measurements in variable environmental conditions and
speciation of chlorinated compounds within mixtures, a manufacturing study for
high throughput fabrication of the sensors, and field testing of the device at
multiple contamination sites. Attainment of these objectives will advance the
sensing technology to a robust and readily manufactured system for chlorinated
solvent monitoring with low detection limits, high accuracy, and reliability.