* 1431410
* Reforming Laboratory Instruction and Hands-on Experiences for the Millennial learners in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Willietta Gibson, Bennett College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 11/30/2018
* USD 119,191.00

Many educators acknowledge that the millennial generation of students learns
like no other, yet little has been done to alter laboratory instruction in
response to this generational shift. This project will conduct educational
research that evaluates the use of the Case Study Teaching in the Sciences
method to improve laboratory instruction. This educational pedagogy promotes the
use of cases, or interactive stories, to engage students in STEM courses and to
help reform STEM instruction. The cases will be used to introduce the lab
concepts as a way to bring relevance to the analytical skills being learned in
the lab. The overarching goal for this project is to reform laboratory "step-by-
step" instruction to a method that will be more active, engaging and relevant to
millennial learners. More specifically, the project will evaluate student
learning preferences, student engagement, retention of material, and learning of
course concepts using the case studies method. Qualitative and quantitative
assessment will be conducted to evaluate student perceptions for use of the
methods, student learning gains, and critical thinking of students in biology,
environmental engineering, and introductory engineering courses. This study will
evaluate and compare data based on gender, ethnicity, and institutional type
across three very different university environments. This work has the potential
for broad impact because there is widespread interest in improving educational
practices across STEM fields. The goal for this work will be to determine if the
case studies for laboratory instruction can potentially provide a crosscutting
new paradigm for lab instruction.