* 1431234
* Collaborative Research: Progressions of Skill Development in Biology Doctorates
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* David Feldon, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,509,999.00

Utah State University will conduct a collaborative project with the University
of Virginia to determine how research skills are developed in graduate students.
The significance of the study lies in the fact that the goal of graduate
education is to prepare a highly-skilled workforce, not just a credentialed one.
Skills are, thus, central to both the process of graduate education and the
value of degrees in the labor market. However, skill development is a poorly
understood aspect of graduate education. The project will, therefore,
demonstrate how interactions among knowledge and skill, socialization
experiences, and motivation play out over time. In addition, it will provide
novel insights into racial/ethnic inequalities in graduate school trajectories
and outcomes. This has been a missing link in previous research about the issue
of inequality. Understanding how skills are developed over time and how they
interact with relevant motivational constructs can optimize the creation of
training experiences that both maximize students? skill development and reduce
inequality by identifying the key predictors of success and the pivotal points
in the progression of Ph.D. programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will use a Social Cognitive Theory framework in combination with the
socialization framework to conduct a longitudinal study of 280 new Ph.D.
matriculants in the biological sciences. The specific aims are to:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Develop a longitudinal dataset that includes performance-based skill data and
socialization/training experiences, and test specific hypotheses regarding skill
development. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Determine whether skill development trajectories
vary across racial/ethnic and gender groups and contribute to inequalities in
graduate school outcomes, and test hypotheses regarding skill
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Use insights from the findings to propose
interventions to improve skill development during graduate school and decrease
racial/ethnic and gender inequality in student experiences and outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of a unique dataset that includes
performance-based repeated measures of skills over multiple years of doctoral
training, in conjunction with measures of motivation and types of socialization
experiences, will provide the foundational context to generate and test
theoretical advancements in graduate education.