* 1431891
* Assessing by design: Unpacking the role of formative assessment in student learning
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Jennifer Momsen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 12/31/2020
* USD 500,716.00

This project is a carefully designed empirical study of the relationship between
formative assessment, instructor-generated feedback, and student learning. It is
widely believed on the basis of theory and prior local studies that formative
assessment is one of the most effective instructional interventions to impact
student learning, but the supporting empirical evidence is still thin in some
respects. With the full cooperation of participating faculty, this study will
generate a robust stream of empirical data from both face-to-face and online
courses in biology and psychology in order to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterize the
formative assessment prompts,&lt;br/&gt;2. Describe the nature of instructor-
generated feedback to students,&lt;br/&gt;3. Describe how students use
instructor-generated feedback, including identifying the types of feedback
students use, and how frequently and consistently they use it. &lt;br/&gt;4.
Ultimately describe the relationship between formative assessment and student
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a design-based research project.
Classroom modules will be randomly assigned to either experimental class
sessions (that provide formative assessment and feedback opportunities) or
control class sessions (that do not provide formative assessment and feedback
opportunities). In this manner, all students will participate in both control
and experimental groups at some point during their course. Student learning will
be measured through gains in learning using items drawn from validated concept
inventories (where appropriate) or instructor-generated assessment items, and
the self-report instrument Students Assessment of their Learning Gains
(available at SALGsite.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The maintained hypothesis is
that students who regularly access and use feedback opportunities will show
greater learning gains and have higher course grades. The study will collect
demographic variables (e.g., gender, GPA, ACT scores) and administer the Revised
Study Process Questionnaire (Biggs et al. 2001) and the 12-item GRIT scale
(Duckworth et al. 2007) to support the creation of an empirically-driven model
to describe the contexts in which formative assessment and feedback are most
useful to learners. The project seeks to predict for whom and in what classroom
situations formative assessment and feedback are most useful.