* 1431408
* EAGER: Is Na-NH3 a High Temperature Superconductor?
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2018
* USD 220,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Below a specific temperature,
electricity can flow in some materials with zero resistance and hence without
any input of energy. These materials are known as superconductors and are
currently in use, for example, to provide strong and stable magnetic fields for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines. In order for superconductors to have
an even larger impact in technology and in the reduction of energy consumption,
the temperature where superconductivity is found needs to be raised
significantly from the current record of -135C ( or -211F) found in some ceramic
materials known as high temperature superconductors. Interestingly, experiments
carried out in 1946 and 1973 reported evidence of superconductivity in rapidly
frozen solutions of sodium in ammonia below -93C (or -135F), more than forty
degrees Celsius higher than the high temperature superconductors. A number of
other experimental groups however were not able to confirm the existence of
superconductivity in this system. This project, with greatly improved
experimental conditions is a systematic attempt in clarifying this important
unresolved issue. Graduate students and post-doctoral scholars working on this
project will receive unique experience in carrying research in an unique
exploratory mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstraact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 1946 report of superconductivity by Ogg was
based on the observations of a dramatic drop in resistance from 10,000 down to
10 ohms in a fraction of the rapidly frozen samples of sodium-ammonia solution
confined in glass capillary. Persistent current, deduced from the observation of
a small magnetic field in 7 out of the 100 quenched cooled samples were also
seen when the samples were removed from a permanent magnet. The failure of
observing such signatures in the majority of the samples were attributed to the
cracking the samples in the cooling process. While six other experimental groups
had attempted to replicate the results of Ogg, only two were successful. The
research team uses today's improved experimental conditions to directly clarify
this important unresolved scientific puzzle. Ogg interpreted the
superconductivity in his samples is the consequence of fast cooling rate so that
the miscible sodium-ammonia solution bypasses the liquid-liquid phase separation
region when it freezes. The sodium-ammonia solutions of the research team are
prepared in high purity glove box instead of ambient laboratory environment to
eliminate any contamination. Sample cells are made from thin stainless steel
capillary to speed up the cooling rate to 0.01 s, ~two orders of magnitude
faster than Ogg's samples. With a metallic cell, a superconducting transition
cannot be masked by a cracked solid sample. In the second set of experiments,
the research team infiltrates the sodium-ammonia solutions into hollow glass
fibers of 150 nm inner diameter and into porous Vycor glass cylinders with pore
diameter of 7 nm. Liquid metal and binary fluid mixtures inside these hosts show
no evidence of phase separation. It is possible that phase separation of the
sodium-ammonia solutions are similarly suppressed thus providing an ideal
condition for the onset of superconductivity without quench-cooling.