* 1431672
* Nonlinear Wave Propagation Analysis using Experimental Data for the Estimation of Central Aortic Blood Pressure using Peripheral Circulatory Signals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jin-Oh Hahn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 277,004.00

Central aortic blood pressure significantly better predicts cardiovascular risk
than commonly used brachial artery blood pressure. However, it is not widely
used in clinical practice since it is very difficult to measure. This project
concerns fundamental research on mathematical modeling to enable estimation of
central aortic blood pressure from as few as two non-invasive peripheral
circulatory waveforms. If successful, this project will advance personalized
healthcare and medical device industry sectors. In particular, it will improve
the way patients with cardiovascular disease are treated via its low-cost and
non-invasive method that allows better assessment of cardiovascular health and
prompt detection of its impairment. It may also stimulate the medical device
industry and in turn the overall economy by stimulating the development of cost-
effective, deployable medical devices for cardiovascular health monitoring,
which will ultimately lead to improved therapy and treatment. This project will
also have broad impact on education and knowledge dissemination, by bridging the
gap between engineering, systems biology and medicine, attracting women and
underrepresented students to multi-disciplinary research, and broadly
disseminating the knowledge gained from this project through a dedicated
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to test the
hypothesis that central aortic blood pressure can be estimated from as few as
two non-invasive peripheral circulatory waveforms via model-based system
identification. To fulfill this objective, cardiovascular system is viewed as a
nonlinear dynamic wave propagation system with unknown input. In this project, a
theoretical study to develop system identification and input de-convolution
methods for a class of nonlinear wave propagation systems will be conducted, and
then the validity of the methods will be examined by applying them to the
problem of estimating central aortic blood pressure waveform from two non-
invasive peripheral circulatory waveforms. This project will contribute to
advance dynamic systems and control by solving a system identification problem
for a class of nonlinear dynamic systems. Since the class of systems considered
belongs to cardiovascular health monitoring applications, it will advance
systems physiology initiatives. Especially, this project will benefit the
development of data-based modeling methods for physiologic systems and
neuroscience, such as condition monitoring of cardiovascular hemodynamics and
assessment of autonomic-cardiac regulation function. Ultimately, this project
may open up new opportunities for technological advances in pervasive and
personalized medicine, which can ultimately improve the quality of life of human
beings.