* 1431223
* Syntax-Semantics Interaction During Sentence Comprehension: An Individual Differences Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Akira Miyake, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 549,958.00

The ability to comprehend language is a hallmark of human intelligence. Although
this ability seems to come effortlessly to neurologically normal adults, such
ease belies a complex underlying network of neural processes. A major challenge
in investigating the neural mechanisms of language comprehension is that people
may not all process language in exactly the same way. People may vary
substantially, for example, in the ease with which they can recognize words and
in their abilities to hold in mind information about the preceding words and
sentences. Given such individual differences, the mechanisms of language
processing can be obscured if researchers adopt the common neuroimaging practice
of averaging together brain activity from different people who have experienced
the same stimuli (for example, the same word). With support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Albert Kim and his colleague Dr. Akira Miyake will
investigate the neural mechanisms of language comprehension with a focus on
systematic differences between individuals. . Dr. Kim and Dr. Miyake will record
brain electrical activity using electroencephalography (EEG) from the scalps of
participants who are reading sentences, measuring event related potentials
(ERPs) for each word in the sentences. They will incorporate recent advances in
application of blind source separation (BSS) algorithm into this research to
enable separation of fast brain electrical signals from different brain regions
and enable characterization of individual differences in the neurobiology of
language processing in ways that cannot be provided by fMRI based brain imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental disorders of language comprehension impede
scholastic and professional success, and acquired language comprehension
disorders, such as those following stroke, can be fundamentally debilitating.
Thus, understanding the basic mechanisms of language processing is likely to be
relevant to the diagnosis and treatment of disordered language. Because of the
novelty of simultaneously measuring and comparing multiple measures of
individual differences in language processes, this work has the potential to
transform current research practices in the field. Dr. Kim and Dr. Miyake will
maximize the broader impact of the work by organizing special journal issues in
appropriate outlets and special workshops within national and international
conferences. The goal of these special issues and workshops will be to assemble
research in various areas in cognitive neuroscience (e.g., language, memory,
attention, decision making) that illustrates the theoretical importance and
viability of integrating individual differences analyses, neurocognitive
theories, and modern analysis methods. Finally, because the proposed research
involves multiple research methods and approaches, it will provide exceptionally
rich training opportunities to the graduate students and undergraduate students
who will be working on the project.