* 1431845
* Development and Assessment of Teaching Tools to Facilitate the Implementation of Construction Industry Simulation (COINS) in Lower Division Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Charles Chadwell, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,926.00

A knowledge and skills gap exists in the civil and construction engineering
curricula in applying theoretical knowledge to practice and in extending this
knowledge outside students' fields of study. In an attempt to address this issue
in civil and construction engineering curricula, investigators at California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (CPSLO) have developed a virtual
Construction Industry Simulation (COINS) to supplement traditional classroom
instructional delivery methods. COINS provides a virtual environment to immerse
students in active learning by posing problems and situations that require them
to engage in practical engineering problem solving. Through the implementation
of COINS, engineering faculty will be able to enhance their instructional
repertoire and gain confidence in employing new, effective instructional
approaches. In so doing, they will be better equipped to meet the learning
styles and needs of a broader range of students. Through COINS, students will
learn how to communicate and overcome obstacles in a multidisciplinary team and
they will gain valuable skills that are needed to transition to jobs in industry
and to participate in advanced research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two primary objectives: (1) to develop an instructor's module for
effective COINS implementation in lower division engineering courses at two- and
four-year institutions of higher education and (2) to study the impact of COINS
on student learning. The investigators seek to advance knowledge and
understanding in the areas of project-based learning, multidisciplinary
projects, undergraduate research, and teamwork by measuring the impact of COINS
simulation on student learning, identifying effective implementation strategies,
and developing materials to facilitate the use of COINS by faculty. This will
increase access to the COINS approach so that more students will participate in
project-based learning experiences using the COINS simulation thus enabling
these students to experience true concurrent engineering through an integrated
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be assessed using student
work, interviews, focus groups, reflection exercises and observations. The
expected outcomes are numerous; major contributions will be: introductory
civil/construction engineering course content that will improve articulation
between community colleges and four-year institutions; an online community of
practice to facilitate sharing of ideas, solutions, and practices as well as
providing feedback on instructional materials and methods; and improved student
learning and capabilities in engineering problem solving, teamwork, and
communication.