* 1431955
* TURBO: The Undergraduate Saco River Biodiversity Observatory -- A Long-Term Ecological Research-Style Research Experience to Enhance STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Stephan Zeeman, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2020
* USD 639,246.00

STEM education is increasingly important for success in a society that depends
on science and technology, but college students' persistence in STEM programs of
study, which are often dominated by traditional lectures and standard lab
exercises, is generally low. Integrating undergraduate research opportunities
into the curriculum has been shown to increase student learning and persistence.
This project will implement an interdisciplinary curriculum that provides
authentic research experiences for all STEM students in the College of Arts and
Sciences at the University of New England. The investigators will create a
project-oriented learning experience using the local estuary of the Saco River
by developing new course modules, stimulating undergraduate research projects,
conducting an interdisciplinary conference focusing on the project's theme, and
implementing targeted faculty development. The investigators will examine the
extent to which the increased hands-on, interdisciplinary approaches to student
learning lead to increased student retention and persistence in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across all STEM departments in the college, at least
29 courses with an enrollment of more than 1,600 students will work
simultaneously on assessing, monitoring, or modeling aspects of the Saco River
estuary. Students will investigate urban, salt marsh, intertidal, and open water
habitats and apply methods of ecology, physiology, molecular biology, botany,
zoology, mathematics, chemistry, and physics. A central database and web portal
will make the data available for interdisciplinary data mining within the
university and by the public. The investigators aim to demonstrate that
experiential learning based on Kolb's learning theory can deepen students'
understanding of the process of research as practiced by scientists in a long-
standing NSF program, Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER). The activities will
include working in groups to solve problems, using large data sets, and
participating in the creation and sharing of data. Such an approach will also
help students to comprehend science as more than rote learning -- as something
that can be questioned and produced by them. Furthermore, the project will use
place-based education to draw students into the project and into STEM. With this
approach, (1) surrounding phenomena are the foundation for curriculum
development, (2) students become creators rather than consumers of knowledge,
(3) students' questions are central in determining what is studied, (4) teachers
act as experienced guides and co-learners, and (5) the wall between school and
community becomes permeable and is crossed frequently. Through repeated exposure
to place-based education over their four years at the university, undergraduates
will gain progressive, in-depth experiences with STEM, which will enable them to
connect the process of discovery with learning and knowledge creation and will
prepare them to be leaders, teachers, and innovators.