* 1431011
* SBIR Phase II:  Using Geopolymerisation of Natural Aluminosilicate Minerals to Develop Sustainable Masonry Materials
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2017
* David Easton, Watershed Materials LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2017
* USD 891,446.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
full-scale working prototype of manufacturing equipment to produce a novel
environmentally sustainable masonry unit. Conventional concrete masonry unit
(CMU) manufacture relies on ordinary Portland cement (OPC) for strength and
durability. OPC is energy-intensive and is the most expensive ingredient in
conventional masonry. In contrast, this project proposes a manufacturing process
that transforms naturally occurring soil elements called aluminosilicates into
strong and durable masonry products through a chemical process called
geopolymerization. The broader impacts of the proposed activity include societal
benefits in the form of human health, enhanced scientific and technological
understanding, and commercial considerations. The adoption of geopolymer masonry
blocks by the construction industry will have the following benefits: i) a
dramatic reduction of the 14 million metric tons of CO2 emitted annually by
domestic CMU manufacturers ii) a decrease in the energy required to process
aggregates as a result of a fine particle constituent to be used in the
formulation, and iii) the elimination of the requirement of aggregate washing,
which will enable widespread use of recycled aggregates. The proposed activity
will increase domestic construction material manufacturing capabilities, and
create skilled jobs for the US economy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of
Phase I demonstrated the scientific feasibility of using a proprietary
manufacturing process to create geopolymer-based masonry specimens with
performance comparable to OPC-based specimens. During Phase II, this knowledge
will be applied to develop equipment capable of producing cost-effective
geopolymer masonry block to meet the steadily increasing demand for sustainable
masonry materials in domestic and global markets. Geopolymer masonry is a
disruptive product that has the potential to dramatically improve the
environmental profile of one of the most common construction materials on the
planet. The Phase II work will include the design and construction of a full-
scale working prototype for the production of geopolymer masonry at a cost
comparable to conventional OPC-based masonry products, evaluations of mechanical
properties of the resulting geopolymer masonry blocks to verify their
performance against laboratory specimens and ASTM standards governing masonry
materials, and research to address outstanding issues related to performance by
incorporating water-repelling admixtures and hydrophobic additives into
geopolymer mix designs.