* 1431135
* CAREER: Large-Scale Structures in Turbulent Dynamo Experiments with Liquid-Metal Suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Eric Brown, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,798.00

Brown&lt;br/&gt;1255541&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The turbulent dynamo process is the
generation of a magnetic field from the turbulent flow of a conducting fluid;
which occurs for example in the Earth's core. An understanding of how turbulent
flow structures generate the magnetic field is a central challenge in dynamo
research. However, only one experiment has been able to produce a turbulent
dynamo because of the extreme material properties and scale required; even in
that case the fluid flows that generate the magnetic field have not yet been
measured, and the fluid flows cannot be directly simulated in the strongly
turbulent regime. The goals of this research plan are to use materials design to
develop a revolutionary approach to magnetohydrodynamic experiments, and combine
experiments and low-dimensional modeling to understand how fluid flow structures
interact to generate magnetic fields in dynamos. The extreme parameter regime
required for generating a turbulent dynamo in the laboratory will be reached by
designing materials consisting of magnetic particles suspended in a liquid
metal, i.e. micron-sized iron particles suspended in liquid gallium and its
alloys. Such a fluid will have a high enough conductivity and magnetic
susceptibility to build the universe's smallest turbulent dynamo (10 cm). The
first simultaneous measurements of fluid flow and magnetic field in a turbulent
dynamo will be made to connect their dynamics with an array of temperature and
magnetic field probes at several locations around the apparatus. Turbulent flow
structures can be reconstructed from such measurements, and modeled with low-
dimensional models consisting of stochastic ordinary differential equations.
These experimental and modeling techniques will be combined to understand how
turbulent flow structures interact to produce magnetic fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This materials design is a novel
approach to dynamos that would transform the field by opening up experimental
research to more laboratories -- experiments could be scaled down and the need
for large facilities to handle liquid sodium in traditional dynamo experiments
would be eliminated. The tunable material properties of suspensions will allow
for a direct comparison with simulations in the same parameter regime which has
not been possible with traditional dynamo experiments. The first simultaneous
measurements of turbulent flow structures and magnetic fields in an experimental
dynamo will allow development and testing of models for how turbulent flow
structures generate a magnetic field. The low-dimensional modeling techniques
have the potential to become a new paradigm for simple understanding and
quantitative predictions of different dynamical behaviors of large-scale
structures in a wide variety of turbulent flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: Materials design will result in the development and characterization of
fluids with useful tunable properties including high conductivity and a strong
magnetic response; possible applications include magnetorheological brakes with
reduced heat dissipation, and fluid power transformers with no moving solid
parts. Astronomical dynamos such as the Earth and Sun have complicated dynamics
that are not well-understood. Solar flares can interfere with long-wave radio
communications and produce radiation hazards to spacecraft. Earth's magnetic
field protects against dangerous radiation from the Sun. Modeling of magnetic
dynamos may lead to better understanding of their dynamical behavior, which
could have a positive impact on aerospace engineering. An integrated scientific
research education program for undergraduates will be developed at UC Merced, a
minority-serving research institution. This includes coordination of the lower
division and upper division laboratory courses, and senior theses, with a focus
on the scientific method and data analysis. These educational components will be
evaluated according to a rubric for laboratory reports, theses, and
presentations in line the physics program's learning objectives.