* 1431014
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Polymer Gel-Based Indicators to Monitor the Exposure of Shipments of Pharmaceuticals to Harmful Temperatures
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Bani Cipriano, Prasidiux LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,063,975.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase (SBIR) II project is to help detect whether pharmaceuticals about
to be administered to patients have been damaged during shipment or storage by
exposure to very cold temperatures close to or below the freezing temperature of
water. Many pharmaceuticals, especially vaccines, lose their potency if exposed
to near-freezing conditions. In light of tightening regulations with respect to
the temperature-controlled storage and distribution of pharmaceuticals and
changing distribution models (increase in direct-to-patient shipments), there is
a critical need to demonstrate with greater reliability and in a cost-effective
manner whether pharmaceuticals lose their potency due to exposure to harmful
temperatures. The result of this SBIR II project will be an indicator that will
provide workers along the pharmaceutical supply chain information about whether
a pharmaceutical encountered harmful temperatures and the duration of such an
encounter. Both harmful temperature and duration of exposure are critical pieces
of data required to determine whether a pharmaceutical has been compromised.
Technologies do exist that indicate whether an exposure to a harmful temperature
has occurred, however, the indication of time of exposure is muddled and
difficult to discern. The proposed research in this Phase II SBIR program, if
successful, will offer a reliable alternative to costly electronic devices. The
benefits of this device include preventing damaged product from reaching
patients, helping companies remain in compliance with regulations in a cost-
effective manner and reducing pharmaceutical waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop Time
Temperature Indicators (TTIs) that reliably indicate exposure of pharmaceutical
shipments to harmful cold temperatures near the freezing point of water. This
technology will be the first chemical-based technology capable of indicating the
duration of such exposures. If a harmful exposure occurs, the combination of
time and temperature data provided by these indicators can be used by the
shipper to evaluate whether a pharmaceutical was truly compromised. As a result,
pharmaceuticals that have been truly compromised are discarded and not
administered to the patient. The patented indicators utilize a specially
formulated polymer hydrogel that undergoes a volume transition from a swollen to
a collapsed state upon cooling. The kinetics and the temperature dependence of
the transition are highly tunable. The objectives of this Phase II project
include refining formulations and synthesis methods to prepare polymer gels with
highly reliable swollen-shrunken transitions. These gels will then be
incorporated into specially designed housings to obtain TTI prototypes. Simple
manual-driven machines will be designed to prepare the TTI prototypes. The
performance of these TTIs will be validated: the company will demonstrate that
these TTIs meet a minimum quality requirement. Thereafter the project will test
the stability of the TTIs by measuring performance after accelerated storage and
the proposed TTI prototypes will be subjected to standard transit tests. As the
reliability of these indicators is a key product attribute, this project will
identify the synthesis and process steps that introduce variability and address
them accordingly.