* 1431480
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Evaluation of the Social Effects of Transportation Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Bruce Braun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 5,727.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the civic and political
effects of two public transportation systems on efforts to deal with issues
related to urban fragmentation. The research project will provide new insights
regarding how urban designers and planners understand the built-environment
technologies they develop and deploy and how the everyday politics of
infrastructural use are based on different sets of motivations. The project will
assess the viability of transportation projects as technological solutions to
problems of urban fragmentation, providing new perspectives on an issues evident
in cities in both developing and developed nations, including the U.S. Because
the project will directly engage planners, designers, and engineers, it should
assist in identifying and sharing "best practices" to improve the evaluation
techniques they employ when designing new systems. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Prof Bruce P. Braun, doctoral
student Laura Cesafsky will conduct this project through a detailed examination
of the two public transportation systems built in Bogota, Colombia, in the early
2000s: a "gold standard" bus rapid transit system and an expansive network of
separated bicycleways. The student will gather data regarding system use as well
as information from, interviews, focus groups, participant observation, and
archival research to evaluate the history of these systems' funding, repair, and
management as well as the public controversies they have engendered