* 1431904
* Science Inquiry Using Physical and Virtual Experiments: Systematic Investigation of Issues and Conditions for Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* N Narayanan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,464,256.00

Both physical labs and virtual labs are often used in science teaching, and both
have their advantages and disadvantages. With each providing different
affordances for learning, it is often feasible to combine the two in a multitude
of ways. This project will conduct a series of studies to: (1) Uncover the
differential benefits of physical versus virtual labs, for learners with a range
of abilities and prior knowledge, and for content of different difficulty
levels; (2) Understand the differential effects of sequencing physical and
virtual labs for different learners and content; and (3) Examine how best to
combine physical and virtual labs in mixed reality environments. In addressing
an important question in educational research, the project will help clarify the
currently conflicting findings about the learning benefits of physical and
virtual experimentation in fostering deep learning of science concepts.
Publications resulting from the project will significantly extend current
knowledge about learning from hands-on experimentation and learning from
simulated experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
systematically examine factors that affect learning from physical and virtual
labs in studies conducted across three grade levels in three states. Rigorous
analytical tools will assess the effect of several factors on students' learning
processes and outcomes. Each year's studies will build upon results from the
prior years. The first set of studies will address the comparison of virtual and
physical experimentation. A second and third set of studies will investigate the
sequencing of physical and virtual experimentation under different conditions.
The fourth set of studies will explore an integration of the physical and the
virtual for different learners and materials. In each study, a range of data
will be collected to understand how students learn, their learning outcomes, and
the strategies that teachers use to facilitate learning from physical and
virtual labs. Outcomes will include (1) comparisons of students' learning in
physical, virtual, sequenced physical and virtual, and integrated physical and
virtual labs; 2) knowledge about conditions that promote or hinder learning from
physical and virtual labs individually and in various combinations; (3) an
understanding of how learning is affected in physical, virtual, sequenced, and
integrated labs by differing contexts, topics, student prior knowledge and
ability; and (4) a clear and detailed qualitative picture of the differences and
similarities in teacher strategies and student learning dynamics in physical,
virtual, sequenced, and integrated labs.