* 1431595
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Inquiry-oriented Mathematics: Establishing Supports
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Estrella Johnson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 297,271.00

Improving mathematics instruction and learning is a priority for increasing the
success and persistence of undergraduate students interested in careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. The central goal of this
collaborative project (including Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Florida State University and North Carolina State University) is to
develop an understanding of what is needed to support instructional change in
undergraduate mathematics. In particular, the project will design, investigate,
and evaluate a system of supports for mathematics instructors interested in
implementing student-centered curricular innovations. Such curricular
innovations have been shown to support conceptual learning gains, diminish the
achievement gap, and improve STEM retention rates. However, research has also
found that simply developing and disseminating curricular innovations fails to
support meaningful instructional change. By developing and researching a system
of supports for instructional change, the project will address this particularly
important (and often missing) component needed for taking curricular innovations
to scale. By supporting instructional change, and therefore supporting the
propagation of research-based curricular innovations, the project will have
broad impacts on undergraduate STEM education. These impacts include: improving
instruction for STEM students, thus broadening the pipeline for undergraduate
students pursuing STEM careers; advancing teaching practices and instruction
that have been shown to be particularly beneficial for women and minority
students in STEM; and, developing an infrastructure and model that can be used
to support instructional change and professional development in other
undergraduate STEM areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research the
following question: How can the program better support instructional improvement
in undergraduate mathematics? More specifically, what are the relationships
among instructional supports, instructors, and instruction that are important
for informing effective instructional change? To do this, the project will
design, investigate, and evaluate a system of supports for mathematicians
interested in instructional change. The instructional support model will consist
of three interrelated components: curricular support materials, summer
workshops, and online instructor work groups. These supports will be developed
using design-based research including iterative cycles of designing, field-
testing, analyzing, and refining. The project will then investigate instructor
change in the context of our model. This investigation will focus on the
relationships and interactions between the supports, the instructors, and their
instructional practices. Finally, in order to evaluate the program's
instructional support model, the project will assess student learning and
develop a measure for inquiry-oriented instruction. In addition to assessing the
efficacy of the support model, the project will use the evaluation tools to
identify aspects of the supports and instruction that have a positive impact on
students' learning.