* 1431289
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Private Provision of Public Goods, Classifying American Philanthropy
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Maryann Feldman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2015
* USD 12,920.00

There are 1.4 million tax-exempt charitable organizations in the United States.
These organizations can take multiple legal structures but primarily consist of
public charities and private foundations. Many of these organizations fund
academic research. Despite their number, relatively little is known about how
these organizations fund research and if this research contributes to the public
good. The lack of knowledge is caused in part from a lack of classification.
Nonprofit, foundation, and association are terms used interchangeably by
charitable organizations across legal structure and funding strategy. Further,
there is a tendency by third-party agencies to group charitable organizations by
their focus area, such as education, health, or community development, and
evaluate general attributes like their level of administrative expenses,
transparency, and financial sustainability. Thus, organizations cannot easily be
compared across fields nor can their approach to philanthropy and impact be
evaluated. This project creates a classification scheme to categorize charitable
organizations based on their legal structure and philanthropic strategy. This
will allow charitable organizations to be analyzed with their peers based on how
they are organized and how they give. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a theoretical model to advance our understanding of charitable
organizations using a two-way system of classification based on their legal
structure and their philanthropic strategy. The model divides charitable
organization first by revenue source -- endowment or donation -- and then by
strategy --mission or broadly focused -- creating four categories to capture
their operations. The model is then vetted with data from the IRS Form 990 for a
sample of approximately 500 charitable organizations that is geographically
representative and structurally diverse. The first part of the analysis assigns
each organization in the sample to a category from the classification scheme.
The second part of the analysis examines how the categories vary by
organization's characteristics and giving behavior. Using a multinomial logit
model, the four categories are regressed on a series of organizational
characteristics and giving behavior of the charitable organizations to analyze
what attributes are linked to a classification category. Philanthropists from a
set of these organizations will be interviewed to assess if this classification
scheme fits within their vision and understanding of their mission and purpose.
The interview data will be used to vet the classification model to assess if
organizations have been properly categorized by their own interpretations and to
understand how that affects the decisions they make. This project advances our
knowledge of philanthropic organizations and begins to test how these strategies
impact the public good.