* 1431739
* Collaborative Research: Constructionism in Learning: Sustainable Life Cycle Engineering (CooL:SLiCE)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Kathy Jackson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2019
* USD 212,768.00

Including the consideration of sustainability, or the impact of human activity
on the natural environment, into the design of consumer products is an important
goal for both consumers and industry. However, engineering programs have
struggled to find ways to effectively include the analysis of sustainability
into engineering design education. This project will address this challenge by
developing a cyberlearning environment that supports environmentally responsible
product design through team-based and personalized design activities. The
approach links 3D modeling and a product design database with an integrated
manufacturing and supply chain analysis engine for environmental impact
analysis. Team-based design activities will challenge students with sustainable
product design problems using familiar products, such as skateboards,
snowboards, and MP3 players. Successful implementation of the project will help
to develop a new and affordable way for academic institutions to integrate
sustainability topics into their curricula and prepare a skilled workforce that
meets modern industry and consumer needs for sustainable product development.

The project's learning platform - Constructionism in Learning: Sustainable Life
Cycle Engineering (CooL:SLiCE) - is based on the constructivist theory in
learning and supports the development of multi-stage problem solving skills that
will be built into a real-world problem context in which fundamental design,
customization, and sustainability issues are integrated with an artifact likely
to be personally meaningful to the learners. This approach will give learners an
opportunity to realize the implications of their choices as consumers by
specifically focusing on environmentally responsible design. The work will
explore the hypothesis that the CooL:SLiCE platform will provide a medium for
deeper learning in students of environmentally responsible life cycle product
design. Sustainable life cycle engineering learning modules to be developed and
delivered along with the CooL:SLiCE platform will facilitate investigations on
the impact of different levels of autonomy on student learning of
sustainability. A unit process modeling concept will be employed in the
CooL:SLiCE manufacturing analysis engine for quantifying process and supply
chain performance metrics. It has been established that the topic of
sustainability attracts the interest of students from groups currently
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Consequently this project will contribute
to broadening participation in STEM by helping to integrate sustainability
analysis into the engineering curriculum. Moreover, this research will provide
an understanding of the role of the e-learning platform as a medium to educate
learners in environmentally responsible design. The structured learning
activities will provide information that will further research efforts seeking
to develop a cyber-based analysis tool for sustainable life cycle engineering.