* 1431026
* SBIR Phase II:  Optimized Medication Administration Device for Palliative Care
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Igal Ladabaum, Hospi Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,086,255.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide a clinically effective and
discreet way to administer palliative medications cost effectively when the oral
route is compromised. Almost all patients lose the ability to swallow as they
near death. Approximately 10%-20% of hospice patients have severe symptoms after
the oral route is no longer functional. Unfortunately most of these patients
either die uncomfortably, or are admitted to the hospital for symptom control.
These outcomes are tragic for the patient, and cost the healthcare system
hundreds of millions annually. There are approximately 1.7M patients in hospice
in the US per year. Close to 30% of Medicare dollars are spent in the last year
of life. An approach enabling low acuity care that provides effective symptom
control in the patient?s home can reduce Medicare hospice benefit costs by over
$500 million annually. More importantly, it would enable patients to remain in
their homes, with dignity, during the last precious days of life. Successful
execution of this project would also result in a viable medical device business
that would create dozens of new jobs supported by multi-million dollar revenues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is directed toward developing an
optimized version of a rectal medication administration device that can be
placed by a layperson and is comfortable for the patient. The rectum is highly
vascularized for rapid and effective absorption. The distal 1/3 of the rectum
partially bypasses the hepatic portal vein allowing medication to enter the
central venous system without a first pass effect through the liver. The rectal
route does not have the complication risks or the cost of percutaneous
medication administration. A pharmacokinetic study will be performed to compare
the systemic absorption of palliative medication administered via micro-enema to
the absorption via suppository. Suppositories are an undesirable way to
administer ongoing medications rectally due to the discomfort and embarrassment
of repeated insertions, as well as the wait time and cost associated with
procuring medications in suppository form. Upon successful completion of Phase
II work, prototypes of optimized devices will be complete and validated for ease
of use in a usability study with layperson volunteers. The aim of the proposed
project is to make the rectal route of medication administration practical, and
thus set the stage to introduce its benefits to a broad segment of the patient
population.