* 1431032
* SBIR Phase II:  A Miniaturized Raman Optical System for Trending Glucose Levels
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Raj Gupta, eLutions Integrated Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2017
* USD 962,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project shall prototype
a wearable Raman optical system to monitor trending blood glucose levels
noninvasively, continuously, and in real-time. A solution that is unobtrusive,
long-running, and provides absolute glucose readings with minimal calibration is
considered a "holy grail" for patients with diabetes mellitus. In the vast
divide between this aspiration and the default regimen of multiple daily
fingerstick measurements for single-shot glucose readings lie incredible
opportunities for improvement in self-regulation and patient-specific care. Our
goal is to miniaturize a Raman system into less than 10 cubic centimeters to
enable transcutaneous glucose detection. Sufficient accuracy is sought so that
analysis of collected data allows clinicians to provide better individualized
care than is possible with either isolated fingerstick data or two-month-
averaged glucose levels inferred from glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) readings.
Using a novel optical configuration developed in Phase I, further
miniaturization in Phase II will reduce our laboratory bench-top system to a
handheld platform that is an order of magnitude smaller and maintains the
necessary throughput and sensitivity to detect glucose ex vivo.

This Phase II effort will also investigate the core problem of repeatability
plaguing almost all optical approaches for noninvasive glucose detection.
Specifically, it will be addressed for the Raman-based spectroscopic
configuration explored in Phase I. Optical as well as mechanical techniques will
be employed to introduce stability into the system to mitigate contributions
from ambient mechanical and physiological perturbations and disturbances that
cause errant readings, throw off calibrations, and frustrate end users. Testing
and validation of these techniques will be performed ex vivo, using disposed
skin, tissue and blood samples to create model analogues in place of animal or
human transcutaneous testing. This minimizes initial regulatory overhead while
providing essential test data to ascertain detection limits, capacities for
overcoming repeatability, and practicalities for usage in real-world scenarios.
The end Phase II milestone is to deliver a prototype for demonstration that is
capable of sufficient sensitivity, and stabilized detection and quantification
of physiological levels of blood glucose that can be readied for wearable and
ambulatory settings. Overcoming this key hurdle is a necessary step to advance
all such optical technologies for transcutaneous detection, and one which will
engage potential customers and investors for continued support toward
commercialization.