* 1431681
* Collaborative Project: Workshops and Learning Communities for Physics and Astronomy Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Chandra Turpen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 154,580.00

This is a collaborative project involving the American Association of Physics
Teachers (Award DUE-1431638), Brigham Young University (Award DUE-1431454), the
University of Maryland at College Park (Award DUE-1431681), and the University
of Colorado at Boulder (Award DUE-1431779).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most new
college and university STEM faculty members begin their first teaching
assignments with little or no experience with methods of effective pedagogy.
Consequently, both they and their students are often frustrated when the
students do not seem to learn what the faculty members think they are teaching.
To address this problem in physics and astronomy, the American Association of
Physics Teachers, the American Astronomical Society, and the American Physical
Society propose to continue a successful series of Physics and Astronomy Faculty
Workshops focusing on effective pedagogy, building on what has been learned
during the previous series of workshops. During the course of the new five-year
project, the workshops will work with about 900 four-year college and university
faculty members (about 50% of the new tenure-track hires in physics and
astronomy in the United States), who collectively teach more than 100,000
students each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three new components will be added to
the program of workshops: (1) a permanent set of Experienced Faculty Workshops
aimed at more senior faculty members; (2) a series of virtual Faculty Learning
Communities (FLCs), which will provide coaching and feedback for the workshop
participants as they implement interactive-engagement teaching methods; and (3)
a research program focusing on the most effective ways to implement the FLCs and
developing a more systematic understanding of the workshops themselves. Items
(2) and (3) will directly address the "implementation dip" that occurs for
faculty considering the use of new pedagogy. The dip has been documented in
almost all STEM faculty workshops. Although the current physics and astronomy
workshops have been successful in developing knowledge about effective pedagogy
and the evidence for its effectiveness, and in inspiring the participants to
implement those pedagogies, the evaluations also show that the faculty members
are not always persistent in implementing those pedagogies. The new project is
designed to enhance the implementation of what the participants learn in the
workshops and to add to the knowledge base of what constitutes effective
pedagogical professional development for physics and astronomy faculty. The same
methods should be broadly applicable to faculty members in other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by four
NSF programs:&lt;br/&gt;* Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE),
Division of Undergraduate Education, Directorate for Education and Human
Resources;&lt;br/&gt;* Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), Division of Human Resource Development,
Directorate for Education and Human Resources;&lt;br/&gt;* Education and
Interdisciplinary Research (EIR), Division of Physics, Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and&lt;br/&gt;* Education and Special
Programs (ESP), Division of Astronomical Sciences, Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences.