* 1431484
* Establishment of a Scholarship for Service Program at the University of Alabama in Huntsville
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Sara Graves, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 5,681,213.00

The University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) seeks to establish a
CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) Program producing approximately ten
SFS students per year for government service to help secure, protect and defend
our Nation's information systems. UAH's SFS Program spans engineering, science
and business administration, giving students options to choose a technical
direction of most interest to them. The University, a Carnegie Foundation Very
High Research Activity University, is located adjacent to government and
Department of Defense organizations at Redstone Arsenal. Recruitment of women
and underrepresented minorities is a priority for the Program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Program introduces Information Assurance (IA) topics into the
curriculum from the freshman experience through graduate work. The IA topics are
introduced in the context of specific courses, such as database systems and
operating systems. Many of the courses include practical experiences to provide
students with real-world learning opportunities. The Program is supported by a
network security lab in the Department of Computer Science, a Safety and
Security Lab in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and a
Digital Forensics Lab in the College of Business. An active learning philosophy
is used during laboratory activities to help students acquire and retain skills.
Research opportunities include security of big data, industrial control system
security, cybersecurity business processes, safety, aviation security, digital
forensics, and automotive security.