* 1431839
* Peer Enhanced Experiential Research in STEM (PEERS)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Paulo Acioli, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2019
* USD 426,738.00

This project is designed to advance the research skills of undergraduate majors
in STEM. This will be accomplished through the inclusion of hands-on research
activities, the expansion of computer simulations, and most importantly, the use
of peer mentors to facilitate these activities in the introductory 200-level
courses in Chemistry, Earth Science, Physics, Mathematics, and Computer Science.
The development of a well-trained cadre of peer mentors is critical to the
success of the program. A new 300-level interdisciplinary lab-based course,
"Research Workshop in Physical and Computational Sciences," will be designed to
provide this preparation. The course will be structured around a series of
modules that exposes students to topics drawn from different STEM disciplines
through hands-on, open-ended laboratory exercises. These students will, in turn,
serve as peer mentors in the introductory 200-level courses, into which similar
research components have been embedded. The combination of curricular changes
through experiential research will strengthen the STEM programs at the
university and will improve retention of these students. The expected long-term
outcomes of this project include strengthening the curriculum, improving student
learning and retention, increasing student satisfaction in STEM, developing and
strengthening a culture of research for undergraduate students, and increasing
the overall number of STEM students, particularly those from underrepresented
groups. The recruitment and retention of students in STEM is an important issue
in our society, since jobs in STEM fields are projected to grow faster than
those in other fields. The project will also provide a transferable model for
growing our future STEM workforce at universities
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on the undergraduate
research activities initiated at the university in 2009-2011 by a Title III
grant from the U.S. Department of Education. That project resulted in the
formation of a Student Center for Science Engagement to provide academic support
for STEM majors, as well as a structured undergraduate summer research program
in the sciences, which has been institutionalized since 2012 and impacts
approximately 50 STEM majors each summer. The new project will expand the
results through a "scale up, scale down" approach, engaging a larger group of
students in laboratory-based guided research activities in a classroom setting
through mini-research projects incorporated into the curriculum. The goals of
this project are to introduce inquiry-based elements and computational tools in
the introductory and intermediate-level courses in the sciences and mathematics;
to develop new discipline-specific and interdisciplinary courses that are in
line with NSF's STEM workforce development objectives; and to provide students
with research opportunities within the classroom setting. Examples of projects
that will be incorporated into the new curriculum are computational dynamical
mechanics, mathematical modeling of disease, geological modeling of hazards, and
surface chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While implementing the program, the
investigators will examine questions of effectiveness such as the following: (1)
Does participation in the reformed courses lead to measurable change in
students' interest, aspirations, and preparation to persist in their discipline?
(2) Does participation in the reformed courses lead to measurable change in
students' learning, especially mastery of course content and understanding of
the research process? (3) Do the reformed courses contribute to increased
persistence in the major? (4) Does participation in the reformed courses lead to
increased retention rates for women and minorities?