* 1431671
* AIMS: Analyzing Images to Learn Mathematics and Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jeremy Wojdak, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 142,536.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project is based on the
knowledge that students engaged in real biological research, either via
experiences outside of the class, or open-inquiry activities in the class, learn
more and are better motivated. The project team is generating learning materials
that provide authentic research experiences for students in introductory biology
classes. One of the challenges in biology curricula is the disinterest and
discomfort many students have with mathematics and statistics. The learning
materials being created, assessed, and disseminated allow meaningful hypothesis
formation, data collection, and most importantly analyses, that capture student
interest via image analysis of fascinating biological phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photographic images can quickly capture people's interest,
and can transmit a great deal of information. This project is capitalizing on
these phenomena to create engaging educational materials to teach quantitative
and analytical skills to biology students. Students are presented with
inherently interesting sets of still images or videos from which they can
observe and measure real biological phenomena, via image analysis. They are
presented with a tangible research framework and given background information,
asked to develop hypotheses, and then asked to collect data from a set of
images/videos, firsthand. Through these images, students are engaged in the
process of science, first superficially as they hear interesting research
projects and examine absorbing photographic images; but then more deeply during
data collection and subsequent analyses. The power of image analysis to aid
instruction already has a foundation in the pedagogical literature for
mathematics, geo-engineering, and computer science, but has been more rarely
used in biology. The research projects being used as the foundation of the
learning materials include ecology, behavioral science, neuroscience, evolution,
and molecular and cellular processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project evaluation
includes pre- and post-instruction assessment to examine student learning gains,
as well as direct queries concerning students' attitudes to the biological
sciences. Learning modules tested at Radford University are then being tested at
a broad range of partner institutions, including Virginia Tech, Vassar College,
and Roanoke College. The knowledge being generated is a means for these
cognitive skills to be integrated into traditional biology curricula nationwide.