* 1431019
* SBIR Phase II:  Bioprinted fat grafts for improved nipple reconstruction after breast cancer
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Scott Collins, TeVido BioDevices. Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 951,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the delivery of a custom-made nipple made
from a patient's own cells for women who have had a mastectomy due to breast
cancer. In the US about 300,000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer annually
and nearly 40% will undergo mastectomies, full removal of the breast. A third of
them will opt for breast reconstruction, most of whom will desire a nipple.
Patients with loss of the nipple areola complex (NAC) from cancer treatments
continue to experience psychological distress long after breast mound
reconstruction has taken place, yet currently available options for nipple
reconstruction are vulnerable to an unpredictable degree of loss of nipple
projection, symmetry, color and possible need for reoperation. The technology
can be evolved to treat other unmet needs in reconstruction and the cosmetic
surgery field. The technology in this project can contribute to the scientific
knowledge fundamental to the fields of Tissue Engineering and Regenerative
Medicine. The results of this research will help the field move towards larger,
clinically relevant tissues and potentially the creation of whole organs.

This project will investigate, develop tools and techniques, and select best
formulation for the ultimate delivery of a graft that has been tissue engineered
to address the lack of reconstructive solutions for women that have undergone
mastectomies and desire nipple reconstruction. The research aims of the Phase II
project will demonstrate further viability of the scientific concepts proposed,
such as impact of vascularization on volume retention, and develop
tools/techniques for engineering shaped adipose tissue constructs (relevant to
nipple projection). The project will test and select best formulation for
adipose constructs as measured by in vivo volume retention, host reaction and
vascular infusion. The research proposes to further optimize size and projection
parameters and develop methods to assess and characterize incoming materials to
reproducibly fabricate constructs with the correct size and desired volume
retention.