* 1431002
* Societal resilience and interaction with the environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Cameron McNeil, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 170,728.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Cameron L. McNeil will
lead an international team of scholars investigating the role of environmental
factors in the collapse of ancient Maya city-states. The collapse, which
occurred within lowland regions of the Maya area between AD 790 and 950, has
been the focus of extensive debate. Numerous hypotheses have been proposed to
explain it, including warfare, climate change, top-heavy political systems, and
natural disasters. But in particular, environmental degradation, or
deforestation, has found widespread support as an explanation for the collapse.
Archaeological and environmental data from the Copan Valley in Honduras are
frequently invoked to argue that the ancient Maya destroyed their environment
and precipitated the collapse of their society. According to this view,
population pressure drove the Maya to deforest their lands and thereby instigate
large-scale erosion, contributing to the political and demographic collapse.
This project will use research techniques from a variety of scientific
disciplines to generate new data on human-environmental interaction in the Copan
Valley, which will shed new light on the environmental degradation theory of the
collapse. The project will also address a contrasting hypothesis: that at the
peak of their civilization the Maya actually implemented sustainable land-use
practices, implying that deforestation was not a major factor in the collapse.
Preliminary data collected by Dr. McNeil suggests that the Maya at Copan had, in
fact, established a long term sustainable environmental equilibrium and
degradation was not the cause of social change. The project has a strong
commitment to education of both US and Honduran students. It has an active
history of including both US graduate and undergraduate students in the
research. Training Honduran students serves to raise the level of archaeological
knowledge within the country and contributes to an appreciation of and a
commitment to protecting the nation's historic and prehistoric heritage.

The majority of the data collection will be centered on the archaeological site
of RÃ­o Amarillo, an ancient Maya town in the Copan Valley, and the alluvial
plain to its west. The goal of the research is to collect a variety of
independent and complementary data sets amenable to the analysis of past human-
environmental interactions. In particular, the project will undertake the
analysis of pollen and phytoliths from sediment cores extracted from a body of
water; starch and phytolith analysis from ground stones, lithics, and ceramics;
the identification of charred macroremains recovered from archaeological
excavations; stable carbon isotopes and phytoliths to determine the vegetative
histories of the fields around the site; ground penetrating radar (GPR) to
uncover signs of drainage networks; 3D imaging of the landscape with near-
infrared sensors to look for field modifications; and recording modern pollen
rain to assist in interpreting ancient pollen signatures. Each of these forms of
data has the potential to provide indications of the extent of environmental
degradation created by human populations over time. Results from this research
will complement the analysis of artifacts and settlement plans acquired from
archaeological excavations, providing a detailed record of human-environmental
interaction in this area. The project will provide new data and new insights
concerning the state of the landscape in the Copan Valley at the time of the
collapse.