* 1431908
* Developing Scientific Reasoning: Targeted Physics Instruction for STEM Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Lei Bao, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 649,970.00

Developing scientific reasoning skills is a major goal of contemporary
education. The nature of jobs in the global, knowledge-based economy calls for a
shift of educational goals from content drilling toward fostering higher-end
skills in reasoning, creativity, and open problem solving. Unfortunately, the
typical introductory science course does not significantly impact students in
these areas. Although scientific reasoning has become a widely targeted domain
for high-end skills in STEM learning, the knowledge base about the impact of
curricula targeting scientific reasoning is still not very deep. This project
will address the gap by producing a research-based curriculum specifically
designed to develop scientific reasoning skills, as well as solid evidence about
how the course activities and their specific strategies affect college students'
development of scientific reasoning skills. Outcomes of the project will include
(1) a complete lab curriculum for first-semester (introductory) physics, with
lab modules designed such that they can be flexibly used in lab settings across
institutions, and (2) a knowledge base with assessment outcomes on the
effectiveness of different elements of the curriculum in helping students
develop scientific reasoning skills, as well as best practices for implementing
the curriculum in different settings to optimize learning. Because the
scientific reasoning modules will be designed to readily fit into existing lab
courses, this work has the potential to impact thousands of STEM majors (1,600
per year at the University of Cincinnati alone). Because scientific reasoning
skills cross all areas of STEM, the project's research outcomes will be
adaptable across many courses in the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines the development of promising curricula with a rigorous
assessment/evaluation study. The robust assessment plan will be conducted across
six pre-selected test sites. A validated assessment tool will be used to measure
students' scientific reasoning. The research design, which involves multiple
repeated measures with random subgroups of a student population, will produce
data that allows for the identification of patterns of class mean performance on
scientific reasoning skills over time, as well as an understanding of how
changes in scientific reasoning performance are connected with specific
instructional events. Statistical analyses involving multiple t-tests will
determine whether the evolution patterns and states are statistically
significant and consistent with instructional events by comparing performance
before and after relevant instruction. Survey data collected from instructors at
test sites will provide evidence of successful implementation strategies, as
well as challenges, such that the curriculum and related products (i.e.,
instructor guides) can be designed to optimize learning and promote widespread
use of the end products.