* 1431022
* SBIR Phase II:  Analog/Mixed-Signal Integrated Circuit Verification Coverage
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Felicia James, Zipalog, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,244,527.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to increase the
competitiveness of U.S. semiconductor industry by improving the quality of A/MS
design verification, improving first pass design success and reducing time-to-
market. Today, current analog verification methods and tools often fail to catch
design mistakes, especially due to unforeseen interactions across chip
subsystems, and these mistakes are a frequent cause of costly delays in bringing
products to market even on chips where analog is only a small portion of the
overall design ? a $63 billion market. The costs and lost profit potential
related to multiple design versions can quickly run to millions of dollars and
easily dwarfs the cost of providing designers access to the appropriate design
tools. Using two different market analyses, the first using a digital
verification market analogy and the second considering worldwide new (not slight
derivatives) designs in just the AMS IC market, leads to an estimation of total
available market for new analog verification solutions of $300 million annual
revenue. Further extending the verification solutions with analytics and
collaboration tools can potentially increase the market by a further 50% to $450
million annual revenue. Understanding A/MS verification coverage is a key
component of this opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project proposes a verification coverage
system for analog/mixed-signal (A/MS) integrated circuit development.
Verification of today?s complex integrated circuits and systems is widely
acknowledged as a critical challenge to improving design productivity. Part of
the verification challenge revolves around understanding what portion of the
operating space has been examined; i.e., ?covered?. Today well-accepted formal
and simulation-based techniques exist to capture and measure test coverage for
digital integrated circuits, but there is no corresponding commercial capability
for analog and mixed-signal integrated circuits. Analog designers frequently
spend too much time analyzing and over-testing system behavior for a small set
of well understood usage scenarios while leaving significant portions of the
state-space completely untested. The design exploration problem for A/MS
circuits presents a critical challenge for implementing such systems due to the
inherently large design space associated with these types of circuits. Key
objectives for the project include productizing and extending key components
demonstrated in the Phase 1 prototype. This project will deliver a commercial
product to provide A/MS verification coverage data that is actionable and
facilitates collaboration between design and verification teams. The resulting
product will have scalability and performance to handle large complex designs.