* 1431033
* SBIR Phase II:  A Cell Analysis Platform for Low-cost, Rapid Diagnosis of Sepsis Using Microfluidic Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Daniel Gossett, CytoVale, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,419,607.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in detecting sepsis early in its course,
before end organ damage when it is most treatable. Sepsis, an uncontrolled
systemic response to local infection by bacteria or fungi, is responsible for
more deaths than prostate cancer, breast cancer, and AIDS combined and is
associated with ~$17B in annual U.S. healthcare expenditures. We anticipate that
providing emergency department physicians with an earlier diagnostic will
profoundly influence clinical outcomes (currently ~40% mortality), costs
(&gt;$22,000/case), and the quality of life for survivors and their families.
Accumulating evidence connects systemic immune activation ? a key process in
sepsis ? with single-cell architectural changes that are mechanically measured
by high-speed mechanical phenotyping technology. This technology is well-suited
for adult sepsis screening in the emergency department (market size of $1.5B)
due to: (1) the functional analysis of cell state the mechanical measurement
provides, (2) its high achievable throughput and therefore statistical accuracy,
(3) exceedingly short turnaround time, (4) low cost of goods, and (5) the
clinically-actionable information it provides. Beyond the adult sepsis screening
market, several additional indications include neonatal sepsis, bladder cancer
detection, academic research tools, and drug
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project brings an
innovative new class of biomarkers to bear on a problem that has been
intractable with current biomarkers. Briefly, the physical properties of cells
have been known to be important for decades, but only with the advent of
breakthrough microfluidic technology have we been able to measure these
parameters in a high-throughput manner capable of diagnosing disease. This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II award will be used to develop and
validate innovative sample preparation and image analysis modules for a sepsis
screening technology as well as performance of proof-of-concept clinical studies
that would be a flagship offering in using biomechanical biomarkers to diagnose
disease. The technical objectives are designed to improve sensitivity to white
blood cells, activated during sepsis, by microfluidic automation of sample
preparation and optimization of the microscopic imaging optics. In addition to
preparing the test for practical implementation in the emergency department, the
test will be validated with a proof-of-concept clinical study, and a clinical
scoring system will be devised.