* 1431009
* SBIR Phase II:  Autonomous 3D Scanner for Building Interiors and Exteriors
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Oskar Skrinjar, Scientific Imaging and Visualization, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2017
* USD 669,885.00

This SBIR Phase II project will result in a system that can scan building
interiors and exteriors and construct corresponding detailed, photo-realistic 3D
models. Having such models is useful in a number of applications. However, the
existing approaches for the construction of such models are labor intensive and
require highly trained people and expensive equipment, which make the entire
process prohibitively expensive for most applications. The proposed system will
significantly reduce the cost of construction of such models by using only video
input and automating most of the process. The proposed system could be used to
relatively inexpensively construct detailed, photo-realistic 3D models of
interiors and exteriors of: real estate properties, restaurants, sport clubs,
museums, historic buildings, architectural sites, touristic sites, university
campuses, amusement parks, water parks, zoos, apartment complexes, resorts,
hotels, hospitals, shopping malls, etc. The constructed 3D models can then be
explored online using computers, smartphones and tablets. Furthermore, the
system can be used for mapping or exploring buildings in situations where it is
dangerous or impractical for people to enter, which is often the case in rescue
and law-enforcement applications. Given the wide range of potential customers,
the proposed system has the potential to generate both one-time earnings as well
as recurring income streams.

The objective of the project is to develop a system for inexpensive generation
of photo-realistic 3D models of building interiors and exteriors and provide an
on-line interactive visualization interface for the viewing of the 3D models.
The proposed system is based on a small unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) equipped
with a wireless camera that can semi-autonomously fly inside and around the
building, video record all the interior and exterior structures, and send the
video and other recorded information to the base station where the 3D model is
constructed using computer vision techniques. The proposed system requires the
development of two innovative technologies: (1) semi-automated construction of
texture-mapped 3D models of structures video recorded from a flying vehicle, and
(2) semi-autonomous flying of an UAV inside and around a building based on the
video stream from the UAV's camera. While 3D scanning is an existing technology
and small UAVs have already been developed, this proposal will combine these
technologies and enhance their capabilities to deliver new value. In addition,
computer, smartphone and tablet software for interactive visualization and
exploration of the constructed 3D models will be developed along with a user-
friendly interface.