* 1431578
* Texas State STEM Rising Stars
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Mina Guirguis, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Texas State University - San Marcos, STEM Rising Stars program, will be a
four-year comprehensive effort designed to support college students pursuing
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) to feel confident and
motivated about their future careers, to be academically successful, and to
graduate on time. The project will increase understanding of successful ways to
support and encourage female, Hispanic, and African American undergraduate
students in STEM fields of study. Increasing STEM participation and graduation
numbers for minority and female students will have a major impact on the
production of a diverse and well-trained group of STEM graduates in Texas and
potentially, at other large institutions across the country. This project will
provide a model for how to recruit and retain student interest and participation
in STEM education and will provide research insight as to how STEM instruction
can be improved to be more effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project
goals at Texas State University over the next four years will be to: 1) increase
the overall second-year STEM undergraduate student retention rate by 12% over
four years to achieve a target of 62.5% retention; 2) increase the retention
rate of Hispanic and African American STEM majors by 15% to achieve a target of
53% retention; 3) increase the overall representation of Hispanic and African
American students (combined) in STEM majors by 20% over four years to achieve a
target of 36% representation; and 4) increase the number of female students
completing undergraduate STEM degrees by 25% over four years to achieve a target
of 20% completion. These goals are guided by theoretical bases such as Tinto's
academic and social integration model and Astin's involvement model, Tierney's
model of persistence which suggests that institutions need to provide their
students the cultural capital necessary to succeed in an educational system
where barriers to persistence and integration exist for minority students, and
the use of active learning methods. This project also considers contextual
micro-level data that some theorists believe will help change agents understand
what works and under what circumstances. Some of the contextual factors
considered include: faculty and peer relationships, family and community
support, and academic sense of self. By establishing communities of learners at
both the student and faculty levels, Texas State STEM Rising Stars aims to make
a significant and sustainable impact on the overall STEM learning culture at
Texas State University. The project evaluation will involve a mixed-methods
approach for formative and summative assessment. The formative assessment
component will assess student participants' learning by measuring changes in
their pre and post assessments, course grades, and the degree to which students
report a continuing interest in STEM fields of study. The summative evaluation
will monitor progress toward achieving project objectives and activities. In
addition, the project will be conducting a persistence analysis, tracking
student persistence and attrition among project participants. Texas State STEM
Rising Stars is committed to producing significant improvements and has the
faculty, partnerships, and infrastructure needed to assure success.