* 1431598
* Quantifying the contribution of the deep biosphere in the marine sediment carbon cycle using deep-sea sediment cores from the Baltic Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Karen Lloyd, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 362,095.00

Marine sediments contain a microbial population large enough to rival that of
Earth's oceans, but much about this vast community is unknown. Innovations in
total cell counting methods have refined estimates of cell concentrations, but
tell us nothing about specific taxa. Isotopic data provides evidence that a
majority of subsurface microorganisms survive by breaking down organic matter,
yet measurable links between specific microbial taxa and their organic matter
substrates are untested. The proposed work overcomes these limitations, with a
particular focus on the degradation of proteins and carbohydrates, which
comprise the bulk of classifiable sedimentary organic matter. The project will
link specific taxa to potential extracellular enzyme activity in the genomes of
single microbial cells, apply newly-identified, optimal methods for counting
viable cells belonging to specific taxa using catalyzed reporter deposition
fluorescent in situ hybridization (CARD-FISH), and measure the potential
activity of their enzymes in situ. The resulting data will provide key evidence
about the strategies subsurface life uses to overcome extreme energy limitation
and contribute to the long-term carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigators are employing novel,improved methods to quantify cells
of specific taxa in the marine subsurface and to determine the biogeochemical
functions of those uncultured taxa, including: &lt;br/&gt;1)Determine the
pathway of organic carbon degradation in single cell genomes of uncultured,
numerically dominant subsurface microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;2)Quantify viable
bacteria and archaea in the deep subsurface using an improvement on the existing
technology of CARD-FISH. &lt;br/&gt;3)Measure the potential activities (Vmax
values) of enzymes in deep Baltic Sea sediments, and use the abundances of
enzyme-producing microorganisms to calculate depth profiles of cell-specific
Vmax values. &lt;br/&gt;The project combines these methods in order to identify
and quantify the cells capable of degrading organic matter in deep sediments of
the Baltic Sea, obtained from Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP)
expedition 347. These results will greatly expand our knowledge of the function
and activity of uncultured microorganisms in the deep subsurface.