* 1431025
* SBIR Phase II:  Project to Create an Automated System to Identify and Curate Web-based Resources for Entrepreneurs
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Bradley Davis, Enclavix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 760,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop an online system to find and organize
the best web-based resources for entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs have the
opportunity to create profitable, society-changing companies with high quality
jobs, but many entrepreneurs lack skills in the areas of capital, finance, legal
and startup management which are required to convert an opportunity into a
successful company. Many entrepreneurs fail because they "do not know what they
do not know", because they do not know about available resources, or because
they cannot readily find those resources. Many resources are available to
entrepreneurs, but with millions of search engine links on the topic, the most
useful of these are nearly impossible to find. The proposed online system will
use machine intelligence software to identify and categorize a wide array of
resources. It will use another machine intelligence system to grade the quality
of these resources, and then use a unique display system to show the most
helpful and relevant resources in a dynamic constellation-like interface. This
is designed to improve the ability of entrepreneurs to explore and find the help
they need to solve their problems. This project requires state of the art
software development to train computers to identify and qualify each resource in
order to select those most helpful to entrepreneurs. By helping entrepreneurs be
more successful, more rapidly, this project will help grow America's economy,
generate revenue and profits and create new jobs for businesses all across the
country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this SBIR Phase II
proposal is to deliver a working system to help accelerate entrepreneurs by
guiding them to the resources that will best help them achieve success.
Specifically, during this project, the team will develop multiple machine
intelligence systems to perform the classification, categorization and quality
assessment of online resources; build on the existing Enclavix semantic network;
and collaborate with the University of Utah to implement an advanced
visualization system. This Phase II proposal is advancing the state of research
in all three research areas. This project will include developing a machine
intelligence engine to take an entrepreneur focused web-based resource and place
it in the proper category in the semantic network. A second machine intelligence
engine will solve the difficult problem of determining the quality of a given
resource. The machine intelligence systems that are being proposed are very
complex and are pushing the boundaries of this technology because of the number
of resources that need to be evaluated. In addition, again because of the large
number of target resources available, visualizing and exploring the data is
challenging and requires an advanced visualization system that provides a new
way to successfully access large amounts of data.