* 1431522
* Expanding Instrumentation Access at Multiple Institutions Using Portable IR, Raman, and XRF Spectrometers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Kevin Bennett, Hood College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 330,975.00

Collaborators at Hood College, Frederick Community College, and Mount St. Mary's
College seek to develop inquiry based laboratory experiments while
simultaneously providing a replicable model for increasing instrumentation
access across multiple institutions. The implementation of these inquiry-based
activities will place the responsibility for learning on the students, so that
they engage with the material at a deeper level than in traditional
?confirmation? experiments. This will lead to greater internalization and
integration of the material, which increases both student learning and
confidence. The primary focus of this Improving Undergraduate Education project
will be on integrating guided-inquiry experiences across the chemistry
curriculum, however faculty in other disciplines including physics, geosciences,
and art/archaeology will also be involved. Each activity will be developed by
one institution, but as many as possible will be tested at multiple sites.
Assessment will allow the activities to be vetted across different institution
types (PUI versus community college) with varied student profiles, resulting in
a library of experiments that can be shared with the chemical education
community. The results of this work will be disseminated widely through posters,
presentations, publications, and web-based resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are varying levels of inquiry from low, level hands-on activities where the
teacher determines the topics and questions to high level inquiry where the
students determine all aspects of the experiment. Recognizing this, the
collaborators plan to design experiments that use the highest level of inquiry
possible, in which students choose the topic, methods, and finally share their
interpretation of the results. In other words, students will be exposed to ways
of learning and knowing that occur in scientific research. Data generated
through assessment and evaluation should support the rationale that by
cultivating students' self-efficacy in the laboratory environment, they will
have better content knowledge and greater assurance in their scientific
abilities. Formative and summative evaluation will focus on whether or not the
project objectives have been met and the effectiveness of project activities.
Each experiment will be evaluated both qualitatively and quantitatively (pre-
and post-tests and selected exam questions. Because of the small class sizes at
all three participating institutions, quantitative data is expected to be
helpful for some of the larger courses like general and organic chemistry, but
will be of limited utility for small courses. Therefore immediate student
feedback mechanisms for each experiment will be developed. The results of this
work will be widely disseminated, both on the individual activity and project
level. Innovative experiments will be published in peer-reviewed journals such
as the Journal of Chemical Education and The Chemical Educator. The results will
also be presented at the American Chemical Society Biennial Conference on
Chemical Education (2016). When appropriate, activities will also be uploaded to
sub-discipline specific online communities such as the NSF-supported Virtual
Inorganic Pedagogical Resource. Project deliverables will include results of
summative evaluation and all course materials.