* 1431428
* Workshop: Ecology under Lake Ice; NCEAS-Santa Barbara, CA - October 2014 and February 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Stephanie Hampton, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 20,520.00

This workshop will bring together in person about 20 experts, as well as a
number of others via internet connections, to synthesize the existing
information about how active organisms are in winter under the ice of frozen
lakes. Usually summer is considered the prime growing season, but there is
increasing evidence that long winters are also important for diverse biological
activity and physical processes that may affect the functioning of lakes all
year. Ocean studies have shown that under-ice biological communities can
contribute more than half of the total annual productivity in some locations.
Far less is known about lakes, but observations suggest the same may be true
there too. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice loss is now widely recognized as a major
environmental change in the polar seas. Winter ice duration has also shortened
in lakes worldwide, but there has been much less attention to the resulting
ecological changes. The economic and social importance of inland waters that
freeze in the winter, such as the Great Lakes, are great reasons why we should
better understand lake dynamics over the entire year. Products of this workshop
will include the identification of key next steps in winter limnology, the
exploration of satellite remote sensing approaches, and collaboration with ocean
scientists to answer big questions about how lake ecosystems function under ice.
This workshop will also build and reinforce a network of scientists studying
under-ice processes, produce scientific articles, and generate data sets that
will be available to the public. Social media will provide other outlets for the
results and lead to other opportunities for the participants to engage with the
popular media as results emerge.