* 1431378
* Collaborative Research: Climate Risk Governance and Polycentrism in the US States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mark Stephan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2018
* USD 103,846.00

Climate change is often described as a significant global challenge best
addressed with centralized national and international institutions. But in the
US, the federal government's role has been limited while many states and
localities are leading in the development of climate mitigation and adaptation
policies. This kind of polycentric governance, where hundreds of subnational US
governments and thousands of businesses are actively addressing climate change,
is surprising. Social science research to date has largely focused on exploring
the occurrence of climate mitigation or adaptation policies at just one level of
government while ignoring the consequences of those policies: actual changes in
environmental performance by Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emitters. This shortcoming
stems, in part, from availability of data; there were no facility-level GHG
emission trend data until 2007 when Congress created the Greenhouse Gas
Reporting Program (GHGRP). We use these data to create a 5-year panel dataset
along with data collected from secondary sources, a web-based survey of a range
of stakeholders, and interviews from six case studies to be analyzed with both
quantitative and qualitative methods. This research relies upon a comprehensive
combination of theory, multilevel statistical modeling, and qualitative
comparative analysis to better understand a complex, longitudinal, and
multilevel governance challenge.

The research team uses an institutional policy analysis framework to examine
three aspects of the polycentric nature of climate governance in the US. First,
we will describe the types of climate risk governance arrangements that have
developed across and within the states. Second, we will examine when and where
these institutional arrangements spur Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission reductions
at facilities. Third, we will analyze the institutional elements and
interactions that are most effective in changing environmental performance. This
collaborative project begins the difficult work of evaluating the extent to
which different US climate risk governance arrangements affect GHG emission
trends. The project results will inform evidence-based climate policy choices,
governance decisions, and public understanding. To maximize the impact of this
research, the team will assemble a diverse advisory board that includes business
and environmental professionals, along with state and local government
officials. Their advice on data collection, dissemination, and outreach will
help ensure that the results from this project are robust and reach a range of
stakeholders. Moreover, research results will be subjected to peer-review in
scholarly conferences and journals. Research results will be made publically
available through a website that includes: (1) a web and mobile phone map
application of facility-level GHG emission reduction performance; (2) access to
datasets, reports, conference papers, peer-reviewed publications, and (3)
webinars to disseminate project findings broadly.