* 1431415
* Workshop: A Cross-Disciplinary Analysis of Processes of  Development and Modernization - Washington, D.C., June 2015
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Smith, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 22,892.00

This award is to support a two-day interdisciplinary workshop that is to be held
in Washington, DC, in June 2015. The workshop will bring together historians of
science, technology, and the environment with regional experts from around the
world to discuss pre-circulated papers. The ultimate aim of the workshop is to
publish an edited volume. The focus of the workshop and volume will be the
environmental dimensions of international development programs in the Global
South and the associated ideas of technological transfer. Among the issues and
questions to be addressed are the historical origins and intentions of
modernization and industrialization projects, their impact in both rural and
urban environments in less developed parts of the world, and the changes that
new technologies and knowledge regimes brought to local ecologies, production
systems, and cultural understandings of nature. Participants will also consider
how new forms of expertise were created and affected indigenous knowledge, and
how new technologies reconfigured spatial arrangements, particularly the
relations between global, national, and local levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will add both insight and momentum to the individual research agendas
of participants, and thereby have an impact on the research of the collaborators
and the students of the participants. A publicly accessible workshop webpage
will also be developed that will make widely accessible the essay abstracts,
author contact information, and a summary of the conference proceedings. The
published volume of workshop papers will help people understand and assess the
long-term effects of such interventions, so that people and institutions
invested in the Global South might reconsider their approaches to development
and industrialization in these regions with the potential to improve and protect
natural landscapes in the future.