* 1432963
* Student Funding to Attend the International Conference on Strongly Coupled Coulomb Systems (SCCS); Santa Fe, NM; July 27 - August 1, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Michael Murillo, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

The SCCS (Strongly Coupled Coulomb Systems) meeting is an international
scientific conference with a broad focus that includes topics of relevance to
multiple fields including, but not limited to, energy and environmental
sciences, atmospheric sciences, astrophysics, and high energy density physics.
Generally, between 100 and 200 scientists, students, and post-doctoral
researchers attend this conference. Topics specifically covered at the
conference include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- dense and astrophysical
plasmas&lt;br/&gt;- density functional theory&lt;br/&gt;- ionic
liquids&lt;br/&gt;- multi-component and astrophysical plasmas&lt;br/&gt;- dusty
plasmas&lt;br/&gt;- white dwarfs&lt;br/&gt;- electron liquids&lt;br/&gt;-
plasmas in condensed matter&lt;br/&gt;- confined and mesoscopic Coulomb
systems&lt;br/&gt;- high energy density plasmas in the laboratory&lt;br/&gt;-
classical charged systems&lt;br/&gt;- developments in theoretical methods and
numerical techniques&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of
this conference, it offers students a unique opportunity to not only learn how
their research may be applied to other fields, but to also interact with top
researchers within their own fields. The last time that this conference was held
in the United States was in 2002. However because it took place not long after
the attacks of September 11, 2001, many of the international participants were
not able to obtain visas to attend. After twelve years, the organizers are
finally able to bring the conference back to the US. The long hiatus from the US
increases the potential impact of this conference on US science, since it will
offer a more affordable opportunity for many US researchers. This is especially
important for young researchers who are just beginning to build a network for
future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator
anticipates a number of graduate and postgraduate students will attend. All
participating students will be asked to fill out and submit an Application for
Funding with supporting letters from their graduate advisors to the PI and a
technical committee. All submitted applications will be carefully reviewed, and
appropriate funds will be distributed to aid accepted students. Partial expenses
will be reimbursed for travel, housing, and registration for each of
approximately six to ten students.