* 1432299
* Sustainable Interdisciplinary Research to Inspire Undergraduate Success
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Thomas Landerholm, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 573,751.00

There have been recent urgent calls to train more students for the 21st Century
scientific workforce and to increase the diversity of students entering Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) careers. Many studies illustrate
the positive influence of research experiences on the performance, retention,
attitudes and career decisions of undergraduate science majors In this project
Sacramento State, a large comprehensive urban 4-year university with a diverse
student body, aims to increase undergraduate student success by building a STEM
Education Community that engages Biological Sciences faculty and students,
campus science educators and community partners in interdisciplinary research on
a problem of particular interest to them and of general importance to the entire
nation; human impact on the ecology of rivers, in this case the American River
flowing at the college's doorstep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's teaching
approach is built around the tenants of Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action. Its emphasis is on community building
within the university to ensure that all biology students experience the
intellectual stimulation of a research project and that faculty learning
communities be established to ensure ongoing institutional commitment to a
quality undergraduate education for all students. The primary mechanism employed
is development and implementation of research-based classroom experiences in
which students at all levels of training explore a single large-scale problem.
The project involves the biology department, in cooperation with educational
researchers, in science education research, extensive curriculum development,
faculty development and interdisciplinary program development. Twelve biology
courses will be transformed by this project. Fourteen tenured faculty will
participate in a Faculty Learning Community in order to implement evidence-based
teaching practices, effective use of technology in the classroom and to
collaborate across their sub-disciplines in multiple courses to solve big
scientific problems. Integrating a range of inputs, the team will iteratively
improve the modules using a design-based research and development strategy.
Among the broader impacts of this course is that it is sustainable and scalable
and easily adapted by other institutions because it utilizes existing course
budgets and places no undue pressure on individual faculty laboratory finances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/