* 1432591
* Teaching to Learn: Improving Undergraduate Science Education Through Engagement in K-7 Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Swoap, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 810,876.00

The majority of research on undergraduate science education focuses on the
impact of various instructional techniques on students' learning of science.
Less understood are the roles of undergraduates' understanding of and attitude
toward science in shaping science course-taking and persistence in science
majors. This project aims to address this gap in research by investigating the
impact of science teaching experiences on undergraduate students. The project
will accomplish this by engaging science, education, and liberal arts students
in a year-long experience to develop and teach science lessons in K-7 classrooms
in a high-needs school district (North Adams Public Schools). This experience is
expected to (1) deepen undergraduates' understanding of the nature of science,
(2) increase their ability to explain science concepts to non-specialists, (3)
increase their confidence in their own ability in science, (4) create a
"community of science learners" that can sustain pursuit of further science
coursework, and ultimately (5) lead to more science course taking and higher
retention in science majors. Undergraduates from the Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts (a small public liberal arts college) and Williams College (a small
private liberal arts college) will work with K-7 teachers and college science
professors to develop science units based on the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS). Pairs of undergraduate students will co-teach these units with
K-7 classroom teachers and the support of college science education professors
over the course of the school year. The undergraduates and K-7 teachers will
also participate in joint professional development to deepen their understanding
of both the nature of scientific inquiry and science teaching, and to reinforce
their connection as a community of learners.

The project bridges two areas of research to investigate the impact of teaching
science in elementary settings on the science learning and education outcomes
for science, education, and liberal arts undergraduates. NSF's Graduate Teaching
Fellows in K-12 Education (GK-12) program, which engaged STEM graduate students
in K-12 teaching, found several positive impacts of teaching experiences on
graduate students, including increased teaching skills, improved skills at
communicating scientific concepts to non-specialist audiences, increased skill
in collaboration, improved research skills, and an enhanced understanding of the
relevance of their research to society. Studies of informal STEM education
opportunities (including undergraduate research, internships, and mentoring)
have found impacts on students' understanding of the nature of science, science
self-efficacy, communication skills, and retention in science majors. However,
there has been little research to date on the impact of informal science
teaching experiences on the science education and attitudes of undergraduates.
This project is designed both to influence the likelihood that undergraduates
will enter into and complete science majors and to improve science literacy in
the general populace by improving key aspects of science literacy among liberal
arts undergraduates and pre-service and in-service elementary school teachers.
Project outcomes will be assessed through a variety of surveys completed by
participating undergraduates and a matched comparison group, participant
questionnaires to gather qualitative data on the "Teaching to Learn" experience,
observations of teaching practice, and longitudinal transcript reviews of
participants and comparison group students. In addition, the collaboration
between multiple colleges and a school district will enable the assessment of
the model's feasibility and impact across institutional types and diverse
undergraduate populations.