* 1432937
* Mullins' Effect Softening, Recovery, and Mechanisms in Tendon
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Roderic Lakes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

"Mullins' effect" is always observed when mechanically testing tendons in the
laboratory. The "Mullins' effect" is an irreversible softening of a structure
after it is stretched. This effect also leaves a tendon longer than it was
before it was stretched. All tendons stretched in a lab, however, have been
previously loaded in life. If a standard Mullins' type of effect occurred, all
laboratory loads at or below those already seen in life would not soften the
structure. But, this is not observed. To explore whether living cell contraction
(occurring in life) can explain this dichotomy in behaviors, fresh, cellular
tendons will be tested and compared to tendons that were frozen to remove cell
activity. Mechanical behavior and tissue morphology will be measured, focusing
on tissue recovery. To further investigate whether the observed differences
between in life versus in the lab behaviors are due to cell contraction, the
contractile ability in tendon cells will be removed with a biochemical
inhibitor. Then these tendons (with live cells) will be tested in the lab for
Mullins' behaviors. Finally there will be a test to determine whether changes in
tissue hydration and post-load rehydration affect recovery from Mullins'
behaviors. For this objective, tendons in hypo- and hyper-osmotic solutions,
thus changing hydrations levels in the tendon, will be tested. The findings of
this reasearch will be disseminated on the web and incorporated into course
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During in vitro testing, tendon displays a Mullins'
effect softening, which is typically an irreversible phenomenon in inert
materials. That irreversibility, however, is in conflict with observed behaviors
of biological tissues. All harvested tendons have been loaded in vivo, so if a
standard Mullins' effect occurred, all in vitro loads at or below those already
seen physiologically would not produce Mullins' softening. This clearly is
untrue. To explore this phenomenon in terms of active cell contributions, fresh,
cellular tendons will be tested and compared to tendons frozen to remove cell
activity. Metrics will include mechanical behaviors and morphology, focusing on
recovery. To further investigate whether changes in crimp and/or in Mullins'
effect recovery are due to cellular contraction, the physical contribution of
cell contraction will be removed with the addition of cytochalasin D (an
inhibitor of actin polymerization known to drive cell motility). Thus the
mechanical aspect of cell activity will be removed while maintaining cell
viability. Finally there will be a test to determine whether tissue rehydration
affects recovery from Mullins' effect softening via testing in hypo- and hyper-
osmotic solutions.