* 1432563
* Active LENS: Learning Evolution and the Nature of Science using Evolution in Action
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2022
* Richard Lenski, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,813,965.00

Recent science education reform efforts (Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Education: A Call to Action, the AP Biology Frameworks and the Next Generation
Science Standards [http://www.nextgenscience.org/]) emphasize the importance of
evolution as a major unifying theme in the science curriculum and in
understanding life processes. They further identify inquiry-based laboratory
experiences as key to helping students gain a better understanding of evolution
and highlight the need for controlled studies to test such interventions. A
major impediment in involving students in the experimental study of evolutionary
processes is that the evolutionary process is difficult or impossible to
demonstrate in the classroom. Current efforts rely on simulations with limited
opportunities to test hypotheses and to learn how science is practiced. This
project specifically and directly addresses these challenges through ongoing
development and testing of Avida-ED, an educational software tool derived from
an experimental digital tool used by scientists to study bio/computational
evolution. It was first developed under an NSF CCLI award (031484). Activities
planned will provide in-depth faculty development through a national series of
workshops, and an expansion of an ongoing national study of the effectiveness of
this approach for learning about evolution and the nature of science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Avida-ED engages students in observation and manipulation
of populations of self-replicating, autonomous digital organisms while they are
actively evolving. It is built on top of a proven experimental evolution
research platform, so students can perform experiments to test evolutionary
hypotheses that they generate on their own in the same modeling system used by
scientists. Evidence from on-going national classroom studies indicates the
unique value of being able to directly observe evolution in action in this
digital environment. Pilot studies show that Avida-ED is effective in (i)
overcoming common misconceptions about evolutionary mechanisms and (ii)
increasing acceptance of evolutionary science. This study examines these issues
in more detail, including cognitive and non-cognitive elements of active
learning when using digital evolution models. These constitute some of the first
quasi-experimental classroom studies in evolution education. Other activities
planned include a series of national workshops to provide profession development
in the use of Avida-ED to over 150 faculty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Education: A Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/