* 1432001
* An innovative computational modeling intervention to facilitate learning of biology in university courses using simulation and dynamical systems approaches
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* John Sutton, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,321,012.00

Sustaining the innovation that leads to economic and social progress in this
country will depend on the capacity of all citizens to acquire 21st century
problem solving skills. A Bureau of Labor Statistics report indicates that over
half of the thirty fastest growing careers in this nation require familiarity
with the life sciences; a discipline that is rapidly shifting to a more systems-
level, large database driven approach to understanding ourselves and the world
we live in. This proposal is a collaborative effort between life sciences
educators and computational biologists from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
to develop innovative methods to meet the challenges posed by this new approach
within the life sciences. This project has the potential to significantly
transform the learning of biology by providing a complete learning environment
that enables students to learn by constructing, simulating, analyzing, and
interrogating the dynamic and systems properties of living organisms. It was
developed in direct response to Vision and Change: a Call to Action in
Undergraduate Biology Education, a document produced by The American Association
for the Advancement of Science, based on the findings of a large number of
biologists. That document emphasizes the importance of systems thinking,
learning about the dynamics of biology, and integration of computer simulations
into undergraduate biology education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal
of this project is to transform the way biology students learn about complex
living systems. The project will develop, implement, and evaluate computational
modeling as a unique and user-friendly pedagogical aid. It uses the Cell
Collective, a web-based computer simulation platform that has been successfully
applied in computational biology research, as a pedagogical tool to facilitate
learning about complex biological processes in a broad set of university life
sciences courses. The technology has been successfully piloted as an educational
tool in immunology and microbiology courses and has been included as part of an
inquiry-based cancer biology textbook. The educational research proposed in this
application aims to extend this platform, and develop a comprehensive and easily
accessible learning environment that will provide university students and
instructors with computer models and learning content for topics taught in both
introductory and specialized biology courses. It will enable students to learn
about the dynamics of living systems in real-time through interactive
simulations, while providing instant feedback with simulation and assessment
results. In addition, the web-based nature of the resource will enable students
and their teachers to participate in collaborative learning activities on both a
local and global scale. Developed resources will be made available to
researchers and teachers interested in incorporating this approach into their
own learning technologies and methodologies. A design-based research and
development approach is being used to learn about how student conceptual change
can be supported by this intervention. Quantitative data from the students'
conceptual models and biology evaluation assessment and qualitative data from
exploratory interviews aimed at perceptions of difficulty, language barriers,
and areas of greater clarification will be analyzed to refine the software
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by
the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A
Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/