* 1432297
* The Effects of Social Capital and Cultural Models on the Retention and Degree Attainment of Women and Minority Engineering Undergraduates
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Chrystal Smith, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,140,983.00

The purpose of this study is to broaden understanding about how social capital
and cultural models of engineering success (CMES) contribute to the retention
and degree attainment of women and minority engineering undergraduates,
traditionally under-represented in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM). Social capital refers to the social connections of students
and the resources available through those connections. CMES refer to beliefs
about how to succeed in an engineering program (i.e. degree attainment.) The
study builds from the premise that women and minority undergraduates who succeed
in engineering programs are more likely to 1) enter with and acquire/develop
various forms/levels of social capital and 2) resolve conflicts between their
CMES and the culture espoused by the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
four-year longitudinal study, which builds on a prior research project, is
guided by social capital and cultural model theoretical frameworks. The study
will employ a mixed methods approach, specifically a partially mixed concurrent
dominant status design in which both quantitative (online surveys) and
qualitative (face-to-face and video interviews) data are collected concurrently.
The data will be gathered from engineering students at eleven (11) diverse
collaborating institutions (Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Florida
Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida International University,
Florida State University, Mercer University, Michigan State University,
Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico, University of Florida, University of
Michigan, University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, and University of South
Florida). The outcome variables are: 1) the decision of entering students at
these 11 institutions to pursue undergraduate engineering degrees and 2)
retention of these students to the fourth year of their engineering programs.
The two-fold goal of the research is to: 1) identify the effects of social
capital and CMES on the retention and degree attainment of women and students
traditionally underrepresented in engineering and 2) examine the relationship
between social capital and CMES. An innovative aspect of the study is the use of
cognitive diagnostic assessment (an extension of item response theory) to
measure CMES. The results from the research project will make theoretical
contributions in engineering education and is likely to transform cultures in
engineering departments and facilitate the design of interventions that would
broaden the participation of women and minorities.