* 1432373
* Design and Development Research: Deploying Adaptive Learning Environments to Overcome Background Deficiencies and Facilitate Mastery of Computer Engineering Content
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Carolyn Plumb, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 298,102.00

Many students who intend to major in computer engineering do not persist through
the introductory sequence of digital logic courses that are part of every
accredited computer engineering program in the U.S. These students often lack
the necessary prerequisite knowledge due to their varied backgrounds and
incoming preparedness levels. This problem is compounded by the large class
sizes of introductory college courses, which make it difficult to accommodate
the background knowledge and the skills of individual students. Additionally, an
e-learning environment has the potential to reach a broad audience through
remote delivery, thus further increasing the impact of this approach. This
enables community colleges and 4-year universities to move toward a true two-
plus-two transfer program by allowing students to complete lower-level computer
engineering courses remotely before transferring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
adaptive learning materials in this project will be developed for use in an
introductory digital circuits course and a logic design course. Both of these
courses contain laboratory components that will also be addressed by this work.
The materials will be developed as self-contained learning modules that can be
used at different colleges with varying schedules (e.g., semester vs. quarter).
The materials will consist of a unified, adaptive learning environment that can
be implemented using any course management system (e.g., Moodle, Desire2Learn,
Blackboard) to eliminate the need for proprietary software. An accompanying lab
kit will facilitate hands-on learning in a low-cost, portable form factor to
facilitate remote delivery and eliminate the financial barrier of offering a
meaningful laboratory experience. The materials will be tested at a diverse set
of institutions: Montana State University, a Ph.D. granting, research active
university, MSU-Billings, a 4-year non-research university, Flathead Valley
Community Colleges, the largest 2-year community college in Montana, and Salish
Kootenai College, a Tribal College proving both 2-year and 4-year degrees for
Native Americans. This broad range of participants will allow the team to assess
the effectiveness of the adaptive learning materials while simultaneously
considering the relationship between student background and the student learning
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both quantitative and qualitative measures
will be used to assess the adaptive learning modules. Direct measures will be
collected on student performance, including the number of ungraded quiz attempts
within an adaptive module, end of module exam scores, time required to complete
a module, and time spent at each level of difficulty within a module. Surveys
will be used to collect student satisfaction with the adaptive learning
environment that will include feedback on their impression of content
difficulty, workload compared to other courses of the same credit load, and
their sense of how well the material was personalized to their needs. Student
demographic information will be collected including gender, ethnicity, age,
socioeconomic background, ACT scores and college credits obtained. This
information will be used to understand how different groups use and benefit from
the course materials. Focus groups will also be conducted with student
participants at Michigan State University in order to collect qualitative data
on student learning and attitudes toward the e-learning system. Phone interviews
will be conducted with students from the other participating institutions. The
interim findings from this assessment will be used as feedback to enhance the
adaptive learning system in order to accommodate a broader range of
participants.