* 1432288
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Concept Inventory for Engineering Design Graphics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Heidi Steinhauer, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 211,756.00

Engineering graphics is one of the largest enrollment courses within engineering
and engineering technology; however, much of engineering graphics education
today teaches the "CAD tool of the day" rather than the fundamentals. This
project will conduct educational research in the development of a concept
inventory for engineering graphics concepts that can be used by STEM educators
to help a wide spectrum of students. Concept Inventories have been developed for
many fundamental courses in the STEM fields. Most notably, the Force Concept
Inventory developed in the early 1980s, sparked a reform in physics education
that focused more on student understanding of fundamental concepts rather than
rote memorization of facts. Hence Concept Inventories enable faculty to design
their courses with a focus on the fundamentals and provide them with a validated
means of assessing student understanding of these basic concepts. Since students
enroll in engineering graphics within high schools, community colleges, and
four-year institutions, this project holds great potential to improve the
learning of fundamental concepts in engineering graphics for many
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In a prior NSF project DUE-1044269, the research
team used a Delphi Study to identify the fundamental concepts in engineering
graphics. This project will develop its inventory based on those previously
identified fundamental concepts. The instrument will be developed through a
rigorous research and development process and will fill a gap in engineering and
technology education. The project results will be disseminated broadly and will
be targeted to faculty from a wide array of institutions, including high
schools, community colleges, and four-year colleges. The project results will be
long lasting within the engineering graphics education community of scholars.