* 1432381
* Improving the Preparation of Graduate Students to Teach Undergraduate Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2023
* Jack Bookman, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,140,446.00

A significant number of today's mathematics graduate students will enter the
workforce as college faculty members for which teaching undergraduate students
will comprise a significant portion of their professional responsibilities.
Although some resources are available for the professional development (PD) of
graduate students or novice college mathematics instructors, mathematics
departments wishing to develop or expand such a program to enhance undergraduate
teaching and learning find it challenging to obtain instructional materials
and/or appropriate faculty expertise on which to draw. There are informal
networks of faculty who work in this arena, but the resources that do exist
often are inaccessible or difficult to locate for those new to the teaching
workforce. Against this backdrop, the project will: (i) provide better access to
the existing resources; (ii) develop new resources and opportunities for access;
and (iii) create lasting versions of the existing informal networks of faculty
practitioners and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
create an infrastructure, housed, supported, and sustained by the Mathematical
Association of America (MAA), to enhance the mathematics community's ability to
provide high quality, teaching-related PD to graduate students. Associated
activities will include the creation of a community of practice and online
resource library to help mathematics departments start and strengthen programs
to prepare graduate students to teach undergraduate mathematics. Three primary
audiences will benefit: 1) Providers - experienced faculty who provide PD
opportunities to graduate students teaching or preparing to teach undergraduate
mathematics; 2) Scholars - faculty and graduate students who develop PD
materials and programs and/or conduct research on the teaching of undergraduate
mathematics; and 3) Teaching Assistants (TAs) - the graduate students themselves
who seek professional development. Key components of the infrastructure include:
1) a multimedia suite of resources for Providers and mechanisms for building it;
2) a professional community of practice bringing together Providers and
Scholars; 3) workshops and webinars for Providers and Scholars; and 4) distance
delivery of PD for graduate students who have no face-to-face opportunity at
their local institution. Evaluation will be a key component integrated
throughout the project, and will focus on both formative input of each component
as the project develops and a final summative report. Included will be a needs
assessment survey of graduate programs as well as research to contribute to the
understanding of (i) how to develop effective programs that lead to expansion of
systematic and sustainable TA PD programs across the nation and (ii) how the
components of the project work together to help create a community of practice
and the potential of this community to expand and thrive.