* 1432950
* Collaborative Research: Northern Ohio AGEP-T: A Racially and Ethnically Inclusive Graduate Education Model in Biology, Chemistry and Engineering
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Charles Rozek, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2022
* USD 2,432,426.00

Case Western Reserve University, Kent State University, the University of Akron,
the University of Toledo, Youngstown State University, Bowling Green University
and Cleveland State University will collaborate to create the Northern Ohio
Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NOA-AGEP): A Racially and
Ethnically Inclusive Graduate Education Model in Biology, Chemistry and
Engineering (BCE). These alliance schools will also partner with Central State
University and Tuskegee University. This project was created in response to the
NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 14-505) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T
track targets strategic alliances of institutions and organizations to develop,
implement, and study innovative evidence-based models and standards for STEM
graduate education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM career preparation
that eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote positive practices for
underrepresented minorities (URMs). The NOA-AGEP project will develop,
implement, and study a model to improve URM student participation, preparation,
and success in BCE graduate education, and to prepare them for entry into the
professoriate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AGEP-T project will uniquely contribute
to foundational knowledge about the recruitment, retention and graduation of
doctoral URMs in BCE. The emphasis on inclusive graduate education, an
"umbrella" of supports for graduate students, and extensive diversity training
for BCE faculty and staff offers an exceptional opportunity for a regional group
of universities with low URM STEM doctoral student enrollment to investigate the
promotion of inclusive policies, practices and initiatives. The lessons learned
as this project progresses, and the ultimate results from the work, will provide
information that will be beneficial to educators, administrators and
policymakers, as well as the general public.