* 1432107
* Collaborative Research: University Maker Spaces: Discovery, Optimization and Measurement of Impacts
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Julie Linsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2019
* USD 439,764.00

Continued innovation is essential to national security and economic growth. It
is crucial that engineering education move beyond teaching engineering science
and analysis: engineers must design, create, and innovate. This collaborative
project by Georgia Tech, Texas State University - San Marcos, and James Madison
University will measure the impact of university maker spaces and identify
approaches and guidelines for designing maker spaces. A maker space is a
location where the individuals who have a passion for innovation can access
resources needed to freely invent and build physical objects and prototypes. In
response to the success of community maker spaces outside of academic settings,
many universities are moving beyond traditional machine shops and building
multi-disciplinary maker space design centers. This study seeks to understand
and use these new environments to achieve long-elusive aims in engineering
education such as improving student retention, fostering diverse learning
environments, and promoting multi-disciplinary teams. Maker spaces also have the
potential to positively influence females and minorities, who are driven to
pursue engineering by opportunities for creative thinking and human impact. This
work will also investigate the potential of maker spaces to positively influence
females and minorities and there by broaden participation in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The maker movement underway nationally has the
potential to transform university engineering education. The movement is
primarily originating outside of the university environment. This project will
measure the impact that maker spaces have on engineering idea generation skills,
design self-efficacy, retention and minority/female engagement. The project has
two major research objectives. The first is to measure the impact of university
maker spaces at Georgia Tech, James Madison University, and Texas State-San
Marcos. Impact will be measured through engineering design self-efficacy;
retention in the engineering major; and idea generation ability. Impacts will be
measured at two levels. The first phase of the project will use a randomly
assigned experimental design to assess the impact of early engagement on females
and minorities through a longitudinal measurement. In the second level, maker
space participants will be studied via a comparison between extensive users and
those with minimal exposure. In this project, segment snapshots and longitudinal
measurements will be combined. The second major research objective will be to
identify approaches and guidelines for designing maker spaces. Once the
effectiveness of a maker space is shown, the questions of how to replicate it in
other places and how to improve existing university maker spaces will be
addressed. In this phase a cross-university study of maker spaces will be
undertaken. Key features will be determined and may include how these spaces are
designed, the people attracted, and hours of operation. Through interviews,
surveys and collection of publications, novel approaches and effective practices
will be determined and disseminated.