* 1432143
* Collaborative Research: PEARL: Peers Engaged As Resources for Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Jill Hamm, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2020
* USD 771,540.00

Ongoing efforts to strengthen mathematics education in the United States have
emphasized the need for students to engage and persevere with meaningful and
challenging mathematics problems, and to take active and collaborative roles in
problem solving. Teachers often use small group instruction to work toward these
goals: small group work occurs in 70% of middle grades mathematics classrooms at
least once a week, and on average, accounts for 25% of instructional time in
middle grades mathematics classes. Yet effective group work can prove
challenging for middle school teachers. Students quickly disengage from
difficult tasks and their peer interactions often undermine productive
collaborations. The PEARL project brings an interdisciplinary team to: (1) study
small group work; (2) understand the challenges involved in promoting successful
small groups; and (3) determine ways to help teachers deliver on the promise of
group work. The PEARL study involves a carefully sequenced set of research
phases that include classroom observations, interviews and surveys with teachers
and students regarding mathematics small group work in both naturalistic
settings and experimental conditions in order to develop and test both a
framework for understanding small group learning environments and strategies to
help teachers support successful group work. Results of the study will inform
teacher preparation and ongoing education, mathematics teaching practice, and
educational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principles and Standards for
School Mathematics and the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics emphasize
the critical role of students' deep engagement with meaningful mathematical
content with their peers to support development of mathematical understanding.
Mathematics classrooms are often structured to meet these goals by arranging
students in small group learning environments expected to create peer-to-peer
interactions that promote conceptual learning, mathematical communication, and
use of peers as learning resources. Effective group work depends on tasks that
are cognitively challenging and appropriate for group efforts, group discourse
that promotes engagement and meaning making, and peer relational processes that
support collaboration and learning. The PEARL project brings an
interdisciplinary team to study small group work in middle grades mathematics
classrooms, integrating three conceptual frameworks - Mathematics Task,
Mathematics Discourse Matrix, and Peer Cultures of Effort and Achievement - to
understand the challenges involved in promoting successful small group learning
environments, and to determine ways to help teachers deliver on the promise of
group work. The PEARL study involves a carefully sequenced set of research
phases that include classroom observation, interviews and surveys with students
and teachers, and design experiments implemented in naturalistic and
experimental settings in order to build, test, and refine an integrated
framework that has foundations for research and practice. This framework, and
the research design and tools, can stimulate further interdisciplinary study
among mathematics educators and educational psychologists in terms of how
teachers can coordinate tasks, discourse, and peer cultures in pursuit of
successful small group work.