* 1432092
* Impact of undergraduate research and educational program in genomics and bioinformatics on career choices in Puerto Rican students from different socioeconomic backgrounds
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Juan Martinez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 381,531.00

The purpose of this project is to implement an integrative curriculum in
genomics and bioinformatics, by using direct research-based learning approaches
based on modern techniques, and to examine the impact of this curriculum on
increasing the number of Puerto Rican students choosing to pursue scientific and
research career paths. This project will provide a unique platform for studying
the effect of the integrated education on career choices in a major
underrepresented minority-serving institution with students encompassing the
whole socioeconomic spectrum of the Puerto Rican society. The major educational
objective of this project is to establish an undergraduate curricular sequence
starting from teaching genomics and bioinformatics, through collaborative class
project to fostering independent and original research by the undergraduates.
Participation in undergraduate research activities and authorship, along with
academic achievement are among the significant factors mediating the effect of
race/ethnicity in the scientific career choices.

The major research objective is incorporated into the curricular sequence and
will result in an on-line map of human genome diversity across the island of
Puerto Rico. The long-term goal is to create independent researchers through
implementing dozens of student-initiated projects that will be communicated in
various forms, including platform presentation participation in undergraduate
research symposia, presentations at national meetings, online reports and peer-
reviewed publications. Endpoints and outcomes such as test grades, pre- and
post- evaluation of the general knowledge on the topic, perceptions of the
research experience, evaluation of the course, mentorship, and recommendations
to other students, as well as attitude towards entering graduate schools or
other careers related to STEM disciplines, will be recorded for all
participants. These outcomes will be correlated with the socioeconomic status
and the career choice attitudes before, during and after application of the
courses.