* 1432198
* SPARCS -- Siena Plan for Attracting and Retaining Computer Scientists
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Sharon Small, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 687,876.00

The Siena Plan for Attracting and Retaining Computer Scientists (SPARCS) is
addressing the goal of producing one million additional college graduates with
STEM degrees over the next decade, established in the February 2012 report by
the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST). SPARCS
builds on the success of the NSF S-STEM Tech Valley Scholars program and focuses
on recruiting and retaining computing majors in high school and the first two
years of college. The program includes a high school dual enrollment program
that introduces computer science education to Capital District high schools that
are currently not offering it. The program improves computing recruitment by
offering high school students an opportunity to gain exposure to computing so
they might better assess their interest in computing as a college major. The
result is a larger and more qualified computing workforce in New York State's
Capital Region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPARCS recruits and nurtures new computing
majors through graduation, with an emphasis on recruiting and retention in high
school and the first two years of college. High school recruiting focuses on
using partnerships to institute an introductory computing course at schools that
do not have computing courses. College level recruiting focuses on undeclared
students in each of Siena's three schools (Science, Business, and Liberal Arts).
Recruitment also extends to students struggling in their current major who have
demonstrated strong academic potential for computing and may not have been
afforded the opportunity to explore computing. Retention efforts concentrate on
expanding undergraduate internships, incorporating teaching assistantships, and
engaging students in other activities designed to foster a sense of
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is being assessed and evaluated by
an external consultant who has identified the following outcomes as a measure of
the effectiveness of the program: the effectiveness of campaigns to recruit
computing students into Siena, the impact of the SPARCS program on students
staying in computing at Siena, the quality of student performance in courses and
research projects, the number of students from underrepresented groups, and the
number of students entering graduate school or the professional workforce after
graduation.