* 1432383
* The UMM IUSE program: Encouraging the participation of Native Americans in the Interdisciplinary Environmental Sciences and Sustainability - an emphasis on transitions
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2020
* James F Cotter, University of Minnesota Morris
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 893,041.00

This project seeks to increase the number of graduates in the areas of
Environmental Sciences and Sustainability at the University of Minnesota-Morris.
Three foci will guide the effort: 1) Inform - introduce students to science
early; 2) Prepare - introduce high school students to data collection and
quantitative analysis to prepare them for college level science and 3) Support -
introduce a supportive network of peer, faculty and industry mentors that will
offer guidance to students through all educational transitions. The project plan
is grounded in the needs of the local and regional community and should help to
increase the participation of Native Americans in the pursuit and attainment of
STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inform-Prepare-Support framework is
integrated throughout the project activities, which include: an early
encouragement outreach program involving visits to reservations; a 2-week
residential program for Native America high school students who are interested
in STEM careers; a summer program for Tribal College science majors involving
research projects in environmental science and sustainability; and an enrichment
program to mentor career decisions and provide advice for the transition to
careers after graduation. Formative and summative evaluation will consist of an
analysis of how well the project components align with successful attainment of
the goals. In so doing, the project will build on and contribute to the
knowledge base regarding the education of Native American students in STEM. In
particular, it will address the role played by a culturally responsive approach
embedded in long-standing community relationships and circumstances an
conditions under which success occurs. Surveys will be employed to collect
information about student attitude and perception (project experiences, extent
of engagement, and barriers to success). Graduation and retention data will be
tracked. Dissemination of the results of evaluation will impact a wide range of
educators. Students and faculty will also present research results at the
national meeting of the American Indian Science and Engineer Society.