* 1432750
* Adding Mechatronic Experiential Learning into Mechanical Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Panayiotis Shiakolas, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 07/31/2015
* USD 48,791.00

This project at the University of Texas Arlington is working to develop an
effective approach in robotics and mechatronics engineering education for
students at this Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI). The research focuses on
improving retention in upper-level engineering courses and helping students to
transfer and apply knowledge in the synthesis and construction of new designs.
This work will develop an upper-level mechatronics course that combines theory
with a series of hands-on investigations and projects. The experiential portion
of the course will help students learn to use fundamental components of
mechatronic systems such as actuators, motors, sensors, and processors. The
project addresses the problem that upper-level engineering courses emphasize the
theoretical and mathematical aspects of engineering science topics while often
providing limited connection to actual hardware. The project also addresses a
concern that students from underrepresented groups are less likely to acquire
hands-on skills through informal means, and helps to ensure that these students
develop experience working with critical hardware as part of the regular
engineering curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project work will focus on the
implementation of an experiential learning aspect to an Introduction to Robotics
course. This course will be taken by junior and senior engineering students. Key
mechatronic hardware topics to be included are: complex sensors such as
ultrasonic range finders, 3-axis accelerometers, gyroscopes, infrared proximity
sensors, ambient light sensors and encoders. Other devices incorporated will
include actuators, stepper motors, geared motors, servo motors, and
microprocessors. These experiments will correspond to theoretical topics in
mechatronic systems such as dynamic simulation, closed-loop model-based control,
sampling frequency and digital filtering. Evaluation will focus on the extent to
which students who have completed the experiential upper-level robotics course
are successful in transferring knowledge beyond the course to a subsequent
capstone design course. It is anticipated that the experiential robotics course
will enable students, in particular those from underrepresented minorities, to
design and build more complex mechatronic systems than would otherwise be
possible. Complexity will be evaluated based on a rubric which considers the
number and sophistication of components utilized, development of appropriate
data acquisition, design of signal processing hardware and software, system
integration, and equality of contribution among team members.