* 1432090
* Increasing the science literacy of undergraduate students in STEM: Merging the crosscutting concept of scale with introductory science course content
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Peter Geissinger, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 339,719.00

Science education research has revealed that students endeavoring to learn
material in courses in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
generally find it difficult to understand processes they are not able to observe
directly. These challenges can be especially pronounced when students encounter
concepts involving sizes, distances and time frames of very small or very large
scales. This project will conduct research and develop innovative teaching
strategies and learning assessments that address challenges in scale literacy,
which is a measure of an individual's ability to grasp concepts and reconcile
phenomena involving widely varying scales of sizes, distances, and time frames
and is an important component to one's overall science literacy. Although the
project will focus on introductory chemistry and biology courses, the insights
gained from the research will be broadly applicable to STEM education in all
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be informed by preliminary
research conducted by the investigators of this project at the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) that successfully demonstrated student learning gains
were achieved in General Chemistry I by integrating scale as a theme into
instruction. Furthermore, the prior work led to the development of two
assessment instruments, a Scale Concept Inventory (SCI) and a Scale Literacy
Skills Test (SLST), which will be utilized in this project. Through this
project, scale-themed instruction at UWM will be extended to General Chemistry
II and introductory biology (Anatomy and Physiology I) and will contribute to
enhancing understanding of the relationship of scale literacy to student success
in STEM courses. To facilitate the adoption of effective instructional
strategies developed through this project by educators in STEM disciplines other
than chemistry or biology, assessment of scale literacy will distinguish domain-
general from domain-specific scale conceptions. In addition to the SCI and SLST,
specific instruments and data sources that will be utilized to measure project
outcomes include standardized final examinations from the American Chemical
Society Examinations Institute, student interviews focused on assessing
conceptions of scale, and institutional records of student performance in the
targeted courses.