* 1432436
* Machias Initiative for Science and Technology (MIST)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Ellen Hostert, University of Maine at Machias
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2018
* USD 349,728.00

The MIST project aims to increase the success of STEM majors at the University
of Maine at Machias (UMM), a small, rural, public liberal arts college with a
curriculum built around issues of environmental and community sustainability.
Like colleges in many rural and economically challenged regions, where
educational attainment rates are significantly and chronically lower, UMM excels
at providing critical education and workforce development, but science majors
have lower retention and graduation rates than their peers. Persistence from the
first to the second year of college has been identified as a key bottleneck
limiting student success. The MIST project will transform the first-year
experience for freshman science majors using practices shown to improve
retention, focusing specifically on the needs of students who have risk factors
associated with high drop-out rates, such as poverty, being the first in their
family to attend college, or belonging to an underserved minority group. The
project will build on the success of preliminary work by (1) instituting a
10-day summer program and other supports to help at-risk students transition to
college, (2) restructuring tutoring services to supplement the instruction that
students receive in classes, (3) incorporating more inquiry-based and problem-
solving learning experiences, and (4) developing better approaches to career
awareness and preparation. Increasing the number of STEM graduates will help to
meet workforce demands while ensuring that students have access to rewarding and
well-paid jobs locally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will adapt key
best practices to improve first-to-second-year retention rates. In particular,
they will undertake the following four initiatives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Implementing a 10-day bridge program and residence hall learning communities to
support transition to college and overcome barriers to attendance and success
for at-risk students and underserved students (e.g., first-in-family college
attendees, rural poor, and minority students). Questions to be used to measure
success include: How effective are the various elements of the bridge program in
(a) increasing STEM excitement and determination, (b) decreasing the need for
developmental math courses, (c) creating effective study skills, and (d)
increasing awareness of compelling STEM educational pathways and
careers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Implementing a Supplemental Instruction (SI)
program to boost student persistence and success by providing structured group
instruction that is highly integrated with classroom and laboratory activities.
Questions to be used to measure success include: What effects, if any, does
SI/tutoring have on (a) student performance in tutored courses and (b) general
MIST program goals (excitement, determination, study skills, awareness of and
interest in STEM courses and careers)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Transforming
instruction in all first-year STEM courses to incorporate more inquiry- and
problem-based learning, career awareness, and engaging field experiences.
Questions to be used to measure success include: What elements of transforming
the instruction in key foundational courses (content, instructional technique,
tutoring, etc.) are associated with (a) an increase in student achievement,
satisfaction, confidence, and engagement and (b) first-to-second year
retention?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Developing career awareness and preparation
activities and resources for first-year students. Questions to be used to
measure success include: To what degree do the MIST career website and alumni-
student exchange activities increase awareness in first-year students of STEM
career opportunities and educational pathways?