* 1432820
* Using data-mining to enable early interventions in introductory engineering courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Thomas Stahovich, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 477,514.00

The goal of this project is to develop technology-based techniques to directly
capture and analyze student learning steps and pathways, and then provide
interventions based on that analysis to promote success in engineering courses.
In this research, students will use smartpens and tablet computers to carry out
learning activities in undergraduate engineering courses. The smartpens record
problem-solving work, while the tablets record how students use instructional
materials, such as e-books. This combination of technologies provides a fine-
grained view of the learning process not available with conventional assessment
methods, thereby enabling powerful tools for individualized assessment that can
guide instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data mining techniques are used to
examine the correlation between these learning activities and academic
achievement as measured by exam performance, providing a means to distinguish
between ineffective and effective learning strategies. These assessment
techniques are used to create an early warning system that identifies students
at risk of poor academic performance and recommends suitable learning
strategies. The burgeoning field of educational informatics has begun to produce
important insights about student learning. However, most research in this field
has relied on data from artificial learning environments such as online tutoring
systems. This project helps transform this field by creating techniques for
capturing students' learning activities in existing engineering courses in a
form suitable for data mining. This project helps detect the learning processes
and suggest individualized interventions for the diverse students at a Hispanic
Serving Institution, and thus helps to create increased opportunities for
students from traditionally underrepresented groups to succeed in STEM careers.