* 1432890
* Student and Junior Faculty Travel Support for International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST) 2014-Marriott City Center, Oakland, CA, May 19-21, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Vikas Khanna, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

1432890&lt;br/&gt;Khanna &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is in partial support
of the 2014 International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology
(ISSST) that will be held May 19-21 in Oakland, California. This conference
covers a spectrum of issues for assessing and managing products and services
across their life cycle, and the design, management, and policy implications of
sustainable engineered systems and technologies. The conference is particularly
well attended by researchers in academia (both faculty and students) and policy
makers. Specific objectives include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Conference
participants totaling 350+ people. &lt;br/&gt;2. Active participation by
students and junior faculty members from across the United States. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Internationally known invited and plenary speakers. &lt;br/&gt;4. Preparing
future faculty workshop for graduate students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;5. The
gathering of individuals representing multiple technical and non-technical
disciplines and backgrounds (i.e. engineering, natural sciences, social
sciences, public health, public policy, economics, architecture, etc.).
&lt;br/&gt;6. Oral presentations and posters on relevant and interdisciplinary
topical areas. &lt;br/&gt;7. Student technical paper and poster competition.
&lt;br/&gt;8. Special Issue of a journal with select papers from the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;9. Providing attendees with networking opportunities and catalyzing
new collaborations.