* 1432688
* GOALI:  Development of Lightweight Structural Castings Using an Integrated Computational Materials Engineering Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jerald Brevick, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 403,269.00

Metal casting is a very efficient process of manufacturing components used in
the aerospace, automotive, chemical, energy, healthcare, and consumer products
industries. Current design of metal castings in industries often results in non-
uniform material properties, where the strength of the part or component may
vary throughout the piece. This is often compensated for by the over-design of
materials to ensure a minimum strength, and can result in unnecessary waste of
materials and manufacturing time. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) project seeks to develop computational and experimental
tools to build parts with tailored properties, designed to have the highest
strength in the areas where the part will bear the most load. This project will
integrate computational materials engineering with experimental work to create
and test this tailored design system. This approach will lead to fast and
efficient casting design and manufacturing process development, resulting in
discoveries of new high-performance alloys and lightweight castings which will
reduce energy consumption and waste.

This project combines material design and manufacturing process development
using a hybrid approach of CALPHAD (CALculation of PHAse Diagrams) and process
simulation to more rapidly design lightweight aluminum castings for next
generation automotive and aerospace structures. This novel approach will connect
the thermodynamic prediction of alloy composition and heat treatment to process
modeling to design more efficient castings using location-specific properties of
new high-performance aluminum alloys being developed by Alcoa. This
interdisciplinary research will be carried out to develop an integrated model
for casting design, alloy design and process optimization - a first attempt to
connect computational thermodynamics to component design. The design and
simulation results will be validated by selective experimentation in test
specimens and an automotive casting. Specifically, four research tasks will be
carried out between The Ohio State University (OSU) and Alcoa to achieve the
project goal: 1) CALPHAD modeling of solidification and heat treatment and alloy
design; 2) process simulation and optimization using CALPHAD phase equilibria
data; 3) component design using location-specific properties predicted by the
hybrid approach of CALPHAD and process modeling to meet the location-specific
service loading conditions; and 4) experimental validation using test specimens
and an automotive casting.