* 1432674
* Affordable Desktop Learning Modules (DLMs) to Facilitate Transformation of Undergraduate Engineering Classes
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bernard Van Wie, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 834,706.00

This project at Washington State University (WSU) will improve learning in
undergraduate engineering education by helping to graduate engineers that are
capable of applying their knowledge in synthesis of new designs, evaluating
design alternatives, and integrating information. The project will create ultra-
low-cost desktop experiments with which engineering students can conduct
investigations to learn fundamental principles of fluid mechanics and heat
transfer. Fluid mechanics and heat transfer are areas of engineering science
that are studied in many engineering disciplines including aerospace,
biomedical, chemical, civil, environmental, and mechanical engineering. The
ultra-low-cost of the experiments will make it possible for engaging
investigations to be integrated widely throughout fluid mechanics and heat
transfer courses. With a target cost comparable to a textbook, these experiments
will make it possible for teams of students to pursue their own investigations
of fluids and heat transfer phenomenon. This Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE) project will result in an array of simple, inexpensive, easy to
use experiments and companion materials that cover fundamental aspects of fluid
flow and heat transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on earlier
NSF-supported work at Washington State University which established the
effectiveness of the use of desktop experiments compared to traditional lectures
and laboratories. Four experiments are planned for manufacture: a venturi
nozzle, a pipe flow experiment, a concentric tube heat exchanger, and a shell
and tube heat exchanger. The experiments chosen model actual industrial
equipment that students can analyze at multiple levels from simple correlations
accessible to first year students, to the use of sophisticated engineering
principles and tools in advanced course work. The small desk-top experiments
will be able to be used in standard classrooms or comparable work areas. To
achieve cost and portability targets, the project will utilize design for
manufacture techniques and take advantage of new manufacturing modalities such
as rapid prototyping through 3-D printing and vacuum forming. Evaluation will
assess the direct benefits of the research on student learning outcomes,
integrating both qualitative and quantitative data. Data concerning the efficacy
of the ultra-low-cost fluid mechanics and heat transfer experiments will be
collected and analyzed as part of the project. Conceptual understanding will be
measured at several levels of Bloom's taxonomy. Also measured will be
improvements in critical thinking, significant learning based on Fink's
taxonomy, and transfer of knowledge to novel situations. These ultra-low-cost
experiments will create opportunities to measure gaps in understanding and
student misconceptions.