* 1432438
* IUSE Collaborative Research: Data Computing for All: Developing an Introductory Data Science Course in Flipped Format
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Darina Dicheva, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 139,943.00

This project, Data Computing for All: Developing an Introductory Data Science
Course in Flipped Format, addresses two current issues: the need for more
students to be familiar with the use of data in a variety of contexts and the
need for instructional materials to support coursework in the "flipped
classroom" format. The flipped classroom reverses the way time is spent by
students. Instead of having information given to them in the classroom and then
going away to practice using the new knowledge by themselves through homework
problems, the students get the information before class time and then practice
using it while the course instructor is present to help with misunderstandings
and complexities. This allows the instructor to address the problems encountered
by small groups of students, rather than lecturing to a large group without
knowing who understands what.

Data science is essential for applications as diverse as genome sequencing and
customer data analysis. Nearly every discipline has need of large scale data
handling that requires computing and statistics in combination. More
specifically, this course addresses an important need not only in computer and
statistical sciences, but in all science, business, medical and engineering
areas in general. The reliance on the effective use of vast amounts of data and
the emergent field of data science is changing the operation of organizations
across sectors. This project will not only provide new course in an important
area in the STEM disciplines, but will also result in valuable educational
research.

With the growing use of the flipped classroom model of learning, questions arise
about its generalizability. Is it always the right approach? How difficult is it
to prepare materials to teach a course in this way? This project will address
these questions in the context of a new data science course for students with
minimal background. The project is being developed in computer science and
statistics departments at two different types of institutions. Both institutions
have experience using the flipped approach and together have the expertise for
data science. The course materials as well as the evaluation results will better
enable other institutions to consider including introductory data science
computing in their programs.