* 1432019
* Collaborative Project: RISE - Research-based Interdisciplinary STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Anne Johansen, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 87,863.00

Collaborators at North Seattle Community College (NSCC) and Central Washington
University seek are developing a model for institutionalizing an
interdisciplinary and research-based curriculum. The project goals are to (a)
provide progressive and innovative STEM curriculum that significantly improves
preparation of diverse student populations for upper level courses and careers
in science, (b) establish the foundation for a Pacific Northwest Collaboration
focused on excellence in STEM education at the community college level, and (c)
make a significant contribution to the body of knowledge regarding our
understanding of how students think, learn, and problem solve in a research and
interdisciplinary context early in their college experience.

The "thinking is valued" framework, in which developing thinking dispositions
within and across disciplines is seen as the key to academic success, is
embedded in the curricular changes rnvisioned. The collaborators will use
undergraduate research and interdisciplinary experiences as vehicles to
cultivate meaningful thinking opportunities in the first and second years of the
college experience. Formative and summative evaluation will address three
questions (a) Does the project provide evidence of new "habits of thinking" from
students and faculty who participate in the interdisciplinary and research-based
STEM curricula? (b) Does interdisciplinary and research-based curriculum enhance
teaching practices and student learning outcomes? and (c) Is the project
reaching other community colleges and universities? A combination of
faculty/administrator review panels, student classroom assessment,
student/faculty/staff interviews, and institutional presentations will be used
to document, analyze, and update project findings. Dissemination of new
materials and results will impact a wide range of educators through direct
partnerships with practicing faculty, a web presence that serves to distribute
curriculum, and presentations at national meetings throughout the duration of
the project.