* 1432416
* Wireless Communication Testbeds for Authentic STEM Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* R. Michael Buehrer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 01/31/2018
* USD 626,665.00

Given the critical importance of undergraduate STEM education to prepare the
next generation workforce, universities must continuously research and implement
enhancements to the undergraduate STEM curriculum and pedagogy to meet
technological and societal needs and to help faculty educate and motivate their
students. This project brings together experts from different spheres to meld
innovative research in wireless communications, visual analytics, and game-based
learning (also known as "gamification") for authentic, transformative STEM
learning. The project builds on a foundation of knowledge related to
visualization, gamification, and virtual and remote laboratory experiences, and
their use in achieving instructional outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will merge the ideas of radio resources and dynamic spectrum management with
cutting edge visualization tools to transform the students' engagement in the
learning process. The implementation will enable students in Electrical and
Computer Engineering to visualize and understand radio frequency environments
and behavior of spectrum managers, human operators and autonomous radios. For
example, students will be able to discover from first-hand experience the
existence of the Nash equilibrium in certain scenarios involving the coexistence
of multiple self-interested autonomous radios. The project will take advantage
of Virginia Tech's Cognitive Radio and Network (CORNET) testbed that allows
students to operate radios in a safe environment to provide a strong sense of
realism, combined with space to experiment and fail. The project will contribute
to the research literature on effectiveness of visualization and gamification
techniques for enabling deep understanding of abstract and not normally
perceptible STEM concepts and phenomena. Student learning will be assessed using
both in-class measures administered by the instructors and external, qualitative
evaluation using surveys, reflective essays, and focus groups. In addition,
access to a novel hands-on experimental tool will make concepts in Electrical
and Computer Engineering accessible to more students.