* 1432880
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Coexistence of Heterogeneous Secondary Networks for Shared Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,806.00

Spectrum sharing plays a key role in realizing plans to make available new
swaths of spectrum for wireless applications. The benefits of spectrum sharing
cannot be fully realized without addressing interference among coexisting
heterogeneous secondary networks. Although coexistence issues in the ISM bands
have been studied before, the situation in the TV bands and other shared access
spectrum (e.g., 3.5 GHz band) is more complex and challenging due to the signal
propagation characteristics, incumbent protection rules, and the disparity of
PHY/MAC strategies of secondary systems. To date, most research efforts have
focused on incumbent protection, and little attention has been given to the
coexistence of secondary systems in the context of spectrum sharing. The
proposed research aspires to fill this void by 1. studying the viability of
using stochastic neural networks for modeling and solving the CDM problem and 2.
developing novel rendezvous techniques for unicast and multicast
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group plans to integrate project findings in
relevant graduate courses at their respective institutions. In the second year
of the project, the investigators will jointly organize a session on
heterogeneous coexistence and spectrum sharing at the Virginia Tech annual
Symposium and Wireless Summer School, which is an educational outreach event
that serves the wireless industry. The group also proposes to give a tutorial
presentation on heterogeneous coexistence and spectrum sharing at relevant
conferences, including the IEEE DySPAN Conference, the flagship conference on
dynamic spectrum access and spectrum sharing technologies. The group will also
collaborate with our industry partners from Raytheon and Space Micro to
demonstrate a sample of the proposed solutions on their spectrum-agile radio
platforms.