* 1432566
* Communication, Access, and Persistence Among Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students in Foundational Statistics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jane Jackson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,986.00

The algebra-based Introductory Statistics course is both a gateway and
gatekeeper course for students interested in pursuing careers in the sciences.
The research literature suggests that students struggle with fundamental
statistical concepts for a variety of reasons, one of which is often a lack of
understanding of the algebraic methods applied in statistics. For hearing and
sighted learners, vision is one of several modes for accessing classroom-based
instruction. For deaf and hard of hearing (DHH) learners vision is the primary
access channel. Traditional in-class instruction dynamics, which often include
simultaneous presentation of multiple sources of visual information supported
through mediated communication by interpreters or captionists, places additional
demands on DHH learners. To address this challenge, a team of mathematicians,
learning scientists, interpreters, and instructional designers will design,
implement, and investigate a set of video-based supplemental online learning
tools (SOLTs) that have the potential to enhance the academic success of DHH
students in the foundational course in statistics. Visual/graphic and textual
representations of statistical concepts will be accompanied by sign language,
voice, and captioning. The objectives of this effort include (1) development of
a pilot collection of SOLTs for learning complex statistical concepts in
mainstream postsecondary learning environments and (2) testing of the efficacy
of these materials in experimental and natural class settings. The team is
examining the proposition that SOLTs will allow students to select from multiple
communication options and to control the pace of learning, and thus experience
increased ease of communication, higher levels of engagement, and eventually
greater mastery of statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project
will integrate development and implementation activities with a comparative
mixed methods evaluation research design to investigate student understanding of
statistical concepts using concept inventories, tests and homework, and data
from focus groups on student perceptions of the effectiveness of the different
visual presentation modes on their learning. To test the efficacy of the SOLTs a
one-group pre/post design will be combined with a post-test only design with
nonequivalent groups under two conditions, an experimental setting and a natural
classroom setting. The project has the potential to increase the learning of
statistics by DHH students as well as students who are predominately visual
learners and to contribute to the literature on the influence of different
visual presentation modes on the learning of statistics.