* 1432522
* Collaborative Research: Early Career Transitions into STEM Employment: Processes Shaping Retention and Satisfaction
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Sharon Sassler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

Researchers at the University of Texas at Austin and Cornell University are
implementing a project to understand large gender differences in occupational
retention among STEM graduates in early career, with a particular emphasis on
investigating the role played by employment conditions, alternative job
opportunities, and workplace climate in retaining recent graduates or propelling
them into non-STEM fields. Various studies report considerable attrition within
the first few years of employment, even among those who successfully transition
into the STEM labor force initially; exit rates from STEM occupations are
particularly high among women. However, survey data are less able to provide in-
depth knowledge of why individual STEM workers choose to exit their field and
what processes are involved in making such a decision. This study will help
explain the roots of the labor shortages now claimed by some employers and
inform policy and practice so that more trained STEM graduates, especially
women, are able to build successful careers in the STEM labor force. The general
problem of high turnover in STEM employment, including diversion among women and
men, is significant given political and economic claims made about the
importance of a well-trained STEM labor force in ensuring U.S. competitiveness
in a global marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a mixed-
methods approach to study a cohort of 200 chemistry and chemical engineering
graduates to interrogate the reasons for the low transition and retention rates
in STEM employment following graduation. Their aims are to (1) collect and
analyze prospective data on the work expectations of chemistry-related
graduates, perceived barriers or obstacles to employment in STEM, and factors
affecting decision-making in the choice of first job; (2) identify gender
differences in the career and family plans of chemistry-related graduates, as
well as gender differences in initial occupational placement; and (3) track the
retention of women and men in the early STEM career and expose the sources of
attrition, especially differential attrition among women. They will use
comparison groups of chemistry-related graduates who never worked in a STEM
field and those who begin but subsequently divert to non-STEM jobs to facilitate
the comparison of post-graduation earnings, upward mobility, and job
satisfaction of those in STEM and non-STEM employment. The ability to
prospectively analyze gender differences in field retention in the four years
after graduation allows the team to adjudicate different theories of gendered
persistence in STEM employment.