* 1432251
* Training A New Generation Of Statistics Educators (TANGO Stat Ed)
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Michael Posner, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2018
* USD 571,091.00

This project is reaching out to under-prepared statistics instructors in the
nation's community college system to provide them with modern content and the
ability to teach it using evidence-based teaching methods. The statistics
instructors in community colleges often lack sufficient resources or connections
to take advantage of all that is offered by the growing statistics education
community. At the same time, the explosive growth in everyday use of statistics
places a great burden of responsibility on statistics educators. Statistical
literacy is vital for engaged and active citizenship. Leaders in the statistical
community have identified educating educators as a critical need for the near
future. Statistics education researchers have developed theoretically grounded
and evidence-based pedagogical practices that can strengthen present and future
teachers.

The approach being taken in this project is to pair 72 community college
instructors in need of professional development with 12 established statistics
educator mentors across 4 regional hubs. The mentors will help these instructors
gain both content knowledge and the ability to use current best evidence-based
practices in their teaching. These practices are consistent with the Guidelines
for Assessment and Instruction in Statistics Education. The instructors will
participate in two expert-led workshops each year, will meet in monthly
professional learning communities through which mentors will promote interaction
and peer-learning, and will be integrated into the statistics education
community. The project will also integrate these community college instructors
into the national statistics education communities through the US Conference on
Teaching Statistics, online connections, and conferences. The project is
creating mentoring relationships and professional learning community programs.

The regional hubs and mentoring relationships created by this project will
provide ongoing opportunities for community college instructors to interact with
the growing statistics education community that is dedicated to quality
statistics education. The effectiveness of this approach to propagating best
practices will also be carefully studied as part of the project. The project
will examine whether this approach can become a foundation for future regional
and national collaborative projects. By providing professional development
opportunities beyond the abilities of most community colleges, this project
could affect new and continuing faculty members for many years to come. It is
creating both the social interactions and the structure needed to sustain these
endeavors beyond the time frame of the grant.