* 1432645
* Interdisciplinary Training in Neuroscience for Faculty and Undergraduates from 2- and 4-year Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2018
* David Schulz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2018
* USD 297,120.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project from the University
of Missouri - Columbia addresses the need for professional development for
biological sciences faculty in the area of computational neuroscience.
Computational neuroscience is an emerging area that studies brain function in
terms of the information processing properties of the structures that make up
the nervous system. It is an interdisciplinary science that links the diverse
fields of neuroscience, cognitive science, and psychology with electrical
engineering, computer science, mathematics, and physics. While leading biology
educators call for strong interdisciplinary curricula that include physical
science, information technology, and mathematics, many biological and behavioral
scientists lack adequate training in the quantitative sciences, limiting their
understanding and use of tools from this area. Similarly, engineers and
quantitative scientists lack the training in biological sciences and
neuroscience necessary to understand the details of the diverse systems in
biology, and facilitate improved interactions with biologists to develop
relevant and advanced computational tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team is
building on the knowledge they have gained through their prior NSF-funded work
in the development of a computational neuroscience course, as well as on their
seven years of experience providing a professional development workshop entitled
"Hardware and Software Experiments to Teach Undergraduate Neuroscience." The
workshops offered through this project are enhancing the teaching expertise of
faculty in neuroscience at both 2- and 4-year institutions. Faculty-student
teams participate in one-week workshops that include instructional methodologies
emphasizing computation via free software experiments. Bringing this expertise
back to their home institutions, workshop participants are increasing the number
and diversity of undergraduates studying computational neuroscience. In
addition, an intensive two-week curriculum development course will be offered to
four faculty-student teams. These rigorous workshops provide training in
mathematics, software, teaching, and development of curricular modules in
computational neuroscience and include a one-year long support program for
faculty-student teams as they develop and implement software modules into their
curriculum. In the course of the project, the PI team is also augmenting our
knowledge of obstacles to the implementation of effective instructional
practices by carrying out studies to identify barriers to student learning and
to faculty professional development and implementation of effective teaching
practices. Understanding these impediments will facilitate development of
strategies to overcome them so that effective instructional practices can be
more widely adopted in the nation's institution of higher education.