* 1432348
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Testability and timing analysis in nanoscale designs in the presence of process variations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Sarma Vrudhula, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

A significant challenge for embedded systems is developing the high-performance,
reliable, low cost, and low-power integrated circuits. This project addresses
this challenge by developing accurate testability and timing analysis techniques
for integrated circuits. The main objective of this effort is to address timing-
related reliability, testing and design challenges faced by the semiconductor
industry due to significant increase in process variations. The project will
develop new methods for modeling the process variability that benefit from
advanced data structures and novel algorithms. A new direction in determining
gate delay models in the presence of process variations is investigated. The
goal is to reduce modeling errors and is expected to identify critical path
delay faults that current methods skip. Moreover, it is expected to result in
more accurate estimates for the delay of the circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research activities will help semiconductor companies in developing
reliable and faster integrated circuits and microprocessors. This will have
impact on the society since cell-phones, cars, airplanes, unmanned vehicles, and
biomedical devices are a major factor in the quality of human life. The
fundamental modeling of process variations will be developed with the center
member companies, ensuring rapid technology transfer and uptake of new methods.
The work is supported by the Industry Advisory Board as well as individual
industry members of the center and has the potential to extend the center
research portfolio while potentially attracting new members. The proposed
research will be used as a vehicle to help students develop interests and
abilities to conduct research in the VLSI design and test automation area, and
undergraduates will be inspired for graduate studies.