* 1432914
* Atomistic Dynamics of Acoustic Emission (AE) Generation in Ultra-Precision Machining (UPM) for Incipient Anomaly Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 11/30/2018
* USD 229,997.00

This grant provides funding to explore the feasibility of an approach to relate
the generation and propagation of acoustic emission waveforms from atomistic
sources with the relevant plastic deformation mechanisms in ultra-precision
machining processes, based on adapting recent advances in nanolithography, ray
acoustics and material point theories, towards real-time monitoring of surface
quality. Ultra-precision machining processes have a broad range of applications
in automotive, aerospace, medical, and defense industries. Real-time monitoring
of these processes is hampered by low signal-to-noise ratios of conventional
sensors, and costs associated with advanced in-situ instruments. Currently,
acoustic emission offers a viable means for real-time and high resolution
monitoring of these processes. However, physical principles connecting the
process microdynamics with acoustic emission waveforms, which are critical for
real-time monitoring of anomalies in ultra-precision machining processes, remain
elusive. The physical principles and models from this research can be vital for
harnessing acoustic emission signals for real-time process monitoring to assure
nano-scale precisions and surface quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the investigations would lay foundations to advance sensing technologies for
real-time quality assurance of ultra-precision manufacturing processes in the
vital industries of today's economy. Considerable short-term impact will accrue
from active research partnerships with the industry, and involvement of graduate
and undergraduate students. The affiliated educational activities will include
enriching a graduate course by employing the new experimentation facilities and
other research outcomes as part of the lab, as well as by incorporating the
results from the proposed research as course modules in process modeling and
mechanics tracks.