* 1432052
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Development of Student Reasoning Skills Through Scaffolded Physics Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Andrew Boudreaux, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,993.00

This is a collaborative project involving North Dakota State University (Award
DUE-1431857), the University of Maine (Award DUE-1431940), Penn State Greater
Allegheny (Award DUE-1431541), the University of Washington (Award DUE-1432765),
and Western Washington University (Award DUE-1432052).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to helping students learn foundational physics content, one of the most
important goals of a college-level physics course is to help students learn how
to reason. To be successful in STEM fields, students must be able to build
multi-step explanations leading to a prediction, an inference, or a conclusion.
Experienced physics instructors recognize that this is difficult for many
students. Although a great deal of research has been conducted on how students
develop an understanding of individual concepts in physics, there has been
little research to date on how students learn to chain ideas together. In many
cases, instructional interventions have been shown to help the strongest
students most, thereby widening the gap between high- and low-achieving
students. Differences in students' underlying reasoning abilities might account
for this disparity of impact. The outcomes of this project have the potential
both to decrease such gaps and to increase the retention of at-risk students in
STEM disciplines. Because this is a new avenue of research, one of the primary
goals of this project is to develop tools and methods for the reliable
measurement of student reasoning, and to test these tools with diverse student
populations. These tools will be shared with other researchers so that they can
be applied more widely in studies of the development of students' reasoning
abilities in STEM courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a sustained focus on
reasoning and problem solving from a variety of research perspectives, little is
known about how students construct inferential reasoning chains in solving
qualitative physics problems. Because of the importance of reasoning in
developing and applying scientific knowledge, as well as the relative lack of
empirical and theoretical resources for understanding and assessing the
development of such reasoning, there is a need for more research in this area.
Central to this exploratory project is the development of new instruments and
methodologies for disentangling conceptual understanding of physics from the
reasoning abilities required to apply that understanding productively. Specific
objectives of the project are (1) to develop instruments capable of reliably
measuring student reasoning and (2) to use those instruments to investigate the
development of student reasoning in university physics courses. The
investigators will concurrently pursue both the development and refinement of
instruments and the generation of new knowledge about students' reasoning in
physics, including the identification of factors and instructional circumstances
that enhance or suppress the application of productive reasoning approaches. The
investigators will employ three complementary strategies: (1) the collection and
analysis of snapshot data obtained from many students at a single instant (e.g.,
written responses to exam questions), (2) controlled experiments involving
comparisons of snapshot data obtained under different circumstances, and (3) the
collection and analysis of video data from student interviews and from groups of
students working through materials in class.