* 1432829
* Interdisciplinary Assessment of Supplemental Instruction and Attitudes in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sean Walker, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,491.00

This project is a thorough study of the impact of supplemental instruction (SI)
across four broad undergraduate STEM disciplines in an institution that has
fully institutionalized it as part of their instructional methods. Although the
PIs believe that SI is both effective and an efficient adjunct to regular
classroom instruction, there is still much that is not understood about how it
works. The challenge being addressed in this project is to develop increased
understanding of the mechanisms by which SI improves students' performance in
content understanding and their attitudes and beliefs about learning in science
and math courses. Improved understanding is the precursor to improved designs
for SI. The project would approach this through a comprehensive, cross-
disciplinary program of study of the impact of SI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will document the extent to which SI impacts student conceptual
understanding in 8 target courses across 4 departments: biology, chemistry,
mathematics, and physics. Surveys will be conducted in each course administered
over 4 semesters. Measures employed are student grades, changes in conceptual
understanding using already developed concept inventories, and changes in
students' beliefs and attitudes towards science and mathematics. The affective
realm of SI will also be investigated by interviewing SI leaders, analyzing
their recorded interviews using hermeneutics. The host university is a
nationally recognized leader in the development and use of Supplemental
Instruction. Consequently, the results of this work will serve to further inform
or enlighten the many other faculty instructions in numerous institutions that
use SI or are in the process of instituting SI.