* 1432952
* I/UCRC FRP:  Nano-patterned Thin Film Composite Membranes for Scaling Mitigation during Desalination
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 199,954.00

The proposed approach to be explored through this I/UCRC Fundamental Research
Program project utilizes interfacial polymerization (IP) to create a barrier
layer on pre-patterned ultrafiltration (UF) membrane supports to create
functional patterned thin film composite (TFC) membranes. The specific
objectives are (1) generation of new knowledge regarding (i) the IP process
dynamics on patterned UF membranes, (ii) the structure of the resulting barrier
layer, and (iii) their dependence on major processing parameters; and (2)
examination of the influence of specific surface pattern characteristics on salt
deposition (fouling) during desalination.

This work will enable a non-chemical approach to the fabrication of TFC
membranes with reduced fouling and improved energy efficiency; the study will
also advance current knowledge as to how surface topography affects membrane
fouling during active filtration, which in turn will guide the design of
optimized surface patterns for specific separation applications. The work is
supported by the Industry Advisory Board as well as individual industry members
of the center and has the potential to extend the center?s portfolio while
potentially attracting new members. The proposed work will leverage the
exceptional infrastructure for innovation in education and outreach at CU-
Boulder to provide new and inspirational educational experiences, with a focus
on membrane technology, for students at all levels.