* 1432982
* Arctic Observing Networks: Collaborative Research: Sustaining and amplifying the ITEX AON through automation and increased interdisciplinarity of observations
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Steven Oberbauer, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* diane mcknight
* 08/31/2017
* USD 220,441.00

The International Tundra Experiment (ITEX) was chartered in 1990 to test the
effects of increased temperature on tundra plant phenology, growth, species
composition and ecosystem function. Since 2007, the ITEX-Arctic Observatory
Network (ITEX-AON) has continued and expanded on the ITEX program across a
latitudinal transect of five sites in Alaska and Greenland, collecting core ITEX
data specifically designed to address the current needs outlined in the Study of
Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) Implementation Report. The goal of this
effort is to maintain the continuity of the temporally-critical datasets of the
ITEX-AON in Alaska and Greenland. Core datasets include the long-term manual
observations of phenology, vegetation structure and composition, ecosystem
function, and surface properties on the long-term ITEX control and experimental
warming plots, repeat measurement of the vegetation plots on the 1km2 ARCSS
grids, and a multifactor warming-moisture experiment in Greenland. The
simultaneous measurement of multiple surface properties at the small scale has
allowed detection of relationships not previously recognized, e.g., in moss-
dominated areas of the intensive transects, higher albedo is linked to higher
temperatures. Continuation of these measurements is imperative because
increasing evidence points towards the critical importance of carry-over effects
of the previous growing seasons on current and future responses and the inherent
variability in the system precluded determination of the system response on the
basis of a few years. Data from this project are freely available on the ACADIS
website. The project will continue extensive outreach activities established in
the initial phase, including strong relationships between the Fairchild Tropical
Botanic Garden (FTBG) and the GVSU Regional Math and Science Center and school
systems in Miami, Anchorage, Grand Rapids, and El Paso.