* 1432606
* Speech-Based Learning Analytics for Collaboration
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Shriberg, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,499,944.00

The Education Core Research (ECR) program funds foundational research in STEM
learning, STEM learning environments, workforce development, and broadening
participation in STEM. One of the pressing current challenges in schools as
curriculum focuses increasingly on inquiry, application, and synthesis (rather
than factual recall) is how to efficiently manage, support, and assess
collaboration in the classroom. While teaching with collaborative learning may
be more productive, it also creates greater burdens on educators, including the
need to have real-time diagnosis of problems in group work. Technology has been
used in a variety of ways to provide real-time data, but this project takes a
novel approach: using cutting edge computer science, specifically automatic
speech processing technology, and studies how it might be used to support real-
time diagnosis of collaboration among learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
speech processing to recognize the words spoken, and then analyze whether
collaboration is taking place, is an area of research that is far from
applicability. This project will instead use speech processing technology to
look for other aspects of speech that may serve as useful gross indicators of
collaboration, such as turn taking, which is much easier to apply using current
technological infrastructure. The proposal is a collaboration between learning
scientists, computer scientists, linguists, and teachers, and will address three
research questions: first, they will study (using human observation) how well
indicators (such as turn-taking, or vocal tone associated with frustration)
predict overall collaboration quality (i.e., collaborative learning behavior and
outcomes); second, they will examine how well automated speech processing
technology can identify these indicators; and finally, they will attempt to
validate whether the automated system can usefully gauge the student
collaboration. This research will be undertaken in the context of a well-studied
Mathematics curriculum (Cornerstone Mathematics). Prior research on Cornerstone
Math shows that while it is highly successful on average, student outcomes vary
significantly with student discourse quality. The project proposes to study the
automated system both in a controlled laboratory setting in which acoustics can
be carefully controlled, and in a realistic field setting using diverse students
in 5 middle school classrooms. The intellectual merit includes improving the
state of the art in automated speech recognition technology to examine
paralinguistic and prosodic features useful in gauging collaboration; novel
research on the ways successful and unsuccessful collaboration shows certain
acoustic markers; and design of new computer-supported collaborative learning
technology to support teacher diagnosis of learner collaboration in real time.
Broader impacts of the work relate to the eventual possibility that teachers
could more easily implement collaborative learning in their classrooms, while
paying attention to the teams or groups that need help the most.