* 1432804
* Implementation of Student- Centered Pedagogy, Its Impact on Learning, Persistence, and the Teaching Culture
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Blaire Van Valkenburgh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,397,699.00

This project will significantly improve the learning environment for thousands
of life science majors by converting introductory courses in biology and math to
student-centered modes of instruction. Instructor teams will be trained to use
interactive video technology to implement active learning pedagogies in core
biology courses. The project team also will design a new math curriculum that
incorporates biology-relevant content and computational applications,
supplemental instruction opportunities for underrepresented racial minority
students, and student-centered teaching methods demonstrated to positively
impact students most at risk for dropping out of science. Expected outcomes
include more students motivated and prepared to explore diverse science careers,
fewer students under-performing in their introductory coursework, and a more
diverse undergraduate pool completing science and math degrees. Project
activities also will produce research faculty who are more engaged in assessing
student learning as well as future faculty (teaching fellows) who can serve as
advocates of student-centered teaching at other institutions. To augment these
activities, a new position will be created within the UCLA Career Center that
promotes student interest in career alternatives to medicine and awareness of
emerging careers in science. The project evaluation plan will provide new
knowledge about the impact of interactive videos on student learning, the
effectiveness of student-centered teaching on knowledge retention and
persistence in science majors, and the support structures necessary to engage
research-focused faculty in curricular reform. All of these activities will
incorporate faculty mentoring strategies and incentives aimed at surmounting
institutional barriers that tend to inhibit educational reform.