* 1432466
* Measuring Chemistry Students' Understandings of Multiple External Representations through Cluster Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2022
* Stacey Lowery Bretz, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,277,405.00

An important aspect of learning about chemistry and related molecular sciences
is developing abilities to interpret, generate, and communicate with
representations of molecules, compounds, and the atoms and ions from which they
are built. This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) research project
will investigate how students interpret representations of four core chemistry
concepts about which students often hold misconceptions (or alternative
conceptions): electron structure and periodicity, molecular shape and polarity,
bond energies and heats of reaction, and solution chemistry and precipitation
reactions. Based on in-depth interviews with students, the research team will
design four separate surveys to test students' understandings of these topics
and to collect data from a national sample of undergraduate students enrolled in
introductory chemistry courses. Once these tools have been developed and
validated, the project team will also hold workshops to teach other chemistry
instructors and chemistry education researchers how to best utilize the tools to
assess students' understandings and provide baseline data upon which innovations
in pedagogy and curriculum can ultimately be built. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory research project will investigate the questions: (1) How do
undergraduate students interpret multiple external representations of core
chemistry concepts (MERC3s) within clinical interviews? What cognitive
dissonance emerges, both within and across macroscopic, particulate, and
symbolic domains? What alternative conceptions emerge? (2) How are reliability
and validity best established when developing assessment items to measure
cognitive dissonance and alternative conceptions? (3) What patterns in student
reasoning about MERC3s are revealed through cluster analyses of responses to
assessment items grounded in the students' cognitive dissonance and alternative
conceptions about MERC3s? To ensure valid and reliable findings, the project
team will use a sequential, mixed-methods research design and subject the data
to rigorous psychometric testing, including cluster analysis. Cluster analyses
will also be carried out with existing data sets regarding students'
understanding of external representations of other core chemistry concepts. The
use of cluster analyses to mine existing and new data sets will allow the
research team to not only characterize students' understanding and use of
representations of individual core concepts, but also characterize patterns in
students' thinking that generalize across multiple core chemistry concepts. In
addition, in years 2 and 4 of the project, chemistry education research
capacity-building workshops will focus on teaching the advanced statistical
techniques used in this research to a total of one hundred graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars from across the country, further advancing the
methodological repertoire within discipline-based education research.