* 1432300
* Collaborative Research:  Creating High-Completion CS Online Learning Using Educational Psychology Principles
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Mark Guzdial, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 09/30/2018
* USD 738,873.00

Integrating computer science into the high school curriculum can enhance the
preparation of students interested in a broad range of careers. To accomplish
this goal, it is essential that high school teachers be well prepared to teach
their students and have effective tools and resources available for instruction.
In this project the collaborative team, from Georgia Tech and Luther College,
will adapt their existing Computer Science Principles eBook for high school
teachers to become a general purpose Computer Science Principles (CSP) eBook for
students. They will compare the usability of the eBook on the different
populations and compare learning outcomes of students who learn at a distance to
those who use the eBook in a face to face environment. Their general research
question is: What can be learned about CS in a low-cognitive load, principles-
based eBook format? The long term impact of this work is to create a new model
for online learning that helps adults complete computer science learning and
also helps traditional students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ebook incorporates
findings from educational psychology such as worked examples, multiple modality
presentations, low cognitive load exercises, social supports from small group
activities, and frequent testing interleaved with examples. The eBook utilizes
contextualized approaches which have been successful in engaging and retaining
female and under-represented minority students. The project team will conduct
two studies: Study #1: CSP face-to-face class vs eBook: The project team will
provide the CSP eBook to a face-to-face CSP class (both high school and
undergraduate) and to a set of students interested in studying CSP on-line (most
likely in rural Georgia). They will compare these students for learning
outcomes. They are also interested in the drop-off in use of features within the
book. When students stop engaging in the on-line materials, is that because of
the materials, or is it because of the on-line course delivery mechanism? Study
#2: Teachers vs Students: The project team is creating two eBooks for CSP
content, one for teachers and one for students. By comparing these populations,
they can develop a better understanding of how non-traditional and traditional
students use e-books differently. They will do comparisons based on content
knowledge (using a new validated measure they will develop as part of the
project) and usability (do teachers and students use different features, or at
different rates?). They will also use interviews and surveys to understand
differences in motivations to use and complete the eBook.