* 1432622
* Center of Excellence for Women in Science at Bay Path College: Improving Academic Success, Engagement and Retention in STEM Among Low-Income, Minority and First-Generation Women
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Gina Semprebon, Bay Path University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,300.00

Bay Path College will increase the academic success, engagement and retention of
undergraduate women enrolled in baccalaureate degree programs in Biology,
Forensic Science and Cybersecurity. The purpose of this design and development
research project is to refine, expand and pilot strategies that will lead to
improved learning, engagement and retention outcomes, particularly among low-
income, minority and first-generation college students. The project seeks to
implement and extend recommendations for effective teaching in the biological
sciences promulgated through the Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education Initiative. This will include an expansion of course redesign and
faculty professional development to implement active, student-centered teaching
and learning strategies in upper-level science courses, and integrate core
concepts and competencies throughout the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will be coordinated through
the new Bay Path College Center of Excellence for Women in Science, a facility
designed to nurture women's scientific career aspirations and ensure they
develop the experience, skills and confidence to be competitive, to succeed and
to thrive in their professional lives. The project will also build upon
successful results from a prior NSF grant through the Scholarships in STEM
(S-STEM) Program. Broadening participation of students from groups that are
traditionally underrepresented in STEM will be achieved through high impact
practices, including early student research, mentoring by faculty and STEM
professionals, academic enrichment and career exploration through internships
and other experiential learning opportunities. These strategies are expected to
improve the academic achievement, engagement and retention of all participating
students. Formative and summative evaluation will address two questions (1) Does
course redesign through implementation of Vision and Change recommendations lead
to improved student learning outcomes in these courses at Bay Path College? And
(2) Does broadening student participation in high impact learning experiences
through the project lead to increased student engagement and retention in STEM
in the first two years, and are there differences for low-income Pell-eligible,
minority and first-generation college students? Descriptive and inferential
statistics will be used to determine the effectiveness of course redesign on
student learning. Students will participate in the National Survey of Student
Engagement during their first and final years of college. Dissemination of new
materials and results will be presented at national meetings such as the High
Impact Technology Exchange and the National Association of Biology Educators
conferences. Journal articles will be submitted to The American Biology Teacher.