* 1432930
* Midlatitude Deep Convective Transport to the Upper-Troposphere and Lower-Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Gretchen Mullendore, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2019
* USD 290,966.00

Climate change can be understood as a change in the radiative budget of the
earth; the radiative budget is sensitive to the chemical makeup of the upper-
troposphere/lower-stratosphere (UTLS) region. The chemical makeup of the UTLS
region remains poorly understood at scales important to chemistry models because
of the difficulty in getting high temporal and spatial measurements at high
altitude. Deep convection, such as the severe thunderstorms observed throughout
the central United States in the summer months, is an efficient transporter of
gases from the surface to the UTLS region and, therefore, is a significant
source of uncertainty in UTLS composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focuses on two primary objectives, both of which are important for improving our
understanding of deep convective mass transport: 1) Improvement of the Algorithm
to Estimate Deep Convective Transport using Radar Reflectivity, and 2) Impact of
Variable UTLS Structure on Storm-Scale Deep Convective Mass Transport. Objective
1 will utilize the unique dataset provided by the 2012 Deep Convective Clouds
and Chemistry (DC3) campaign to further improve a radar-only convective
transport algorithm previously developed by the PI's research group. The radar-
only algorithm was developed to allow cloud-scale convective transport estimates
in the absence of dual-Doppler radar coverage or in situ chemical measurements.
The DC3 campaign data is unique in that dual-Doppler radar coverage is co-
located with a wide range of in situ chemical measurements, allowing extensive
testing of the radar-only algorithm, and leading to additional improvements
(e.g. objective storm maturity estimates). Objective 2 will utilize an idealized
cloud-resolving model with identical storms to quantify the impact of varied
UTLS structures on deep convective transport. The idealized soundings represent
archetypal UTLS structures that have been observed in recent case studies and
are hypothesized to strongly impact the irreversible transport, specifically a
tropopause inversion and a double tropopause.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The algorithm development (objective 1) will allow for cloud-
scale convective transport estimates using the NEXRAD radar network. Previously,
cloud-scale transport measurements were only available in focused campaigns. The
investigation into the impact of the UTLS structure on deep convective transport
(objective 2) will allow for an improved understanding of the dynamical role of
the tropopause region on convective evolution and transport. The impacts of
varied tropopause structures on transport have been observed, but it is
difficult to quantify the impact and/or understand the dynamical influences, as
the storms themselves (e.g. CAPE, storm morphology) varied significantly in
cases observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
use the NEXRAD radar network to estimate cloud-scale convective transport
(objective 1) in the central U.S. is very important for constraining the
convective contribution in chemical transport models. Previously, transport
models have had to rely on satellite measurements (which are not cloud scale in
at least one of dimension, i.e. x,y,z,t) or on aircraft or dual-Doppler
measurements, which are limited to case studies. This feedback to the modeling
community will allow for improvements to the convective transport
parameterizations. The improved understanding of the impact of tropopause
structures on deep convection (objective 2) is also important for constraining
transport models, because often the tropopause regions is only poorly
represented in regional models. This study will quantify the need for
improvements to UTLS representation. This project also has educational impacts,
as several graduate and undergraduate students will be trained over the course
of the project.