* 1432363
* Collaborative Research: Surveying the state and implications of computational physics in courses for physics majors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 126,320.00

Within physics and other fields, computation is an increasingly important
element in solving problems and conducting research. Much remains to be learned
about effectively integrating computational approaches into the undergraduate
curriculum. This comprehensive, collaborative research project, leading to the
design and validation of a survey instrument will elucidate the extent,
character, and attitudes towards the use of computation in undergraduate physics
courses. A knowledge base of the computational component of undergraduate
physics courses is useful for educational research, programmatic development,
and effective employment of undergraduate physics majors. The survey will be the
first comprehensive and rigorously statistical national assessment of the
position of computation in undergraduate physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted over a period of two years involving a
variety of stakeholders. A workshop, crucial to the validity of the survey
questionnaire and the usefulness of its results, will be convened to complete
the process of probing the thinking and experiences of stakeholders in advance
of designing the survey. Workshop participants will represent several interest
groups: faculty and administrators from different educational institution types
and enrollment profiles; representatives of businesses, government agencies, and
organizations that employ physics bachelor degree recipients; a specialist in
computational physics education research; and students drawn from the current
cohort of physics majors. Participants will set requirements for the design of a
survey of computational methods and their use in undergraduate physics courses,
and articulate the desired outcomes from analysis of the results of the survey.
Attitudes as well as practices in relation to computation will be surveyed. An
external evaluator, with expertise in formative and summative evaluation, and
significant experience in assessing changes in the undergraduate physics
curriculum will use mixed methods to translate the issues and language treated
in the workshop into a survey and questionnaire that measures current
computational practices in physics courses and the climate for change in the
physics departments that teach them. The PI and the evaluator will consult to
gain insights in learning to understand how the design and operation of the
Workshop succeeded in eliciting the knowledge needed for constructing the survey
and how such advisory workshops can be improved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
will increase the knowledge base needed to replicate in physics education what
the scientific and engineering worlds have been doing for decades-gradually
integrating computational modeling into the standard toolbox for professional
practice.