* 1432787
* Collaborative Research: Lighthouse CC:  Preparing Future Undergraduate Computer Science Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Sarah Hug, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 02/28/2019
* USD 73,201.00

This project (Lighthouse CC) is focused on providing community college computing
faculty with the motivation and knowledge to attract and retain more students,
and improve the diversity of computer science majors. It explicitly addresses
the large and persistent under-representation of women and minority students
majoring in computing. It is building on a set of earlier projects (Lighthouse,
Tapestry) that have been engaged in training educators at the high school level
to increase diversity in computing, a discipline skill that is critical for the
future US economy. The first stage of the Lighthouse CC project is developing
and testing new broadening participation content for community college
instructors. Subsequently, it will build and test a new open online professional
development course designed in accordance with John Keller's ARCS Theory of
Motivational Design (as explained in "Motivational Design for Learning and
Performance: The ARCS model approach," New York: Springer, 2010). ARCS has four
design principles: attention, relevance, confidence, and satisfaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The open online learning environment will provide a
platform for educational research into the learning, behavioral, and diversity
outcomes of enrolled instructors. This aspect of Lighthouse CC will deepen
understanding of the relationship between learner motivation and learning
environment. It will provide both research findings and a significant lasting
infrastructure in the form of tools, data and content for researchers,
practitioners and lifelong learners. The final goal is for this course to become
an ongoing professional development course that is both open and online. The
intention is make this a go-to professional development course so that the
enrollment rises to the level of "massive," thus legitimizing the label MOOC
(Massive, Open, Online Course). To maximize impact, Lighthouse CC will widely
disseminate and promote adoption of its content by using openly accessible
digital resources and an online social network, both of which will be amplified
with support from the National Center for Women &amp; IT (NCWIT) and other
collaborating groups.