* 1432701
* Innovate from the Start: Engaging Engineering and Computer Science Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Amelia Regan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,800,000.00

The iSTART program aims to increase the retention and graduation rates of
engineering and computer science (CS) students at the University of California
Irvine (UCI) as well as transfer of students from three local community colleges
(Irvine Valley College, Saddleback College, and Santa Ana College). The
implementation of evidence-based strategies to address the needs of engineering
and computer science students at UCI and partner community colleges will
increase the number and diversity of well-prepared graduates who enter the
engineering and computer science workforce. Specifically, the iSTART program
will establish a formal First Year Experience Program at UCI, improve the
articulation and transfer process between community colleges and UCI, and
establish specific innovation-based retention initiatives to provide a system of
support and engagement for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iSTART program
will leverage existing infrastructure, activities, and partnerships, as well as
integrate a coordinated set of evidence-based practices and interventions to
support students' learning and engagement and transfer from community colleges.
For UCI lower-division students, a new Introduction to Engineering sequence will
engage freshmen in design projects with themes around Global Grand Challenges.
Similarly, a hands-on and collaborative CS: Principles course will be developed
and implemented to provide an entryway to students interested in pursuing
information and computer science. To address challenges lower-division students
encounter in mathematics courses, a new Analytical Formulation of Engineering
seminar that incorporates collaborative and active learning will be developed
for engineering students, which is modeled after the successful revisions to
mathematics courses in the computer science curriculum. Moreover, multiple
evidence-based interventions for students at the partner community colleges will
be implemented through the recently established Corridor to Academic Success in
Engineering and Computer Science (CASECS) program. These include cross-
enrollment opportunities, articulating courses to improve the transfer process
as well as modify engineering and computer science courses at the partner
community colleges to integrate hands-on and applied learning activities,
recruiting and building cohorts at the partner community colleges who will have
access to co-advising, peer mentoring, and supplemental tutoring, and a summer
bridge program for transfer students. Finally, the integration of a design and
prototyping space for industry-driven student design projects will provide
students co-curricular experiential learning opportunities to develop and
support students' innovation and creativity skills. An evaluation plan that
includes formative and summative evaluation will inform improvements during the
project period as well as measure the outcomes of the project through surveys
and student tracking. Knowledge gained from the evaluation will help provide a
modular model for improving student retention that can be adapted at other
institutions with similar needs.