* 1432962
* EAGER - Chief Scientist Training for Young Investigators: MLML/CSU Focus on Coastal Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Kenneth Coale, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 04/30/2016
* USD 62,851.00

A series of short cruises aboard R/V Point Sur with the principle aim of
training early career oceanographers to conduct research at sea. The need to
improve the skills of early career scientists has been recognized by UNOLS as
well as Program for several years. Previous similar activities conducted on the
West and East Coast under Clare Reimers were highly successful, and this effort
would build on those experiences. MLML proposes a series of UNOLS Chief
Scientist Training Cruises to provide opportunities for teaching early career
marine scientists how to effectively plan for, acquire, utilize and report on,
time at sea for multi-disciplinary research projects and education. These
cruises, to be held on the R/V Point Sur in 2014, they will also offer new
investigators opportunities to test preliminary or unfamiliar research methods,
work collaboratively, with others and acquire samples and experience critical
for developing future oceanographic programs for both research and education.
Because berthing is limited on Point Sur, the plan is to run three short cruises
and a series of day cruises. This approach will allow for a large number of
participants, but will also provide opportunities for several participants to
lead a cruise. The funding for the cruise is modest. The Intellectual Merit of
this activity will be the results from the expedition to a scientifically
important and interesting area. The activity is not just a "look and see", but
rather "learning from doing" real science. The proposals lays out a very
organized and proven time table for meeting the objectives. The Broader Impacts
of the activity are the majority focus. Training the next generation of sea-
going scientists is essential to maintaining effective US oceanography. It is
particularly important at this juncture as the Academic Research Fleet downsizes
and modernizes. This consideration, as well as advancement in technology to
support field work, mandates that new users become familiar with capabilities
that are rapidly evolving. This is one reason behind shifting the paradigm from
learning through osmosis from seasoned veterans to actively participating in
modern oceanography. The experiences of the previous generation are rapidly
becoming less relevant to the careers of the up-and-coming scientists of
tomorrow.