* 1432414
* Integrated Science Education for Discovery in Introductory Biology (InSciED-In)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Catherine Kirkpatrick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,892,789.00

A large body of evidence supports the value of traditional research
apprenticeships in the academic, personal, and career development of
undergraduates. The College of Biological Sciences at the University of
Minnesota has embedded authentic research experiences in all of their
introductory biology courses. As a result, more than 4,000 students currently
engage in classroom-based authentic research experiences each year. This project
will expand that effort so that students can advance from their initial
classroom designed research experiences to the full range of scientific inquiry,
from asking a question to producing new knowledge. This proposal is inspired by
the Integrated Science Education Outreach (InSciEd Out) Program
(http://insciedout.org/), which involves middle school children in research
projects that produce publishable results. The project (dubbed InSciED-In) is
designed to provide undergraduate students, including both biology majors and
non-majors, with a rigorous, comprehensive research experience that includes
observation, questioning, hypothesis building, experimental design, data
collection/analysis/presentation, and the expectation that, through this work,
they will discover new knowledge.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Based on evidence from
pilot studies some student projects will result in publishable research,
enhancing understanding of basic processes of life, including the genetics of
complex traits, developmental biology, behavior, and ecosystems. Implementing
the InSciED-In approach on this large scale creates an opportunity to examine
differences in student outcomes between inquiry-based labs, classroom-based
research apprenticeships, faculty-led research apprenticeships, and complete
(InSciED-In) research experiences. A further educational research topic
scheduled to be examined is whether discovery-based research that uses
computational approaches to probe databases provides learning outcomes
equivalent to those achieved through bench-based research experiences. These
analyses promise to produce better understanding of which types of research
experiences have the greatest positive impact on students, and which students
are most affected. Over the five years of this grant, more than 11,000 non-
majors and 2,000 majors will participate in an InSciED-In research experience.