* 1432397
* Field Monitoring and Measurements Education: A Model for Civil and Environmental Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Roger Seals, Louisiana Transportation Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2021
* USD 337,312.00

The University of New Orleans (UNO), Louisiana State University (LSU) and the
Louisiana Transportation Research Center (LTRC) are partnering on the project
"Field Monitoring and Measurements Education: A Model for Civil and
Environmental Engineering." The goal of this project is to develop a model
instructional program, using structural engineering and structural health
monitoring as a test bed, that can be used to educate civil and environmental
engineering (CEE) students in the fundamental principles and technology of field
monitoring and measurements (FMM) and to utilize monitoring technologies and FMM
data to evaluate performance and behavior, analyze problems and design CEE
systems. The nation's aging, and in some cases, failing infrastructure
necessitates the education of future engineers to address problems related to
structural health (and other critical areas). Since this project addresses a
national need, two activities will be given significant attention: developing
and implementing the instructional materials in a manner that maximizes their
potential for adoption at other institutions; and building a community of
interested and contributing scholars. The latter effort will encompass targeted
proactive outreach activities at the state, regional, and national levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the project are to: (1) improve
student performance with respect to the existing learning outcomes of the civil
engineering courses into which field monitoring modules will be incorporated,
(2) improve student knowledge of and ability to use field monitoring
measurements, (3) train faculty in the use of the curricular materials and (4)
develop a community of scholars that has an interest in and will contribute to
the further development of FMM instructional materials. Quality control and
quality assurance of the instructional materials will be achieved through close
coordination among the investigators, the advisory panel, and the external
evaluator aided by the results of a formative evaluation of the prototype
structural engineering FMM instructional unit and a summative evaluation of a
revised unit over a two academic year cycle at both LSU and UNO. During the
second year of the project, the unit will be introduced and assessed at four
partner institutions (Virginia Tech, Case Western Reserve University, Tuskegee
University and University of North Florida). The project collaborators at the
partner institutions will also be used in an advisory capacity throughout all
stages of the project. The results of this project will serve to establish an
instructional model upon which other CEE sub-disciplines can build.