* 1432728
* TILE: Transform, Interact, Learn, and Engage for success in STEM education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bernd Fritzsch, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,942.00

This project is preparing for institution-wide transformation of teaching and
learning practices at a large public research university. It is continuing to
expand a process that has already begun, building infrastructure around a core
initiative called TILE (Transform, Interact, Learn, and Engage for success in
STEM education). TILE requires faculty implementers to invest in professional
development and the University to invest in technology-rich classrooms. TILE
classrooms are remodeled after the SCALE-UP classrooms used in physics and other
disciplines in the physical sciences that have been proven to be effective
learning environments when paired with appropriate pedagogy. SCALE-UP (Student-
Centered Active Learning Environment for Undergraduate Programs) is a mature,
proven evidence-based method of education that puts students in small groups
around circular tables and engages them in active construction of knowledge.
Using computers, they pull information from the Internet to use in active
solving problems. In SCALE-UP the task of getting disciplinary content is
shifted to the internet and the process of solving difficult problems occurs in
small groups during class time, where students help one another and are guided
by expert instructors. This model is currently in use in more than 100
institutions of higher education. Appropriate pedagogy is learned by faculty
instructors through a professional development program at the university that
has already been designed and implemented by the Center for Teaching and the
Office of Information Technology Services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TILE has the
support of a number of faculty members and administrators, but the process of
transformation is still in its early stages. There are a number of possible
barriers and issues that are likely to be encountered in this institution as in
all large research universities. The main goals of this project are to
anticipate and prepare for those challenges and create a process for overcoming
them. The goals of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;* Assess the organizational
climate for promoting and sustaining innovative teaching and learning practices
in STEM departments&lt;br/&gt;* Create a Leadership Institute to provide College
and Department leadership with evidence-based practices for supporting teaching
and learning at the department and program level.&lt;br/&gt;* Create a process
to iteratively increase the use of evidence-based scientific teaching and
learning practices in STEM classes, particularly in general education and
introductory STEM courses. Included in the plan to increase evidence-based
teaching in an iterative process is a set of assessment tools that will measure
the benefits for students derived from improved teaching and learning practices.