* 1432085
* Improving Large Lecture Gateway Chemistry Courses through Flipped Classes with Peer-Led Team Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Scott Lewis, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 329,994.00

General Chemistry and Organic Chemistry courses are critical junctures and often
are points of attrition in the academic pursuits for many undergraduate STEM
majors. Research and development of pedagogical reforms and instructional
interventions that improve student learning and success in these courses can
contribute to increasing the number of STEM graduates in fields important to the
economic health and security of the nation. This project will build upon prior
work that has demonstrated success by utilizing Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) in
General Chemistry I and will develop, implement and evaluate a reform pedagogy
for instruction in General Chemistry II and Organic Chemistry I that blends PLTL
with a so-called "flipped" classroom structure. In a flipped classroom
arrangement, lecture content is provided via relatively brief online videos that
students watch outside of class. The time made available during class by
diminishing the time devoted to lecturing can be used for implementing active
learning activities such as small group problem-solving and PLTL. As General
Chemistry II and Organic Chemistry I enroll large numbers of students at the
University of South Florida, research outcomes from this project will be of
value to inform similar endeavors at other institutions that also offer
undergraduate STEM courses with large enrollments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
chief elements of this project entail the development of the blended pedagogical
approach, creation of video lectures, training of peer leaders and faculty
professional development. As this project will extend work begun in General
Chemistry I to the subsequent courses of General Chemistry II and Organic
Chemistry I, the investigators will study the impact of the reform pedagogy on
persistence in a disciplinary course sequence, on transferrable skills between
courses, and ultimately on degree attainment in STEM disciplines. Research on
the effectiveness of the intervention will involve comparisons of students in
classes in which the novel pedagogical strategy has been implemented and those
students in classes receiving instruction without the reform pedagogy. Specific
instruments and data sources that will be utilized to measure project outcomes
include administering standardized final examinations from the American Chemical
Society Examinations Institute in General Chemistry II and Organic Chemistry I,
conducting student interviews to elicit their approaches to problem-solving and
institutional records of student performance in the targeted courses and
graduation rates.