* 1432990
* I/UCRC FRP:  Minimizing uncertainty in freeform optics metrology using CMMs
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Christopher Evans, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 10/31/2017
* USD 198,734.00

This I/UCRC Fundamental Research Program project plans to research the
adaptation of in-situ self-calibration methods developed for interferometric
measurement of optical surfaces to measurement of freeform optical surfaces on
precision coordinate measuring machines (CMMs). In optics manufacturing, a
fundamental measurement is a map of surface errors, a hit map which is used to
perform corrective polishing. This project will develop calculation methods that
evaluate the uncertainty point-wise in that map and enable the estimation of the
uncertainty in any parametric description of the error map. Methods developed in
ultraprecision interferometric metrology will be applied to contact measurement
of complex optical surfaces. The result will enable new optical surface shapes
to be measured, and hence made, thus opening up new design space that
researchers on CeFO faculty and elsewhere can explore productively.

Freeform optics represent a transformative opportunity, enabling compact, light,
high resolution infra-red imaging systems that can have broad application from
automotive to manufacturing process control, defense and disaster relief. The
fundamental metrology knowledge will be developed with member companies of the
Center for Freeform Optics, ensuring rapid technology transfer and uptake of new
methods. The work is supported by the Industry Advisory Board as well as
individual industry members of the center and has the potential to extend the
center's portfolio while potentially attracting new members. Research results
will be integrated into the PI's undergraduate manufacturing class, where high
tech optics inspire interest.