* 1432406
* Building a Framework for Developing and Evaluating Contextualized Items in Science Assessment (DECISA)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Jim Minstrell, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,498,746.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project involving the
University of Colorado at Denver and the University of Washington at Seattle in
conjunction with Facet Innovations, will build a framework for addressing the
use of contextualized items in the assessment of STEM learning. The primary goal
is to systematically investigate the effects of characteristics of
contextualized items on student performance to strengthen practices in science
assessments, ensure fairness in science testing, and increase support for both
assessment and instructional purposes. Test items with contexts are called
contextualized items which include supplemental information that precedes or
follows a test item question. Such information may include a description of a
lab setup, a natural phenomenon, or a practical problem often depicted as a
scenario, background, vignette, or cover story. The project findings will help
to understand how students make sense of contextualized items focusing on
complex scientific concepts that they usually encounter in science assessments.
Currently, contextualized items are constructed from either conventional wisdom
or non-contextualized item writing rules. Such items could mislead students to
attend to irrelevant information or interfere with the targeted construct, and,
therefore lead to inaccurate inferences about student learning. This project
will develop a framework for developing items to help address this problem.
Approximately, 70 classroom teachers and 4800 students, in secondary grades,
will participate in the study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will offer a
theoretical articulation of the characteristics of contextualized items and
empirically test the effects on student performance. It seeks to address four
gaps in the literature on contextualized items: (1) insufficient knowledge about
how to conceptualize construct-relevant contextualized items; (2) lack of
research on contextualized items in science; (3) lack of research that
systematically studies the characteristics of contexts and evaluates their
effects on student performance; and (4) the need for studies that examine
differential effects related to subgroups of students to gain a greater clarity
of what types of contexts affect whom. The research design and data analyses
will be guided by three research questions: (1) what are critical context
characteristics that may affect student performance and should therefore be
considered when developing science test items? (2) what are context
characteristics associated with construct-relevant variance? (3) what context
characteristics are associated with differential student performance patterns
due to gender, ELL status, and socioeconomic-status
variables?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take place over three years
through a two phase process. During Phase 1 the project will refine a proposed
theoretical framework that will identify the item context characteristics and
articulate the item development guidelines. During Phase 2, the goal is to apply
the framework by selecting, revising, and developing science items with varying
profiles of contexts; conduct field tests of the items; and perform a range of
psychometric and statistical procedures with test scores, and qualitative
analyses of students' cognitive interview responses and teacher interviews.
Items resulting from this process will aim to evoke students' stored knowledge
relevant to the content and/or process skills targeted. The project will involve
a team of researchers specialized in assessment development and validation,
science education, content knowledge, linguists, and expert classroom teachers.
The item development approach and items generated from this project will have
immediate implications for researchers and practitioners in science education
nationally and internationally.