* 1432204
* Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Students' Epistemology and Expectations of Experimental Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 265,898.00

Within many disciplines, concerns are frequently raised about how effective
laboratory courses are at connecting experimental processes with theoretical
concepts, and more generally bridging the gap between the practices of the
classroom laboratory and the practices of the professional scientific research
and engineering laboratories. Calls to transform laboratory courses are coming
from a wide variety of stakeholders, including: the physics education community;
the life sciences community; and national science policy-making bodies promoting
the retention of STEM majors, the development of the STEM workforce, and updated
guidelines for the laboratory curriculum. Recommendations advocate that students
should develop habits of mind, experimental strategies, enthusiasm, and
confidence in research through improved laboratory courses. Towards these goals
this research project will advance understanding of how to support students in
developing experimental skills and understanding of the experimental process,
through probing students' attitudes and instructors' expectations. Evaluation
tools will also be developed to enable instructors to iteratively improve their
courses and to give researchers insights into the effects of different course
modifications on student learning.

To advance understanding of how to support students in developing experimental
skills and understanding of the experimental process, the research team will
probe students' attitudes and instructors' expectations. The student and
instructor data will be gathered utilizing the Colorado Learning Attitudes about
Science Survey for Experimental Physics (E-CLASS) survey. An online platform
that allows instructors to administer the survey and analyze their data
automatically and seamlessly thus adding an automated survey administration and
reporting system will be developed. This will allow feedback from users in order
that current statements in the survey are evaluated for their usefulness.
Responses from users will allow tailoring of the survey to meet the majority of
instructors' goals and the report sent to back to instructors will be refined.
Information on how instructors are using the data will be ascertained, e.g., how
they are using it to reform courses and the details of the interventions
attempted. Finally building off the ideas of institutional and instructional
change a "A Guide to the E CLASS: Use, Interpretation and Course Modifications"
will be developed. Through these means the use of the survey will be increased,
a system will be developed to make the administration of the survey more
sustainable in the long term, results will be used to help instructors tailor
their courses to achieve individual goals, the validity and reliability of the
survey will be increased, and progress towards answering several research
questions about training students in experimental physics will be made. The
project will be evaluated both internally and externally in both a formative and
summative manner to ensure project success in making direct progress towards the
goals. The project will include an advisory board of key professionals who will
provide formative feedback and advising on key decisions. In addition, knowledge
gained and the platform developed will be shared with the education research
community, as it may be a new model for dissemination of these types of
assessment tools. Dissemination will occur via submission of publications to
journals that are instructor focused (e.g., AJP, Physics Teacher and Physical
Review Special Topics-PER.) Results will also be disseminated through faculty
workshops run by AAPT the American Astronomical Society and APS and the Annual
Physics Department Chairs conference.