* 1432960
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Autonomous Perception and Manipulation in Search and Rescue
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This project wants to capitalize on a team of robots that move in order to
better sense the environment and then perform basic manipulation tasks. The
vision of the project is to integrate robots easily, provide human-team
interfaces, and develop manipulation algorithms. The research will involve the
development of perception strategies and manipulation schemes that will allow
operation of the robot teams in real-world environments during search and rescue
missions. In addition, this research will involve working in cluttered scenes
where the lighting conditions may not be ideal. The project addresses: (i)
Research on the novel problem of robotic perception and manipulation of target
objects that interact with other objects as an integral part of the environment,
which cannot be fully isolated in views and in physical arrangements before
being manipulated; (ii) An appearance-based approach for recognition and pose
estimation of 3D objects in cluttered scenes from a single view; (iii)
Development of a measure of scene recognizability from each viewpoint to
evaluate how accurately partially-occluded objects are recognized and how well
their poses are estimated; (iv) Creation of solutions for disassembly analysis
of 3D structures, extending our preliminary analysis of 2D structures; (v)
Development of grasping based on the results of perception and with the aid of
stability analysis of the arrangement of the objects and their interaction with
the environment and with one another; and (vi) Experimental validation of the
system in real-world settings, in close consultation with our industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will allow the creation of
manipulation capabilities along with perception schemes to facilitate the
development of a multi-robot team for search and rescue missions. The impacts of
the project include: (i) Expansion of the annual robot summer camp to include
robot-team activities with the objective of attracting middle-schoolers from
under-represented groups to computer science/electrical engineering; (ii)
Integration of the activities with first responders through the UPenn and UNC
Charlotte collaborations; (ii) Experimental validation in SAFL at UMN and the
Disaster City in TX; (iii) Offering project themes to REU undergraduates or to
the UROP program; (iv) Outreach programs that involve demonstrations to local
K-12 institutions; and (v) Inclusion of the project theme to the regular
curricula.