* 1432810
* The Oregon State University STEM Leaders Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Milo Koretsky, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,500,021.00

The Oregon State University (OSU) STEM Leaders Program is a five-year project
that will increase the retention and graduation rates of underrepresented
minorities, women, and economically disadvantaged individuals in STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) majors at OSU. By increasing completion
rates of these students, the OSU program will contribute additional graduates to
address the growing national need for workers trained in STEM disciplines.
Targeted at students in the Colleges of Science, Engineering, and Agricultural
Sciences, the OSU program will use methods previously demonstrated to lead to
STEM success, such as small, cohort-based orientation courses, mentoring by
student peers and workshops given by upper-class STEM students. Faculty-directed
undergraduate research in the freshman/early sophomore years and immediate post-
transfer year for community college students, (the project will recruit students
from Linn Benton and Chemeketa Community College, in particular) and will
provide students with enriching experiences aimed at increasing learning while
providing economic support essential for helping disadvantaged students to
remain in school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The achievements of this program, which
will benefit approximately 276 student participants over its five year span,
will be evaluated and communicated to other universities for them to benefit
from replication of its successes. The project's evaluation will utilize four
strategies to measure the outcomes of this project. Institutional data will be
studied to track progress by target population (degrees and enrollments by grade
level) in the Colleges of Agricultural Science, Engineering and Science. There
will be coordination of annual survey data collection. The project will conduct
a quantitative comparison group analysis of participating and non-participating
student cohorts to isolate the impact of the intervention. Finally, the project
will study student focus groups results to provide insight into how various
program elements contribute to enhanced student outcomes to assess efficacy of
activities. By building a growing institutional culture of support, the program
will develop a structure and design for sustaining increased
retention/graduation in STEM fields, many years after the NSF funding has ended.