* 1432286
* Collaborative Research: Development and Assessment of Interactive Video Vignette Modules for Biology Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robert Teese, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 372,580.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project is a collaborative
endeavor involving Rochester Institute of Technology and Alfred University. It
addresses the need for biological sciences courses to encourage students to
think critically, focus on unifying concepts, and practice experimental design,
analysis of data, and scientific models. Evidence reveals that the shift to
these emphases requires the use of interactive instructional practices that have
been shown to increase student learning gains. The modules being created by this
project include many instructional practices that have been found to be
effective in improving deep understanding of core concepts in biology defined by
the Vision and Change initiative (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/) and
the Next Generation Science Standards (http://www.nextgenscience.org/). The
cornerstone of each module will be a new genre of web-based learning tools
called Interactive Video Vignettes (IVVs). IVVs incorporate lessons learned from
education and cognitive research on how people learn. They promote active
learning by engaging learners with real-world problems, providing needed
support, feedback, and guidance for the students, and requiring them to reflect
on their own learning processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator team is
creating 14 modules that help biology students overcome common conceptual and
learning difficulties and enrich student understanding of how scientific
knowledge is constructed through observation and experimentation. The design and
implementation of the modules are informed by the results of a pilot project
carried out by the PI team. In that project, dramatic student learning gains
were observed when IVVs were used in an introductory biology and an upper level
cell biology course. The PI team is extending their research on the learning
outcomes to include the use of all of the newly developed IVVs. The research
methods include pre- and post-instruction assessment to examine student learning
gains, comparative learning gains of students using the IVVs and students in
traditional lecture classes, and direct queries (surveys and interviews)
concerning students' attitudes to the biological sciences. Modules tested at RIT
and Alfred University will subsequently be studied at a broad range of
institutions recruited by the PI team. The knowledge resulting from these
research studies is informing the design of STEM courses and the ways in which
these effective instructional practices can be effectively integrated into
traditional biology curricula nationwide.