* 1432424
* Embodied Explanatory Expressions for Facilitating Science Reasoning and Enhancing Interactive Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Nathan Kimball, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,447,193.00

The project will research how student body movements support their reasoning and
understanding about scientific concepts that involve hidden structures or
unobservable mechanisms. Student and scientist descriptions and explanations
often involve embodied expressions, such as body movements used to represent or
symbolically manipulate components of scientific systems (e.g., turning the
hands to an object's rotation, tilting the upper torso to demonstrate some type
of imbalance, etc.). Exploring the embodied foundations of science reasoning is
also timely because of recent advances in human-computer interfaces that allow
people to interact with computers using expressive, natural movements as opposed
to keystrokes and mouse-clicks. The project will initially research what types
of body motion that support causal explanations for observable phenomena, which
are called Embodied Explanatory Expressions (EEEs). Building on the research,
the project will then explore whether identified EEEs can be integrated into the
control structures of online simulations utilizing newly available motion
sensing input devices (e.g., Microsoft Kinect, Leap Motion). The research
findings will enrich our basic understanding of science learning and have
practical implications in curriculum design and in the development of new
learning technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research student
gestures and body motion during explanation of such scientific concepts by
recording and analyzed these gestures and motion not only to identify the
embodiment of such knowledge, but also to design interventions and simulations
based on such motions that could facilitate learning. Using interviews,
available motion sensing input devices, and other methods, the project will
validate the approach, investigate how students reason using body movements, and
how their expressions change with interventions. This project will identify core
EEEs for supporting scientific reasoning in three critical areas of science
involving unobservable mechanisms: Molecular Interactions, Heat Transfer, and
Earth Systems. The project will focus specifically on the types of embodied
interactions that support students' construction of explanations, and explore
whether these body movements can be integrated into the design of a new
generation of online learning simulations that elevates the level of science
reasoning exhibited by students who use them.