* 1432997
* Contextual Research-Empirical--A Direct Method for Teaching and Measuring Engineering Professional Skills
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ashley Ater-Kranov, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2016
* USD 170,678.00

The investigators propose to create a method to teach and measure the
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) professional skills in
the form of an undergraduate group learning intervention called the curricular
debrief (CD) method. No direct method for teaching and measuring the
simultaneous presence of these skills, which are now generally recognized as the
standard in the undergraduate engineering education field, has existed in the
literature prior to the CD method

This project will expand, empirically study, and refine the CD method and
Engineering Professional Skills Rubric (EPS), which is the accompanying
measurement instrument. The primary research goal is to determine the
instructional and educational impacts of the integration of the CD method into
freshman to senior level courses across the undergraduate curricula..

Ongoing research conducted at WSU to establish the initial reliability and
validity of the CD method has shown its potential for significant nationwide
impact. Yet, more research is needed to provide strong evidence that the CD
method as a performance task and the EPS Rubric as a measurement instrument are
reliable and valid. This study's primary research goal is to rigorously
establish the reliability and validity of the CD method and the EPS Rubric.

A descriptive collective case study methodology and a randomized design will be
used. This methodology will allow the investigators to establish efficacy and
validity while understanding the contexts in which parallel performance tasks
are implemented in three distinct sites and four distinct course-type settings.
The settings are WSU, the University of Idaho, and Norwich University in
Vermont.

This project will directly contribute to fundamental research in engineering
education on a problem of national importance and interest---how the nation can
prepare future engineers with the skills they need for work in a global context.