* 1432766
* Scaling Undergraduate STEM Education Reforms at AAU Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Adrianna Kezar, Association of American Universities
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 02/28/2019
* USD 715,531.00

The project will address a gap in theory and research on institutional change in
higher education. The proposed qualitative mixed methods research study will
examine the role of professional societies in efforts to implement wide-scale
use of evidenced-based teaching practices in undergraduate STEM education. The
research project proposes to move beyond a change model focused on individual
and teams of faculty to a change model focused on institutional and systems
processes and mechanisms. The proposed study will examine the assumption that to
broadly reshape STEM teaching, a reshaping of the norms of the most elite
institutions must be undertaken in order to position these types of institutions
as role models in efforts to scale-up evidence-based teaching practices in post-
secondary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field-based study will bring
together a cultural and systems perspective on institutional change with an
effort by the Association of American Universities (AAU) to test the relevance
of three strategies that are identified in the literature as facilitating
institutional change in higher education: creating discussions/deliberations;
networks; and external support for reform. The proposed study will use the AAU
STEM Initiative as a real-time innovation to examine the role a national
organization can play in achieving scale-up of evidence-based teaching practices
among its members. A qualitative mixed methods research design is aligned with a
theoretical perspective that draws on social cognition and cultural and human
development schools of thought that emphasize the importance of observations and
interviews for understanding change processes. The theoretical approach posits
that the phenomena under study are manifestations of social change processes,
which are best studied through the use of participant-observation and semi-
structured interviews with the goal of developing an understanding of the roles
these phenomena play in scaling change. Considering that behaviors are driven by
internal beliefs, perceptions and motives, interviews are important to uncover
motivations for and perceptions of observed behaviors.