* 1432284
* Assessing the Learning Gains of Manufacturing Students in an Integrated Hands-on Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Mukasa Ssemakula, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 09/30/2016
* USD 229,922.00

The lack of hands-on experience is one of the major competency gaps in
engineering education. This project lead by Wayne State University is addressing
this problem through continued work on the Manufacturing Integrated Learning Lab
(MILL). The MILL model for engineering education uses team based projects,
coordinated across multiple courses, culminating in the design and making of a
functional product. The unifying theme is the design and fabrication of a
functional product that students encounter repeatedly from different
perspectives in several different courses. The MILL curricula has shown
excellent learning gains at the sites where it has been implemented. In this
project the hands-on MILL model will be expanded to additional institutions
including Macomb Community College, Henry Ford Community Colleges and Prarie
View A&amp;M, one of the Historically Black College and Universities (HBCUs).
The assessment methods developed to measure student learning gains in the MILL
program will be tested in this expanded implementation. Results regarding the
learning gains for students in MILL-type curricula, along with a unique
standardized assessment incorporating a realistic physical manipulative, will
prepare the MILL Model for a national scale-up. This project will demonstrate a
flexible, effective, low cost and readily transferrable manufacturing
engineering curriculum model that prepares a diverse and skilled workforce that
meets industry needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
psychometrically validated standardized testing to evaluate and validate
attainment of target hands-on competencies. This is an innovative use of
standardized testing for programmatic evaluation. This approach can document
attainment of specific targeted learning outcomes. By comparing performance on
the test instrument between intervention groups and comparison non-intervention
groups, the project will document the learning gains attributable to the MILL
Model intervention. The project will deploy this instrument at the four MILL
implementation sites as well as three additional comparison sites. A repeated
measures MANCOVA will be conducted to assess the magnitude of the effectiveness
of the MILL Model in increasing student learning outcomes in engineering
competencies. Analysis of the comparative performance of the two groups will be
undertaken to ascertain the learning gains attributable to implementation of the
hands-on MILL Model curriculum. The pool of available psychometrically validated
assessment items will also be expanded during the course of the project. This
effort to assess the learning gains of a large and diverse set of manufacturing
engineering students in an integrated hands-on curriculum will yield information
critical to meeting industrial needs for appropriate skilled manufacturing
engineers. The use of a validated standardized test incorporating a physical
manipulative to evaluate attainment of hands-on engineering abilities will also
help to inform the development of assessment tools for hands-on activities
throughout the STEM disciplines.