* 1432258
* Collaborative Research: Learning & Teaching Engineering Dynamics Through Interactive Simulations
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Vincent Prantil, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 59,825.00

This collaborative project between Northern Illinois University, The Milwaukee
School of Engineering, and Rutgers University intends to improve student
learning in sophomore-level engineering dynamics. Engineering dynamics is a
required topic for a large fraction of all engineering majors including
mechanical, aerospace, biomechanical, and civil engineering. The material is
challenging and many students struggle to master the important concepts
encountered in this course. The project will utilize a virtual reality simulated
environment to present interactive challenges that require application of
engineering dynamics principles to solve. This interactive environment, called
Spumone, was developed under previous NSF-sponsored projects. In pilot studies,
use of Spumone by students has been shown to improve learning of engineering
dynamics concepts. The current project will expand the use of this simulated
environment to evaluate the effectiveness in a wider range of students. The
primary purpose of the project is to take an educational simulation that was
designed and tested in the classrooms of a single educator, and broaden its
reach to the classrooms of other educators. In doing so, the investigators will
discover which features of the simulation-based learning environment favor
broader adoption, and which impose barriers. Lessons learned will enable even
wider adoption of a promising intervention, designed for a critical sophomore-
level engineering course that tens of thousands of students take each year. It
is expected that lessons learned will be transferable to other efforts to build
video-based STEM learning environments.

Using virtual reality and complex simulated environments has been shown to
engage teens and young adults in problem-solving tasks that are often long,
difficult, and require high level critical thinking skills. The degree of
engagement produced by video simulations extends across all races and
socioeconomic backgrounds. Some of these simulations are found to appeal to both
males and females. The investigators working on this project have been
developing simulated environments for use in teaching core mechanical
engineering courses. In their studies, they found that students who learned in
the simulated video environment, achieved higher scores on standard concept
tests, compared to students who took the courses that did not employ
simulations. Furthermore, students who learned with the simulation were more
engaged, more motivated, and much more likely to pursue advanced studies in the
same subject. A pivotal step in bringing simulation-based engineering education
to a wider audience is that of making the simulation easy to adopt by other
educators. In this project a group of potential adopters will work together to
modify their courses to incorporate the simulation. At the same time the
potential adopters will inform the simulation designers how to modify the
application to best fit into their courses. In the process the project
investigators will perform an educational test in which they determine if the
gains in learning and student engagement achieved by the developer can be
replicated by the new adopters. Evaluation of the project will provide
information about the effectiveness of video-based STEM learning environments
and the extent to which this simulation is easy to adopt by other educators. An
implementation evaluation component will assess whether the project is being
conducted as originally envisioned. A progress evaluation component will assess
progress toward answering the design and research questions, as well as progress
toward the goal of successfully implementing Spumone in the alternate settings.
Summative evaluation will assess the overall success of the project in
rigorously answering the design and research questions as well as assessment of
the goal of implementing video-based STEM learning environments on a larger
scale.