* 1433589
* ACM BCB 2014: Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Pierre Baldi, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2015
* USD 24,800.00

The Annual ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology is the premier ACM conference in the areas of bioinformatics,
computational biology, and biomedical informatics, and the main flagship
conference of the ACM SIGBio. The ACM BCB conference is in its fifth year. The
2014 ACM BCB conference, to be held in Los Angeles, CA September 20-23, 2014, is
aimed at providing a better platform to bridge important interdisciplinary
research areas in computer science, mathematics, statistics, biology,
bioinformatics and biomedicine, and broaden the participation from
underrepresented groups. While the development of the synergy of the research on
bioinformatics and computational biology has proven to be very difficult, it is
particularly challenging for female and minority students. ACM BCB is dedicated
to exploring and developing such synergies. ACM BCB 2014 is expected to be a
large annual gathering of researchers and students in computer science, computer
engineering, applied computing, biology, medicine, biophysical sciences and life
sciences. It will assemble a spectrum of affiliated research workshops, keynote
and tutorial lectures, and special interest research sessions into a coordinated
research meeting. To promote broad participation in this event, we plan to
continue in our ?women in bioinformatics? initiative, which was created to
recruit and engage young female students and researchers in this
interdisciplinary area. In continuing this initiative, we plan to invite a
distinguished female scientist as a keynote speaker whose experience and success
may inspire many students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biggest beneficiaries of the
conference will be the graduate students. Through their participation at the ACM
BCB conference, graduate students will have great opportunities to meet
distinguished researchers in the related fields, exchange ideas with other peers
and foster more robust interdisciplinary research. Each supported student will
participate in the PhD forum which will afford them an opportunity to interact
with peers and mentors about their research. The travel supports requested will
allow us to provide underrepresented minorities and female students with
opportunities to meet the invited distinguished speakers, to present their own
research ideas, to discuss any new research problems, and to foster new
collaborations within a joint community of computational and biological
researchers.