* 1433504
* AGS-PRF:  Next Generation of Gamma-ray Detectors Designed to Study Terrestrial Gamma-Ray Flashes, Gamma-ray Glows and X-ray Stepped Leaders
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,11/30/2015
* Nicole Kelley, Kelley                  Nicole
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2015
* USD 71,667.00

High-energy atmospheric physics is a relatively new field of study regarding
high-energy radiation that is emitted by lightning in thunderstorms. There are
three types of high-energy emission that have been observed in connection with
thunderstorms so far: gamma-ray glows, terrestrial gamma-ray flashes (TGFs) and
x-ray stepped leaders. The research under this Postdoctoral Fellowship Award
will seek to better measure, understand, and perhaps make a connection between
these processes. This work will have societal benefit through improved
understanding of radiation from thunderstorms, which has become a concern for
airline crew and passengers. The project will also promote undergraduate
education through a mentoring relationship and international collaboration
through interaction with Japanese scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gamma-ray
glows, TGFs and x-ray stepped leaders are phenomena that may be related and can
help explain the overall charging and discharging of a thunderstorm. This
project targets the study of these three processes and outlines the development
of cheap, fast and high-throughput gamma-ray detectors and their deployment to
study uniquely low-topped thunderstorms in Japan. Four detectors will be built
over two years at the Space Science Laboratory at the University of California,
Berkeley. In addition to the new measurement capability, the researcher will
also be analyzing TGF data from already existing satellite and airborne
instruments.