* 1433645
* Collaborative Research:  Teaching Metacognition: Helping engineering students take ownership of their own learning
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Patrick Cunningham, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2019
* USD 104,245.00

This is a three-phase design-based research project for strengthening
undergraduate engineering students' metacognitive skills. It begins with
prototype development and testing of 6 to 8 intervention modules, then
transitions to refinement and improved development of these based on a variety
of assessments, and ends with the preparation of materials for instructor
professional development. Metacognition is often referred to as "thinking about
thinking" because it relies on individual reflection and self-awareness.
Learning science has found metacognition skill to be important precursor to
becoming an effective independent learner and problem-solver. It is the
foundation of becoming a lifelong learner. In order to deliberately cultivate
metacognitive skills, this project has provided a structured definition that
will facilitate this study of the impact of integrating metacognition into
specific formal learning activities in engineering.

The first phase focuses on the development and pilot implementation of a
coordinated set of intervention modules intended to strengthen the metacognitive
skills of students in a sophomore engineering course at a small undergraduate
engineering school. Included in the first phase is the assessment of impact on
each student's metacognitive development. Each intervention module consists of a
training video on metacognitive knowledge and awareness, a contextualized
classroom content module, and a modified standard assignment to provide students
with opportunities to practice metacognitive regulation. The assessment effort
is focused on developing indicators (rubrics and metrics) that engineering
instructors can use to measure student progress in developing metacognitive
skill.

In the second phase, the research outcomes from Phase 1 are used to revise the
set of interventions for the testbed sophomore course and, additionally, prepare
similar interventions for a second engineering education classroom context - a
freshman course at a large comprehensive state land-grant university. The goal
of the revisions is to improve the interventions and to focus on the
transferability of both the interventions and the indicators to other lower
division courses. The research aspect of Phase 2 refines the Phase 1 research
questions and adds a focus on understanding what elements of an intervention and
context are most important to consider when considering transferability to other
courses and instructors. Finally, Phase 3 will focus on training faculty
instructors, in order to boost the initial dissemination of intervention
materials. The project will develop recommendations for instructors on how to
further translate the set of interventions for use in their own classroom
contexts. The PI team plans to develop and conduct training for instructors at
both institutions. Open access to salient findings, tools, and guides will be
provided through an online repository that is also linked through CLEERHub.org,
a collaborative engineering education research site.