* 1433920
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Creating a Spatial History Methodology to Assess Past and Current Settlement and Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Charles Walker, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2017
* USD 15,983.00

This dissertation research project examines the largely unexplored spatiality of
conquest, the conflicts over the emerging spatial order during the decades that
followed, and how these conflicts have been or could be represented differently
from conquering versus indigenous groups. To do so, the researchers will develop
a spatial history methodology that incorporates GIS (Geographic Information
Systems) software for the visualization and analysis of historical data across
space as well as time. In this way, spatial history can serve as a form of
virtual history: a way to reconstruct or re-imagine a different world with all
the possibility it held for its diverse inhabitants. Though GIS has long been
known for spatial capabilities, the temporal dimension has been slower to follow
suite, particularly in cultural studies. Using Historical GIS to answer the
spatial questions (e.g., how far did colonial power reach?) can in turn lend
answers to deeper questions about just what conquest meant and in what ways it
failed or succeeded. As a result, more people will be able to actually "see"
local/indigenous knowledge as a possible means to assist in solving local and
regional problems, expanding the lessons learned in a variety of pasts in a way
that informs twenty-first century challenges. To answer these questions, the
researchers will employ a hybrid quantitative-qualitative GIS methodology that
will accommodate the typically less precise, qualitative information found in
colonial-era historical sources, including conflicting understandings of the
world. For example, using GIS to reconstruct the hidden spatial narratives of
historical sources, a series of maps will be created showing the degree of power
and autonomy indigenous people wielded away from imperial centers such as cities
and ports. Recent historical research, largely coming from a cultural
perspective, has challenged the myth that the European conquest of indigenous
societies in the Americas was quick, absolute, universal, and complete. However,
conquest was as much a spatial phenomenon as a cultural one. Unlike the maps
that still tend to be more commonly used in textbooks that typically show the
Americas neatly divided among Spanish, French, British, and Portuguese spaces, a
different representation of contested colonial territories would be pockmarked
with holes and shaded with gradients showing overlapping or partial control,
indicating regions outside full colonial purview. The Peruvian Andes'
environmental diversity along with the dramatic changes brought by the European
invasion (beginning in 1532) as well as the Columbian Exchange makes the
sixteenth-century Andes a rich and compelling case study for understanding an
equally transformative and volatile period: the twenty-first century with the
growing problems caused by global capitalism, rapid urbanization, and climate
shifts. The results from this spatial analysis will be shared with the academic
community through a series of talks and papers in Peru, North America, and Spain
and with the general public through the creation of an online geo-historical
database.