* 1433408
* AGS-PRF: Indo-Pacific Hydrology in a Warming World: Modeled and Observed Responses to Climate Forcings from the Little Ice Age to Present
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bronwen Konecky, Konecky                 Bronwen
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

The future of global rainfall patterns under 21st century climate change
scenarios is highly uncertain, due in part to major uncertainties in how
tropical Indo-Pacific climate modes (e.g., the El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation)
respond to greenhouse gas (GHG) forcing. Climate models project significant
changes in the global hydrological cycle in response to GHG forcing, yet the
short instrumental record of precipitation precludes a robust assessment of
potential anthropogenic trends. Paleoclimate proxy data and model simulations
can be useful in this endeavor by helping to illuminate the Indo-Pacific
response to GHGs and other climate forcings in the recent geologic past. During
the past 500 years, a combination of changes in solar irradiance, volcanism, and
atmospheric GHGs drove global climate out of the "Little Ice Age" (LIA;
1450-1750 C.E.) and into the modern era of warming. Hydroclimate proxy records,
many based on oxygen and hydrogen isotopes in precipitation, surface waters, and
seawater, document enormous Indo-Pacific hydrological changes from the LIA to
present. While the causes of these anomalies are poorly understood, new
developments in both "isotope-equipped" climate modeling and paleoclimate data
synthesis provide new, promising tools for understanding these changes by
directly comparing paleoclimate data with model output.

In this project, the postdoctoral research fellow will investigate the response
of the Indo-Pacific hydrological cycle to climate forcings during the past 500
years using an integrated paleoclimate modeling and data synthesis framework.
Existing "single-forcing" simulations of Last Millennium (850-2000 C.E.) climate
with the fully-coupled Community Earth System Model will be used to force new
simulations with an isotope-equipped atmospheric model, enabling a
characterization of volcanic, solar, and GHG-induced changes in the Indo-Pacific
hydrological cycle and associated water isotopic signatures since 1500 C.E.
Simultaneously, a synthesis of hydrologic and water isotopic proxy data from the
past 500 years will be performed to isolate robust hydrologic and isotopic
patterns in the Indo-Pacific since the LIA. Emerging "best-practice" techniques
for paleoclimate data synthesis and model comparison will be used to
characterize the response of the Indo-Pacific hydrological cycle to individual
and combined climate forcings. Results will advance our understanding of how
natural and anthropogenic climate change impact the tropical hydrological cycle
-- a key source of uncertainty in future projections