* 1433541
* EFRI 2-DARE: Scalable Synthesis of 2D Layered Materials for Large Area Flexible Thin Film Electronics
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,064,999.00

This project will research an approach for assembling electronics-grade,
continuous films of two-dimensional layered materials from nanoplates suspended
in liquids. Such a process promises to dramatically reduce the cost of producing
such films and the devices that are produced from them. The method has the
potential to produce materials with good control of chemical composition,
structure and dimensions for applications in electronics, optoelectronics,
bioelectronics, energy conversion and energy storage. The proposed research
program will be closely integrated with education and outreach activities.
Students from underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to broaden
their participation in engineering research and the research results will be
integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses to further broaden
educational opportunities. Together, these efforts will contribute significantly
to education and training of the next generation of individuals ready to meet
the challenges of the new century, including maintaining a competitive advantage
for US technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional layered materials
(2DLMs) are emerging as a unique class of materials setting the stage for new
breakthroughs in fundamental materials science and entirely new technologies. To
fully explore their potential requires scalable production of 2DLMs, ideally
with relatively simple, low cost approaches. A solution chemical pathway to the
scalable synthesis and assembly of 2DLM nanoplates is proposed as a new material
platform for electronic, catalytic and energy applications. In particular, a
molecular evolution approach will be used to identify and design specific
molecular regulating agents for the solution synthesis of 2DLM nanoplates with
deterministic control of all material parameters, including chemical
composition, physical dimension and electronic properties. In-situ transmission
electron microscopy and in-situ atomic force microscopy will be used to
visualize and understand the nucleation and growth kinetics for fine control of
2D crystal formation at the atomic level. Systematic investigations will be
conducted to probe the fundamental electronic properties of the 2DLM nanoplates
and explore new physics originating at the interfaces in 2DLM heterostructures.
Large-area assembly of 2DLM nanoplate thin films, lateral epitaxial growth to
reduce or eliminate the grain boundaries, and design of new device architectures
for the creation of a new generation of highly flexible electronic and
optoelectronic devices will be explored. Lastly, the resulting 2DLM nanoplates
will be investigated for potential applications as electrocatalysts or
photocatalysts, or in energy storage applications. A fundamental understanding
of the nucleation and growth mechanisms will enable the development of powerful
synthetic strategies for scalable production of 2DLMs with deterministic control
of all material parameters, creating a robust material system for fundamental
investigation of low-dimensional physics and chemistry at the limit of single
atomic thickness. The effort will establish the critical intellectual
underpinnings for a new material platform of 2DLMs to enable transformative
advances in diverse technologies including electronics, optoelectronics,
catalysis, and energy conversion and storage.