* 1433770
* Strategies: Making the Maker: A Pathway to STEM for Elementary School Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Sharon Lynn Chu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,110,711.00

Building on the highly energized national Maker's Movement involving government
offices, schools, and businesses now sweeping the country, this project will
explore ways to engage more children in the effort and become motivated and
interested in STEM. The project will target 200 children at grades 3-5 to
involve them in the "Maker's mindset" from an early age. The goal is for
children to develop strong self-identities in STEM areas through their
involvement in arts, crafts, and narrative storytelling.

For three years, Latino and African American children will participate in a
STEM-inspired intervention based on principles of the Making Movement from a
constructivist perspective in a project-based learning environment. Students
will learn basic concepts in electricity, circuitry, Ohm's Law, 3D printing,
electronic load balancing, LEDs, resistances, transistors, and diodes as well as
age-appropriate knowledge and skills in geometry that is intended to foster
self-identity with a Maker mindset. Research shows that engaging children early
on in these types of activities builds strong affiliations with the larger STEM
community, creates a sense of belonging in that community, and helps prepare
children to easily assimilate within the rapidly changing technological world.
To ensure that the Making activities are not an end unto themselves, teachers
will participate in ongoing professional development activities to learn how to
integrate Making activities into the existing science curriculum for the longer
term. This iteratively designed study stems from prior NSF support and is
structured around four threads aimed at: (a) conceptualizing the Maker's
movement in terms of early childhood development; (b) instilling a Maker's
mindset in children; (c) influencing children's identity about STEM; and (d)
benefiting society through contributions to the future STEM workforce. Research
questions structured around these threads will guide the project team's work
with 100 children in five cohorts over three years who will participate in the
Maker's intervention to observe the effects on children's self-identity with
STEM. The project team will use a mixed-methods design to allow comparisons
across three grades each year. A control group of 100 children at the same
grades will be used for comparison purposes. The expected outcome is that over
time, children will begin to see themselves as active partakers of and
contributors to STEM fields and what STEM careers might offer.