* 1433535
* A Study to Enravel the Abyssal Circulation of the Northeast Pacific Ocean and its Double Silica Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Susan Hautala, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,724.00

The upward movement of the world's "oldest" water found in the Northeast Pacific
Basin is one of the least understood aspects of the global ocean circulation and
depends on complex local effects. Globally, it has become increasingly clear
over the last few decades that the return flow of bottom water to the surface
ocean in the "conveyor belt" is far from the quasi-uniform upward motion and
circulation that was originally envisioned. A high resolution analysis of the
deep and abyssal circulation for the entire Northeast Pacific basin will be
conducted using all available historical data and model statistical and
numerical methods. The project will also answer a long-standing question about
the origin of the North Pacific double silica maximum. The investigator for this
project has a leading role in undergraduate education in Oceanography at the
University of Washington and will use the results from this study to illustrate
to students the complexities of the real-world processes underpinning the simple
schematics that are commonly found in discussions of the role of the deep ocean
circulation in long-term climate variation. The investigator will publish and
archive the three-dimensional fields of ocean properties on the University of
Washington Oceanography website. These fields may be helpful to other
researchers for uses ranging from experiment design to better understanding of
tracer distributions in the deep North Pacific. Finally, the work will provide
support and training for an undergraduate and a graduate student.

The first objective of the project is to test a hypothesis about how circulation
fields relate to the North Pacific double silica maximum. The North Pacific
hosts a striking mid-depth maximum of dissolved silica (Si), a regenerated
nutrient important for ocean biogeochemistry. Previous work noted a second much
denser maximum of Si over the western flank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge, with an
intervening Si minimum that precludes a simple upwelling connection between
bottom water and mid-depth in this region. The hypothesis then was that the mid-
depth Si plume is fed from the bottom of Cascadia Basin, located east of the
ridge. Recent work revealed that Cascadia Basin sources are not sufficient to
maintain this feature. The working hypothesis for this project is that the
additional source lies west of the ridge, requiring a connection - one that is
surprisingly complex - via a convoluted upward-spiraling route south along the
western flank to a deep gap just north of the Mendocino Fracture Zone, and then
north into Cascadia Basin along the eastern flank of the ridge system. Along
this flow path, bottom heating and diapycnal mixing decrease the density of the
fluid until it spills over the bounding ridges to feed the mid-depth plume. The
downstream part of the flow path through Cascadia Basin has been documented in
recent work by the investigator who proposes a detailed analysis of the upstream
western flank flow, applying a similar geostrophic inverse methodology. The
second objective is to extend the inverse calculation to the entire region east
of the dateline and north of 25 N at unprecedented resolution. An analysis using
data available before 1990 revealed surprising complexity to the deep
circulation in the Pacific, in the form of distinct regions of meridional
transport in the west and east, connected by multiple zonally-elongated deep
gyres, but more recent studies disagree. A detailed analysis of the northeast
Pacific overturning at higher resolution, and using a fundamentally different
inverse technique based on the potential vorticity budget, will be used to yield
new insight on this issue, as well as other unanswered questions.