* 1433401
* NSF/DOE Solar Hydrogen Fuel:  New metal oxides for efficient hydrogen production via solar water splitting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Yanfa Yan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2020
* USD 748,307.00

The majority of the 15 terawatts (1012 W) of new power needed across the globe
by 2050 must come from CO2 -free sources. Hydrogen production via solar water
splitting is considered one of the top choices to meet this need, because
hydrogen produced via solar water splitting provides not only renewable and
clean, but also storable energy. An award is being made to Profs. Yanfa Yan,
Xunming Deng, and Wanjian Yin at the University of Toledo to develop the
concepts and processes necessary to realize new metal oxides with the potential
for producing low-cost, non-toxic, earth-abundant, and high efficiency
photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting systems by closely integrating
theoretical design, dedicated synthesis, device fabrication, and advanced
characterization. These new design principles will fundamentally change the
approach to discovery of new materials for PEC water splitting devices. It will
avoid the usual ?trial-and-error? process and significantly speed up the process
of developing new materials. This project offers training of postdocs, graduate
students, and undergraduate students to provide young scientists for future
renewable energy research. The PIs will use the "Girls in Science" workshop at
The University of Toledo, provide "Summer Research Opportunities" to local high
school students, engage in the Research in Science and Engineering program
partnering with Woodward High School in Toledo, and will provide a technology
pipeline for Ohio?s Wright Center for PVIC, while PVIC provides industrial
connections for the PIs and their students. The overarching goal of this project
is to design, synthesize, and validate new metal oxides that will not only have
narrow band gaps and high optical absorptions, but also will meet other criteria
for efficient photoelectrodes such as long carrier diffusion lengths, low non-
radiative recombination, appropriate electrical conductivity, and high quantum
yield. The PIs plan to propose and validate design principles at the electronic,
atomic, and molecular levels that will facilitate the design of new metal oxides
that meet all the criteria for highly efficient photoelectrodes. Milestones will
yield the following impacts: (1) A fundamental set of principles will be
developed and validated for designing novel metal oxides with properties
optimized for solar hydrogen production; (2) Novel bulk and thin-film methods
will be developed for synthesizing the targeted metal oxides in single-phase
form and with appropriate grain/film structure to enable validation of the
technologies in functioning PEC water splitting devices; (3) New metal oxides
capable for efficient and stable PEC water splitting and which are low-cost and
non-toxic will be developed; (4) Overall PEC water splitting systems will be
fabricated to evaluate the ultimate performance of the new metal oxides and will
be disseminated to the scientific community; (5) The fundamental properties of
the new oxides, junctions, interfaces, and devices will be characterized and
understood to provide critical feedback for goals 1-3 and to further validate
the design criteria.