* 1433066
* Adjustable Risk Management under Ambiguous Decision Preferences and Data Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Siqian Shen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2018
* USD 253,411.00

Due to the existence of information uncertainty in real-world problems, decision
makers often need to balance risk and return outcomes even without knowing their
exact decision criteria and preferences. This award supports fundamental
research to develop new paradigms for decision making under uncertainty to
currently existing approaches. The research will have applicability in a wide
range of industry and science sectors. In particular, the intended applications
to electric power grids and to transportation systems will promote synergy among
different disciplines, and will advance the state-of-the-art techniques for
analyzing a variety of the nation's critical infrastructures. The results will
be disseminated through education, to improve students' learning in science and
engineering, and promote the participation of underrepresented groups in
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop new
models and approaches, using chance-constrained programming and data-driven
optimization approaches, for managing risk under ambiguous decision preferences
and data uncertainty. The proposed research focuses on stochastic programs with
probabilistic (chance) constraints formulated for guaranteeing the quality of
service. Moreover, we consider adjustable risk parameters in related chance
constraints and their effects on the overall objective value. Given known or
ambiguous distributional information of the uncertainty, we study the
corresponding data-informed or data-driven modeling paradigms for risk
management. The scalability and efficacy of our computation approaches are built
through convex representations and binarization techniques from data mining. The
proposal also includes investigations of two related applications in optimal
power flow operations and sensor deployment for monitoring transportation
systems. We aim to demonstrate that (i) differentiating risk in multiple chance
constraints effectively balances cost and reliability under uncertainty, and
(ii) the selection of risk levels can be guided and improved by data-driven
optimization approaches in problems with imperfect information.