* 1433597
* Project ReCharge
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Susan Szewczak Clark, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,178,340.00

Project ReCharge will engage middle school and high school students as energy
detectives in their schools. Using tablet computers to collect data on school
energy use, students will learn to track electrical loads in their buildings. A
problem-based and inquiry-focused curriculum will engage students in learning
about the energy consumption of various appliances as well as school lighting,
heating, cooling, and hot water systems. Using this background, students will
work with school district staff members and local green technology experts to
develop possible solutions for reducing energy use. After their recommendations
have been implemented, students will monitor gains in efficiency and cost
savings after efficiency retrofits. The project will also provide students with
experiences directly related to emerging career opportunities through service-
learning programs, internships, and work experience opportunities. Project
ReCharge is designed to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
educational pathways to careers in fields of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. The project will be led by a team consisting of the University
of Nevada-Reno's Raggio STEM Research Center, the education non-profit
Envirolution, and Washoe County School District. Project ReCharge will implement
and evaluate a research-based energy efficiency curriculum in 8th grade
mathematics and science classes, as well as in high school environmental science
and career and technical (CTE) courses. All the curriculum modules will align
with the current Nevada state standards including Common Core, Nevada CTE
standards, and the Next Generation Science Standards currently being piloted in
the state. The curriculum will have three tiers: principles of energy (building
science and energy efficiency); real-time energy assessment and recommendations;
and measurement and verification. Professional development workshops will
support teachers in the integration of the new content and technology into their
curriculum and classroom practices. The project will serve approximately 30
teachers and 3,000 middle and high schools students, with many students from
economically disadvantaged, racially diverse, and rural communities. The project
will employ a mixed methods evaluation strategy, using the utilization-focused
evaluation approach of Michael Quinn Patton. The project curriculum and
resources will be disseminated to additional school districts via multiple
pathways that include local and regional workshops; educational, efficiency, and
green schools conferences such as the American Council for an Energy Efficient
Economy and Green Schools National Conference; and professional publications.