* 1433104
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Symposium at the 2014 Recommender System Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Yi Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,240.00

Eight graduate students will be supported to participate actively in the
Graduate Symposium at the 2014 Recommender Systems conference of the Association
for Computing Machinery in Silicon Valley, RecSys-2014. This doctoral symposium
is structured to provide a non-threatening environment for students, in
particular for those who may be attending a major international meeting for the
first time. To do so, the organizers will depart from the usual conference
structure and give students exposure to their research community by presenting
their own work and receiving feedback from peers and experienced researcher, by
two invited talks about career and life in academia versus industry, and by
observing and interacting with other professionals in the field during the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students selected for funding will receive
registration, shared hotel accommodation, and need-based airfare support to
attend the conference. A carefully-developed evaluation system has been set up
to allocate the funds most effectively. Among the priorities are supporting
students from different institutions, students who have prepared the most
substantial papers to present, students from under-represented groups, and
students with financial need. In this area, students require multidisciplinary
training. The conference plans a strong program of papers by scientists from
both academia and industry researchers around the world, internationally known
invited speakers, and a variety of demos and other academia and industry
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACM RecSys conference and the Doctoral
Symposium will advance the state of art in recommender systems by proving an
open and friendly environment for both junior and senior researchers to explore
creative, original, or potentially transformative concepts in the area.
Recommender systems exploit past user behaviors and user similarities to
generate information items that are personally tailored to an end-user's
preferences. They have quickly become among the most useful tools available for
accessing information available on the document web, social web sites, ecommerce
systems, mobile systems, entertainment systems and more. In the future, they are
likely to revolutionize other domains such as education and health care. As
RecSys brings together the main international research groups working on
recommender systems, along with many of the world?s leading companies, it has
become the most important annual conference for the presentation and discussion
of recommender system research, and thus a crucial step in a student's career.