* 1433958
* The Upstream Sources of the Denmark Strait Overflow
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Benjamin Harden, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 297,319.00

One of the key open issues regarding the climate system is how changes in
atmospheric and freshwater forcing in the Northern Hemisphere will influence the
large scale ocean circulation often referred to as the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation. In particular, the Nordic Seas are a vital region for
the circulation of the North Atlantic and for the moderation of our climate.
Warm, surface sub-tropical waters flow northward in the Atlantic Ocean and pass
into the Nordic Seas where their properties are modified by intense air-sea
fluxes and they release heat to the atmosphere before returning south at depth
as dense water that spills through the gaps in the ridge that runs between
Greenland and Scotland. This process regulates our climate by providing a
mechanism for the northward flow of heat in the Atlantic Ocean. The largest and
densest of the outflows from the Nordic Seas occurs through the Denmark Strait,
located between Iceland and Greenland. This Denmark Strait Overflow Water (DSOW)
accounts for roughly half of the total dense water feeding the deep ocean
current flowing southward along the east coast of the U.S. The source waters and
dynamics upstream of the Denmark Strait affect the downstream fate of the
overflow and the sensitivity of the deepest limb of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation to changes in climate forcing. This study will
significantly improve our understanding of the circulation north of Denmark
Strait by identifying and quantifying the different pathways, how they interact
with each other, and their underlying dynamics. Furthermore, the project will
shed light on the nature and causes of the pronounced variability of the DSOW at
the sill. This has been observed in many previous studies but is yet to be fully
explained using observational data. The international collaborators will
contribute additional observations they collected in the Nordic Seas to the
project. All of the mooring data used in the study (including those provided by
the European collaborators) will be archived in a publicly accessible data
portal. An outreach program will be carried out to share the results in the
national media and to create science lesson content appropriate for public
schools. The study will be led by a post-doctoral
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed project is to
quantify the upstream sources of the Denmark Strait Overflow Water (DSOW) and
relate the variability in the different sources to that observed at the sill. To
accomplish this, the investigators will use time series data provided by four
different institutions who together deployed 12 moorings spanning the strait 200
kilometer north of the sill from August 2011 to August 2012, plus a mooring at
the sill itself. While parts of the data have been analyzed previously by the
individual investigators, never before have all of the data been considered in
tandem. The first objective is to quantify a newly discovered pathway of dense
water in the central portion of the strait, known as the Separated East
Greenland Current. This pathway was recently revealed in a small number of
shipboard crossings and is thought to be a free-jet located between the boundary
current on the Greenland slope (the Shelfbreak East Greenland Current) and the
Iceland slope (the North Icelandic Jet). The mooring data will be used to
quantify the structure, transport, and dynamics of this newly recognized feature
over a year-long period. Following this, the second objective is to produce the
first strait-wide picture of the time-varying pathways carrying dense water into
the Denmark Strait, and how the transport is partitioned between the three
overflow pathways. Once this is established, the third objective is to elucidate
the dynamics of the combined upstream circulation system and assess how this
impacts the transport and hydrographic variability at the sill. The aim is to
determine if the ubiquitous synoptic scale variability of the DSOW at the sill
is driven by upstream fluctuations in any of the pathways, and/or if hydraulic
processes at the sill influence the upstream circulation. The final objective of
the study is to devise a sparse mooring array that could be implemented in the
future to optimally monitor the upstream sources of DSOW over interannual to
decadal time scales.