* 1433176
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Access Regimes and Irrigation Technology: Where Does the Water "Soft Path" for Agriculture Lead?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Wendy Jepson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 9,395.00

Water conservation technologies and policies are increasingly adopted for
agriculture in semi-arid environments as demand increases while supplies
dwindle. The roll-out of these devices is tied to a broader trend in water
policy that advocates a "water soft path" (WSP), or the use of flexible
technologies and demand-management policies for environmental and social
sustainability. This project investigates the roll-out of this WSP, the adoption
of WSP, and socio-economic outcomes for rural communities. Although WSP has been
advocated and implemented widely, there is little existing research on the
processes and outcomes of WSP projects as it relates to user access to water
resources, particularly for agricultural production in rural areas. This project
contributes to research and education integration because the researchers will
share data and results with water managers. It promotes training and learning,
as data from the project will roll into learning modules for undergraduate
courses and geography courses at an international baccalaureate certified
secondary school. Furthermore, the project trains a doctoral student in data
collection, analysis, and scientific outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research investigates how the water soft path creates new pathways of accessing
and using water resources that contribute to larger processes of social and
political change in the countryside. The working hypothesis for this research is
that irrigation-efficiency devices and the institutional framework supporting
them provide new pathways for some farmers to access to water resources for
agricultural production. This project addresses the major research question
through an empirical case study of water-soft path in the central Mexican state
of Guanajuato, a major agricultural exporter to the United States. The research
design uses a reproducible mixed-method approach, including interviews,
participant observation, questionnaires, and surveys. This project will: (1)
Describe how WSP emerged in response to scientific and regional discourses of
water scarcity; (2) Examine the mechanisms required to gain access to and
benefit from irrigation efficiency devices in the countryside; and (3) Explain
how irrigation efficiency devices offer farmers opportunities to respond to
water scarcity and continue cultivating land under conditions of climate change.