* 1433517
* AGS-PRF:   Quantifying the Sources of Atmospheric Ice Nuclei from Biomass Burning and Fossil Fuel Combustion Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Gregory Schill, Schill                  Gregory
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/2016
* USD 172,000.00

This award will allow a postdoctoral researcher the opportunity to study the
sources and composition of atmospheric ice nuclei. Ice nuclei are small
particles that are especially efficient at forming ice crystals in clouds. Very
few particles in the atmosphere have this property, but their effect on clouds
and precipitation is large. The main aspect of this award will be the
measurement of ice nuclei that originates from combustion sources, such as
agricultural burning, wildfires, and vehicle pollution. The number of ice nuclei
and the ability of the particles to form ice crystals will be studied. The end
result of the project will be a better understanding of the role of particles
from combustion sources in the cloud system, and an improved tool that will be
incorporated into numerical models from the cloud scale to the global scale. The
researcher will also promote cross-disciplinary research between the atmospheric
and biological sciences, as well as mentor a summer intern in order to enhance
undergraduate training and learning.

The ice nucleation activity of carbonaceous combustion aerosol is poorly
constrained, with conflicting results from both field and laboratory studies.
This work will address this shortcoming through the direct sampling of
combustion aerosols in the field, and associated laboratory work. The main
instruments to be used are the Colorado State University (CSU) continuous flow
diffusion chamber (CFDC) to determine the number concentration of ice nuclei and
the single particle soot photometer (SP2) to selectively remove refractory black
carbon. Biosamplers will also be used to determine the contribution of
biological particles and organic materials. Select particles will be further
assessed using Scanning Electron Microscopy coupled to Energy Dispersive
Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS). The specific objectives of the project are to: 1)
conduct laboratory experiments to test the technique of coupling the SP2
instrument to the CFDC, 2) measure ice nuclei from controlled winter wheat burns
in Oklahoma, 3) conduct sampling of ice nuclei from wildfires in Colorado, 4)
perform sampling of fossil fuel combustion near highways in Colorado, and 5)
modify or create new parameterizations for cloud to global scale models.