* 1433927
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Managing Conflicting Social and Work Identities
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Jessie Finch, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,923.00

How do individuals navigate situations in which their work-role identity is put
in conflict with their social identities such as race/ethnicity, nationality, or
citizenship status? The study systematically assesses strategies employed by
lawyers and judges as they attempt to manage multiple, and potentially
conflicting, identities and it seeks to understand the circumstances under which
these identities affect job-related interactions. The research examines changing
legal guidelines that have resulted in en masse hearings related to immigration
cases. This change provides a site for observing heightened identity conflict
between role identities (a form of personal identity that often focuses on work
roles) and social identities. In particular, judges and lawyers take on a
specific work-related role identity that entails assisting in the conviction and
sentencing of people with whom they share a particular social
identity/race/ethnicity, but do not share another social identity/citizenship.
This research bridges a gap and also expands other research to recognize and
categorize identity management strategies such as distancing, assigned vs.
asserted identities, and impression management.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study
asks the following research questions: 1) Do Latino/a lawyers and judges
involved in these cases manage their potentially conflicting identities
differently than non-Latino/as? 2) Is a shared social identity with defendants
detrimental or useful in the work of these Latino/a lawyers and judges? To
answer these questions, this research employs a mixed-method qualitative
research design, including: content analyses of legal documents, media reports,
and activist publications; ethnographic observations of courtroom proceedings;
and interviews with attorneys and judges (both Latino/a and non-Latino/a) that
include an embedded experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resultant theory of
conflicting identity management will contribute broadly to future research on
identity. Conflicting identity management theory will also inform best practices
on how to deal with potentially conflicting identities in work settings. The
research can also contribute to specific understandings of how the criminal
justice system deals with racial/ethnic issues surrounding immigration crimes
and en masse proceedings. Understanding the broader effects of the program on
legal professionals is especially important not only to social scientists but to
society at large.