* 1433717
* US GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Characterization, Sampling and Analysis of the Sea Ice Environment in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Robert Rember, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2018
* USD 609,060.00

In this project, a group of investigators participating in the 2015 U.S.
GEOTRACES Arctic expedition will characterize and quantify the role of sea ice
as a repository and transporter of trace metals and radioisotopes in the Arctic
Ocean. In common with other multinational initiatives in the International
GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify
processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace
elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these
distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements are
essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. Working alongside a multi-
institutional team of ocean trace element experts, the sea ice group will focus
its attention on the importance of ice as a reservoir that can accumulate trace
elements in one locale and release them in another. This project will also
provide for the training and support of at least one graduate student at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus as well as multiple extramural public
educational initiatives for local communities (including indigenous
populations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.GEOTRACES Arctic section will
traverse waters impacted by sea ice processes, and exhibiting significant
chemical and biological gradients. Sea ice of various ages and provenance will
be encountered along the transect, presenting a unique opportunity to
characterize trace elements of interest in sea ice with differing histories. The
distribution of trace elements of interest in Arctic sea ice has not yet been
determined, but it is expected to vary widely, and this study will investigate
factors important in determining this variability, and thus important in the
transport and distribution of trace elements in the Arctic environment. Access
to ice floes will allow trace-metal-clean sampling of atmospheric deposition
within snow cover, and characterization of surface waters in contact with sea
ice. The project will involve collection of trace-metal-clean samples from the
sea ice environment to make high-resolution measurements of dissolved and
particulate key trace elements from snow, sea ice and seawater underneath the
ice, and to determine sea ice physical, and ancillary chemical characteristics
in order to contribute towards the quantification of trace element input to the
Arctic Ocean. Samples from the sea ice environment will be collected and
homogenized for distribution to the scientific community. In fact, the
development of a trace metal clean ice corer by the sea ice group will
facilitate the characterization of sea ice chemistry, putting them in a unique
position to collect, and distribute sea ice samples to the GEOTRACES community.