* 1433201
* Combined Laboratory and Modeling Studies of Ice Vapor Growth at Low Temperatures
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jerry Harrington, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 655,917.00

Ice-containing clouds can exist anywhere within the lower atmosphere. Cirrus
clouds in the upper troposphere are a common example, being composed entirely or
mostly of ice. Low-level clouds may contain both liquid and ice while mid-level
clouds contain some liquid at most latitudes. Ice crystals take on a variety of
complex shapes and can grow large by vapor diffusion alone. The presence of ice
complicates the links between cloud microphysics, dynamics, and radiation,
making accurate cloud simulations difficult. Ice growth from the vapor phase
proves to be a key but perplexing link in this chain. Recent laboratory
measurements suggest that the deposition coefficient, a measure of growth
efficiency, is small for small ice crystals and that it depends on the
supersaturation. Modeling studies show that simulated ice concentrations and
supersaturations in cirrus clouds, as well as the rates of glaciation of mixed-
phase clouds, depend sensitively on ice growth rates. The work herein seeks to
advance understanding of ice vapor growth in cold atmospheric clouds.

Intellectual merit: This integrated study will produce a synergy between
laboratory and modeling research. The work will focus on ice grown from the
vapor phase with the intention being to reduce uncertainties in past
measurements of the deposition coefficient. The laboratory methods make use of
electrodynamic levitation to isolate ice particles from system walls and permit
particle growth to be followed under precisely controlled conditions. New
measurements of vapor growth rates will be obtained as functions of size,
supersaturation, temperature, and pressure. These data can be used to explore
the dependence of the deposition coefficient on environmental conditions similar
to those ice crystals experience in the atmosphere. Moreover, these data can
also be used to critique new and commonly used vapor growth methods, and
constrain the parameterizations used in cloud models. Ice crystal growth
theories and numerical models will provide guidance to the laboratory work, help
interpret experimental findings, and provide a framework for extending lab
results to cloud systems. The synergism afforded by this laboratory-modeling
study will help shed new light on poorly understood ice processes that are
currently limiting our ability to accurately predict cloud evolution.

Broader impacts: This research has potentially broad impacts on the atmospheric
sciences and society. Large uncertainties exist in simulations of ice-containing
clouds at all modeling scales indicating that the consequences of improving ice
vapor growth parameterizations in models could be scientifically far-reaching.
The research will train graduate students and give advanced undergraduate
students exposure to modern research. The work can also be demonstrated to
diverse audiences including K-12 students. Moreover, continue development of
parcel microphysical models as classroom teaching tools using College resources
is planned.