* 1433459
* EFRI 2-DARE: Phosphorene, an Unexplored 2D High-mobility Semiconductor
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* David Tomanek, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 02/29/2020
* USD 2,211,498.00

As semiconductor chips are widely used in computers, phones, automobiles,
appliances, etc., more capable yet more efficient semiconductor chips can have
profound societal impact such as in reducing electric power consumption and in
prolonging the battery life of portable electronics. Today, each semiconductor
chip may contain billions of transistors that are made of silicon &amp;#8210;
the most popular semiconductor. However, as transistors are made smaller and
thinner so that more of them can be crammed on the same chip to perform more
functions at a faster speed, silicon-based transistors will sooner or later run
into physical limitations dictated by quantum mechanics. The physical
limitations of silicon will cause transistors to fail to turn on and off
efficiently and chips to consume more power and run hotter. To address the
physical limitations of silicon, scientists have explored new materials such as
graphene, made of a single layer of carbon atoms, as an alternative to silicon
in making very small and very thin transistors. However, although graphene
allows electrons to be highly mobile in a transistor, graphene lacks an energy
gap that could be used to turn the transistor on and off efficiently. This
shortcoming of graphene has motivated scientists to explore other atomic-layered
materials such as transition-metal dichalcogenids which have an energy gap, but
they turned out to have a different shortcoming in allowing electrons to have
only low mobility. To solve this dilemma of atomic-layered materials,
phosphorene, made of a single layer of phosphorus atoms, was recently discovered
to have both a high electron mobility and a sizable energy gap. Thus,
phosphorene is a promising replacement for silicon in future-generation
semiconductor chips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, a team of scientists
from Purdue University, Lehigh University and Michigan State University propose
to explore phosphorene which can potentially overcome the challenges of silicon
as well as other two-dimensional atomic-layered materials for ultra-scaled thin-
body transistor applications thereby transforming the electronics industry. A
collaborative and highly integrated interdisciplinary approach will be used to
address three thrust areas: 1) exploration of phosphorene by exfoliation with
focus on electrical and optical properties and device applications, 2) synthesis
by chemical vapor deposition and nanomanufacturing in collaboration with
government and industry labs, and 3) first-principles modeling to guide
experiments and to interpret the results. Being the only other elemental
material that can be exfoliated like graphene, phosphorene represents a unique
opportunity as the basic material for future-generation devices. The initial
exploration through exfoliation will guide the development for high-quality,
defect-free materials and processes that enable safe and easy integration into
device architectures. Additionally, the highly puckered structure of phosphorene
dictates that each single layer comprises two tightly bonded atomic layers ? a
property that can be exploited to develop a large-scale chemical vapor
deposition manufacturing process. The puckered structure also makes phosphorene
highly anisotropic ? a property that can be exploited for thermoelectric
applications. To reduce the environmental sensitivity of phosphorene and to
explore other novel architectures and properties, heterojunctions between
phosphorene and graphene, hexagonal boron nitride, molybdenum disulfide, or
other chalcogenides and oxides will be explored. For example, unlike most other
atomic-layered materials, phosphorene is naturally p-type, and p-type
phosphorene transistors can be combined with n-type molybdenum-disulfide
transistors to form energy-efficient complementary circuits and tunneling
transistors. Moreover, black phosphorus in bulk form has a direct band gap of
0.3 eV, which makes it a useful elemental infrared detector. When black
phosphorus is thinned to a single phosphorene layer, the band gap increases
monotonically to above 2 eV ? a property that can be exploited for efficient
solar cells and tunable photodetectors.&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR)