* 1433759
* Collaborative Research: Consequences of sub-lethal hypoxia exposure for teleosts tracked with biogeochemical markers: a trans-basin comparison
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Karin Limburg, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 290,114.00

Hypoxia occurs when dissolved oxygen concentrations in aquatic habitats drop
below levels required by living organisms. The increased frequency, duration and
intensity of hypoxia events worldwide have led to impaired health and
functioning of marine and freshwater ecosystems. Although the potential impacts
of hypoxic exposure are severe, there is little known about the consequences of
systemic, sub-lethal exposure to hypoxic events for populations and communities
of fishes. The objective of this project is to determine whether sub-lethal
exposure to hypoxia during early life stages leads to poor growth and hence
increased mortality. This project will use "environmental fingerprint" methods
in fish ear stones (otoliths) retrospectively to identify periods of hypoxia
exposure. The project will compare consequences of hypoxia exposure in different
fish species from the Gulf of Mexico, the Baltic Sea, and Lake Erie, thus
examining the largest anthropogenic hypoxic regions in the world spanning
freshwater, estuarine, and marine ecosystems. In addition, the research will
increase awareness of hypoxia-related issues by disseminating curriculum
materials to high schools in southern Texas that are dominated by Hispanic and
Latino American students. As a part of this program, two high school teachers
will be sponsored to participate in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration "Teacher At Sea" program, where they will gain first-hand
experience in biological sampling in the northern Gulf of Mexico "Dead Zone" and
help lead teacher training workshops for additional high school teachers to
implement hypoxia-related curriculum in their classrooms. In addition, this
project will contribute significantly to basic information for critical
stakeholder groups in Baltic Sea and Great Lakes fisheries via the International
Council for the Exploration of the Sea and the Great Lakes Fisheries Commission.
Two graduate students and one post-doc will also be supported in part by this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ long-term, permanent
markers incorporated into fish otoliths to identify life-long patterns of sub-
lethal hypoxia exposure far beyond time spans currently achievable using
molecular markers. This work will capitalize on patterns of geochemical proxies
such as Mn/Ca and I/Ca incorporated into otoliths and analyzed using laser
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry to identify patterns of
sub-lethal hypoxia exposure. The investigators will then determine whether
exposure results in differential growth and survival patterns compared to non-
exposed fish by tracking cohorts over time and identifying characteristics of
survivors. Because this work involves multiple species in multiple hypoxic
regions, it will allow cross-system comparisons among unique ecosystems. The
results from this project will thus provide unprecedented insight into effects
of hypoxia exposure in three major basins using novel biogeochemical proxies,
thereby paving the way for a fuller understanding of the impacts of "dead zones"
on coastal resources.