* 1433132
* Parameterizations of Salt Fingers in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Raymond Schmitt, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 585,904.00

The ultimate goal of this research is to advance our understanding of double
diffusion from salt fingers in the ocean so that field observations can be
properly interpreted and new representations of this phenomenon can be developed
for inclusion in large-scale ocean circulation models. Salt fingering is an
ocean mixing process that occurs in tropical and sub-tropical regions where warm
and salty water overlies colder and fresher water. It is driven by the fact
that, in water, heat diffuses faster than salt. A small parcel of warm, salty
water sinking downwards into a colder, fresher region will lose its heat before
losing its salt, making the parcel of water increasingly denser than the water
around it and sinking further. Likewise, a small parcel of colder, fresher water
will be displaced upwards and gain heat by diffusion from surrounding water,
which will then make it lighter than the surrounding waters, and cause it to
rise further. Locations where salt fingers are present may increase the ability
of the oceans to absorb and transport heat, freshwater and nutrients than
turbulent mixing in the abyss. Thus, it is very important to develop the tools
necessary to quantify salt finger fluxes. The evidence that salt finger
intensity is a strong function of density ratio and can feedback on the ocean's
stratification is now quite abundant. This project aims to build on new
theoretical results and high quality data sets to better quantify the mixing due
to salt fingers in the ocean and hasten the progress toward a plausible
representation in numerical models of the ocean circulation, which have a
demonstrated sensitivity to double diffusion. This project will also contribute
to the general knowledge of double-diffusive systems which are now recognized to
be important in fields as diverse as astrophysics and magmas. The investigator
plans to participate in a proposed multi-disciplinary workshop on "The
Mathematics of Layers and Interfaces" in 2015. The project will also contribute
to the educational development of undergraduate Summer Student Fellows at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution who will participate in the project as part
of their summer research projects. Many of the excellent students in that
program go on to become very successful graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of finestructure, microstructure and
tracer data will conducted along with theoretical analysis and numerical
simulations in order to better understand the role of salt fingers in oceanic
mixing. Evidence for the importance of salt fingers is now clear; it is the
dominant thermocline mixing process in some regions and a significant
contributor in many others. The fact that heat and salt are transported at
different rates has a variety of consequences for thermohaline structure and
ocean dynamics. There are four main elements to this project. First, a
parameterization of salt fingers using microstructure data from the Salt Finger
Tracer Release Experiment (SFTRE) as well as other cruises will be developed to
test consistency with the new salt finger equilibration model. Second, the
properties of the SFTRE thermohaline staircase will be analyzed using the Moored
Profiler time series data. The analysis of layer properties in Theta-S space
will be used to evaluate the viability of an existing flux divergence model. In
addition, this analysis will help test the layer formation and thickness models
which rely on a decreasing finger flux ratio with increasing density ratio.
Third, a study of shear dispersion and lateral mixing in the staircase will be
conducted using the tracer data in conjunction with the remarkably consistent
Theta-S properties of the layers. This will locate any one layer observation
within the overall meridional gradients of the region and permit the
investigator to establish the lateral dispersion of the deliberate tracer. This
analysis will allow the assessment of the displacement of layers relative to one
another, and improve estimates of both vertical and lateral diffusivities.
Fourth, an analysis of fingers in unstable stratifications will be done. Theory
and numerical modeling will be used to help understand how a new parameter
regime based on recent experimental results has the potential to affect "mixed"
layer stratifications in the ocean. Overall, this project will contribute to
improvement of the general circulation models used for climate prediction and
ecosystem dynamics, both tasks of great importance to society.