* 1433166
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Wastefulness, Beneficial Use, and Water Transfers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jacque (Jody) Emel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 09/30/2016
* USD 15,979.00

Water resources in arid regions are under increasing pressure as climate change
and development stress already over-allocated water supplies. One way for water
managers to address these water supply issues is by transferring water from one
use or area to another. This project analyzes the policies, practices, and
consequences of water transfers by examining the social, legal, and
environmental contexts and consequences of moving water from rural agricultural
uses to urban areas. In particular, the research focuses on the idea of
'wastefulness.' A key goal of water transfers is reducing inefficient or
wasteful use of water -- but waste is a socially created idea with different
meanings for different groups. For the communities of people and wildlife that
depend upon those so-called wasteful uses of water, a water transfer may
jeopardize their lives and livelihoods. The broad impacts of this research lie
in its close examination of the social and environmental justice implications of
defining certain water flows as wasteful.

This work contributes to multiple bodies of literature including political
ecology, nature/society geography, and socio-legal studies. The study
investigates water transfers and ideas of wastefulness using the following three
research questions: 1) What competing discourses and narratives around water's
waste and value have been produced, by whom, in relation to water transfers, and
how have different claims asserted by (or on behalf of) human and nonhuman water
users been framed as legitimate or illegitimate in these discourses? 2) How have
legal institutions been used, and by whom, to validate wasteful or valuable uses
of water and the legitimacy of different water users' claims? 3) How have
impacts of water transfers on source areas including changes to air quality,
wildlife habitat, and livelihoods, been framed and experienced by different
groups? The project focuses on California, an area with a long history of
conflict around water use. The research uses a comparative case study approach
to examine three cases of highly contested rural-to-urban water transfers at
three lakes in California -- Owens Lake, Mono Lake, and the Salton Sea. The
cases share many physical similarities, but represent distinct and pivotal
moments in the history of water management, revealing both change and stability
over time. Data sources include key informant interviews, archival data, and
participant observation. By examining the discourses and processes of water re-
allocation, this study builds a better understanding of how ideas and legal
structures shaping California water policy have evolved over time. The study
will have generalizable conclusions for other arid regions within and beyond the
Southwestern U.S. struggling to allocate water supplies in a socially and
environmentally just and sustainable manner.