* 1433108
* Workshop: Support for a workshop on scientific research applications of natural language technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Noah Smith, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This is funding for a one-day workshop on scientific research applications of
natural language technologies to be held at the annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), in Baltimore on June 26, 2014.
A major growth area in applied computer science has been the application of
automated techniques to massive datasets to answer scientific questions about
people and society. Although much work in this area focuses on structured data
or network data, linguistic data is also a key source of evidence for these
phenomena. While some existing natural language processing (NLP) techniques have
found use in this growing community, new techniques for discovering and
analyzing social meanings and structures in text are in high
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Engagement between NLP
researchers and domain scientists will introduce new problem formulations and
new theoretical frameworks that will broaden and deepen applications of language
technology to social science. Potential topics for presentations and discussion
include (but are by no means limited to): inferring social relations from
conversation and other linguistic behavior; automatic extraction of event data
from text; inference of author and speaker properties from text and speech;
relating text datasets to author social networks; tracking language change over
space, time, and communities; measuring linguistic influence; computational
analysis of literary and historical corpora; and tracking the flow of
information, ideas, and sentiment through social networks. Much of the data to
be studied comes from online communities, which are a focus of the Cyber-Human
Systems program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This workshop will
increase the visibility of the computational social science application area for
ACL researchers and will help build connections between language technologists
and social scientists. The workshop¹s format aims at fostering interactions
among participants and invited speakers, contributing towards building a
community interested in language technologies and domain scientists. This format
is especially beneficial to student participants, who will leave with new ideas
about guiding applications. As is typical for ACL workshops, an archival
proceedings will be published openly through the ACL Anthology. The workshop
organizers will report on the workshop, synthesizing the discussion at the
workshop with an emphasis on research topics with greatest potential in the near
future. The report will be published openly (e.g., posted to arXiv and possibly
submitted for publication in a relevant journal) within a few months after the
workshop.