* 1433642
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diasporas' Participation in Social Change
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* David Snow, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,322.00

During the 2011 and ongoing "Arab Spring" period, revolutions against
dictatorships emerged in Libya, Yemen, and Syria. Anti-regime activism, however,
was not constrained by state borders. Members of these countries' diasporas in
the United States and Great Britain also mobilized to support the revolutions,
but did so in very different ways over time. Scholars argue that transnational
diaspora movements in Western, democratic states can and do shape homeland
conflicts in significant ways. However, existing studies have not systematically
analyzed how diasporas mobilize to assist their respective homelands during
crisis periods. Nor have such studies compared diaspora movements' efforts over
time, or explained variation in their collective action dynamics and roles in
homeland conflicts. This research project, therefore, addresses the following
questions: 1) how do diasporas mobilize to support revolutions in the homeland,
and 2) why do their respective movements and potential for influence differ
significantly, specifically in the scope, intensity, and duration of their
collection actions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address these
questions with an in-depth comparative case analysis of these countries'
diasporas' anti-regime movements across the U.S. and Britain using more than two
hundred original interviews with activists, as well as the public statements and
calls to action produced by diaspora advocacy organizations. The data will be
coded using qualitative analytical software in order to discern the scope,
intensity, and duration of diaspora movements. Using the constant comparative
method, this study will test theoretically-derived propositions explaining
movement dynamics and refine these arguments based on the empirical analysis.
Based on theories of social movement mobilization, it is proposed that four
primary factors shape anti-regime movement trajectories: 1) the biographical and
identity-based characteristics of the anti-regime activist community; 2) the
pace and degree of violent repression in the homeland; 3) the relative
opportunities and constraints posed by diasporas' domestic contexts; and 4) the
types of resources channeled into the anti-regime effort. The findings will be
used to extend and refine theories of transnational social movements, diaspora
mobilization, and social change.