* 1433164
* AGS-PRF:  Investigation into the Nature of Critical Behavior in Tropical Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Matthew Igel, Igel                    Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 172,000.00

This postdoctoral research award is for an idealized numerical modeling study of
self-critical behavior in tropical clouds. Self-critical behavior in this
context refers to the phenomena whereby clouds grow quickly into rainfall
producers when their immediate surroundings reach a certain moisture level. It
is established on a large scale that this occurs in order to prevent the
atmosphere from being overly moistened. However, the research in this award is
aimed at discovering what role self-criticality plays on an individual cloud
level. A successful outcome from this award would be increased understanding of
cloud processes in order to improve weather and climate models. The researcher
also plans to teach and advise undergraduate students with the goal of
influencing more of them to pursue science careers.

This study will be carried out using the Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Model (OLAM). The
researcher will address two topics related to the growth of individual clouds,
cloud microphysics and gravity waves. The first hypothesis of the work is that
certain cloud microphysical processes become efficient around the critical
moisture value. To test this hypothesis, the researcher will turn off the
depositional process in the model, the process whereby water vapor is
transferred to ice crystals. If the hypothesis is correct, the critical value
should break down or shift. The second hypothesis is that as the rain rate from
the cloud increases the amplitude of the created gravity waves will also
increase. This would in turn create more clouds and rainfall and force the
system back to a stable state. This hypothesis will be tested by running the
model with a short time step and following the waves and how they interact with
nearby clouds. This postdoctoral fellowship will be split between the University
of Melbourne in Australia and University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine
and Atmospheric Science. This award was supported with funding from the Office
of International and Integrative Activities.