* 1433363
* 2014 Bioanalytical Sensors GRC/GRS, Newport, RI, June 21-22, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2014
* Susan Lunte, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 10/31/2014
* USD 25,525.00

PI: Susan M. Lunte&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1433363&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Gordon Research Conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2014 Bioanalytical
Sensors GRC/GRS, Newport, RI, June 21-22, 2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layperson
description&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Bioanalytical sensors play a critical role in
managing diseases in terms of diagnosis and prognosis as well as in selecting
treatments and tracking their effectiveness. Highly novel and unpublished
research will be presented and freely discussed at the 2014 Bioanalytical
Sensors Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Graduate Research Seminar. These
discussions will form the basis for new collaborations between diverse
conference participants and will assist new researchers in developing and
enhancing their programs. The interactions and ideas sparked by this conference
will lead to future development of biosensors and monitoring systems for disease
diagnosis and health management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The 2014 GRC on Bioanalytical Sensors will
focus on the interface of materials and biology. Sessions on sensing at
interfaces, new nanomaterial platforms, and optical and mass spectrometric-based
sensors have been included in the program. Emerging and enabling technologies
for the measurement of proteins and small molecules in cells, tissues, and whole
organisms will also be presented. These include new approaches to in vivo
sensing, novel microfluidic platforms, and separation-based sensors. The
Graduate Research Research Seminar (GRS) that precedes it will provide an
intimate environment in which graduate students and postdocs with a broad range
of knowledge and skill sets can freely discuss their work and ideas in a highly
intellectual and rigorous manner. The focus of the GRS is on biosensor
development and field applications, including point-of-care sensors for
clinical, environmental, agricultural, and food testing. Specific topics will
include nanomaterials, microfluidics, engineered surfaces, multiplexed detection
in complex matrices, and signal transduction methodologies. Keynote speakers for
the meetings will be leading scientists in the areas of point-of-care
diagnostics, sensor biocompatibility, separation science, and nanomaterials. Due
to the unique format of the Gordon Research Conferences, all participants will
have ample opportunity for discussions regarding research that is being
presented orally as well as in the poster sessions. An important goal of this
conference is to foster cross-disciplinary work and generate new research
collaborations. The current program also has a high degree of diversity with
regard to speakers and participants, including individuals from academia,
government, and the private sector. Special consideration has also been given to
the inclusion of women and minorities; there are also a significant number of
international researchers included in the program. In addition, emerging
investigators (new faculty, graduate students, pre- and postdoctoral trainees)
will be given ample opportunity to present and discuss their research during the
two meetings.