* 1433536
* AGS-PRF:  High-Order Simulations of E-region Turbulence and Large Scale Structuring
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Alex Fletcher, Fletcher                Alexander
* Fellowship Award
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This award supports the PI as a postdoctoral researcher at Boston University
under the supervision of Dr. Meers Oppenheim. The objective of this project is
to improve understanding of turbulent processes in the E-region ionosphere
through simulation. This work will produce 3-D kinetic simulations of plasma
turbulence in the E-region. Turbulence affects trans-ionospheric communication
and over-the-horizon radars. Models of space weather will be improved using the
project results.&lt;br/&gt;Based on earlier work by both the host and the PI, a
new code will be developed to simulate the coupling of Farley-Buneman and
gradient drift waves in the E-region. The simulation of coupled Farley-
Buneman/gradient drift waves will determine the spectrum and mechanism
associated with the turbulent cascade of energy from large to small scales, will
test if this coupling explains "squared-off" electric field measurements by
rockets, will determine how E-region turbulence changes from the equatorial
region to the enormously varying auroral region, will see if there are any
fundamental E-region instability processes that have been overlooked,
particularly in the "medium-scale", and will determine how anomalous electron
heating associated with fully 3-D turbulence changes with altitude and latitude.
Simulation results will be directly comparable to observations by radars,
rockets, and spacecraft and the results will also guide future experiments.
Another goal is to use these simulations to determine a physical mechanism
responsible for the 150 km echoes that have been observed by radars for decades.