* 1433851
* Science, Technology and Engineering Mini-business Incubator (STEM-Inc)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Amy Cox-Petersen, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,025,261.00

This project innovatively aims to motivate early teens to pursue careers in
engineering and computer science through an afterschool program. This program
combines these subjects with business entrepreneurship by engaging students in
designing computer science and engineering products. Students will learn not
only about these subjects, but also about the design process and business. The
design process will be guided by two principles--intelligent fast failure and
lean start-up--which emphasize planning for and capitalizing on short feedback
loops. These principles highlight the notion that creating successful products
is less a matter of getting it right the first time and more a matter of seeking
feedback and revising until success is achieved. More broadly, these principles
focus on key 21st century skills--persistence in the face of failure and
learning from feedback. The project aims to recruit girls and underrepresented
group members to participate and will take place in a mostly low-income
population. It is an ideal project for ITEST because its impact has strong
potential to broaden participation in engineering and computer science by
connecting these to entrepreneurship and business.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will create a mini technology business 'incubator' in an afterschool
program for 7th and 8th grade students. It is a collaboration involving Cal
State Fullerton's colleges of engineering and computer science, business and
economics, and education; and the Anaheim Union High School District. The three-
year after-school program will be run by participating teachers, college student
mentors (one from business/economics, one from computer science/engineering),
and student peer leaders (8 at each of 4 sites). It will be held twice a week
for two hours each session. About 40 students will participate at each of four
sites (160 total each year). It will include: preparatory training for teachers,
college student mentors and peer leaders; afterschool activities; field trips;
industry advisors; parent participation and project showcase. As a design and
development project, research questions frame formative data collection and
analysis to address aspects of the design that are succeeding and others that
require revision. Summative measures focus on what teachers and students learn,
as well as attitudes toward science and engineering and self-efficacy.