* 1433640
* Collaborative Project: GIS Resources and Applications for Career Education (GRACE)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Frances Saroki, Michigan Virtual University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 12/31/2018
* USD 428,846.00

The GIS Resources and Applications for Career Education (GRACE) project builds
upon a recent NSF-funded project, the Mayors Youth Technology Corps (MYTC), that
developed a model of geographic information systems and technology (GIS/T) based
education. MYTC developed a model of purposeful applications of GIS/T-based
education for STEM careers in the workplace that provided youth in economically
disadvantaged communities experience using and applying GIS/T to real world
situations. In the GRACE project, Eastern Michigan University (EMU) and Michigan
Virtual University (MY), in collaboration with Michigan Mathematics and Science
Centers Network (MMSCN), Michigan Communities Association of Mapping
Professionals (MiCAMP), and Michigan Earth Science Teachers Association (MESTA),
take the MYTC model to students and teachers in grades 8-12 across the State of
Michigan through a three-tiered learning process (Explorer phase, Investigator
phase, and Intern phase). The Explorer level introduces students to GIS/T
through an online system that builds students' basic understanding of GIS/T and
stimulates student curiosity. The Investigator level leverages students'
curiosity and interest and prepares them to work with GIS/T lesson modules that
are designed to emphasize science and engineering aspects and align with
standards for teaching the subjects. The Intern level provides students with
professional GIS/T training and opportunities to gain work experiences in local
organizations as Interns. Professional development activities for teachers who
will use GIS/T in their classes are tightly integrated with this progressive
learning process so that the teachers are given adequate instructional support
and technical mentoring as they work with the participating, and future,
students.

The five educational and community organizations that comprise the GRACE team
will: 1) expand and disseminate the model across Michigan and report on the
ensuing challenges and successes; 2) demonstrate how to unite GIS/T
organizations and volunteers with schools, students and teachers to integrate
authentic GIS/T applications in curricula and provide a "foreseeable" career
incentive for students to enthusiastically participate in STEM learning,
especially for rural and underrepresented communities; 3) study motivations and
hindrances of integrating GIS/T into science and social studies classrooms; and
4) develop an effective delivery model - the use of online and blended learning
to transform the speed, ease of replication, and consistency of delivering
instruction that is customized to increase motivation and achievement for
students. GIS/T is applicable to many current career paths; GRACE will afford
students in disadvantaged communities opportunities to engage in GIS/T they
otherwise might not have. The expansion and dissemination of the model will
affect 5,000 Explorers, 2,500 Investigators, and 300 Interns - 120 teachers, and
40 schools will receive GIS/T training, integrate GIS/T in teaching in STEM and
social studies, and apply GIS/T to solve real-world problems. A statewide
learning community of teachers who are interested in adopting GIS/T as
instructional technology will be formed and supported, while a statewide
consortium of schools and community organizations will be established to provide
professional mentors and workforce experience opportunities for students through
paid or volunteered internships.