* 1433212
* Collaborative Research: Oxygen Fugacity (i.e., Chemical Activity) in the Upper Mantle: Intercalibration of Upper-Mantle Oxybarometers with State-of-the-Art Analytical Techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Elizabeth Cottrell, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 92,327.00

Oxygen is an important element in Earth's mantle and makes up the bulk of most
rocks. Its chemical activity (i.e. fugacity) is a controlling factor in
determining: (1) the composition of magmas that form from mantle melting, (2)
the minerals that are present and in equilibrium with one another in a rock, (3)
the distribution of chemical species in associated magmatic fluids, and (4) the
partitioning of elements between minerals during their formation and alteration.
This research involves a collaboration of three institutions in different parts
of the country, employs high temperature/atmospheric-pressure experiments to
achieve research goals, and carries out a comparison of the geochemistry of
seafloor igneous rocks from the Southwest Indian Ridge. Rock types include mid-
ocean ridge basalts, also known as MORB, and abyssal peridotites which represent
what is left over in Earth's upper mantle once MORB has been extracted by
melting processes. Broader impacts of the work include interaction between
scientists from universities and the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History,
methods development that advances the infrastructure for science, and a strong
integration of research and education. The project will involve the cross-
training of a female PhD student who will travel between three laboratories and
be trained in state-of-the-art geochemical analytical techniques, providing her
with outstanding professional development and networking opportunities. Training
of undergraduate students and a postdoc will also take place. The project
supports three female researchers, one of whom is early career, and another who
is from an institution in an EPSCoR (Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research) state (Rhode Island). The researchers will use the
Smithsonian public outreach engine to help implement and promote hands-on
learning activities with seafloor rocks where the scientists interact directly
with the public. The Smithsonian will also host and disseminate associated
online mini-lessons.

This research involves petrologic, petrographic, and experimental work to
examine the oxygen fugacity of the upper mantle and its variability. Rock
samples come from an area of the seafloor that has an exceptional abundance of
both basaltic and peridotitic material in close proximity. Most samples have
already been well characterized analytically for major and trace elements and
key radiogenic isotopes, allowing the research to focus on oxygen fugacity in a
more efficient way. The research includes the cross-calibration of the two most
frequently used oxybarometers in upper mantle studies: (1) oxygen fugacity
determined from Fe3+/Total Fe ratios of mid-ocean ridge basalts determined by
XANES, X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure, spectroscopy and (2) oxygen
fugacity derived from electron microprobe measurements of peridotite using
Mossbauer-calibrated spinel standards. Because alteration can significantly
impact oxybarometer signatures, its effects will be examined by comparing oxygen
fugacity results of fresh and altered peridotites that have undergone various
degrees of alteration. Experiments will be performed at 1 atm in a vertical gas
mixing furnace at a range of oxygen fugacities that bracket the QFM (Quartz,
Forsterite, Magnetite) buffer at a range of temperatures to 1225 C. Project
goals include: (1) determining the oxygen fugacity of the upper mantle, (2)
examining the processes that control the fugacity of oxygen in MORB and abyssal
peridotite, and (3) trying to understand over what length scale oxygen fugacity
in the mantle varies.