* 1433395
* EFRI 2-DARE: Novel Switching Phenomena in Atomic Heterostructures for Multifunctional Applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,828,265.00

EFRI-1433395&lt;br/&gt;Balandin (Univ. of California-
Riverside)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-tecnmical description: This
research addresses a new class of ultra-thin film materials, termed van der
Waals materials, and heterostructures implemented with such materials;
specifically this project investigates novel electrical, optical, and thermal
phenomena in such materials and heterostructures. The work will result in new
material synthesis techniques and enable practical applications of ultra-thin
film materials in electronic switches, optical detectors, low-power information
processing and direct energy conversion. The novel devices implemented with the
ultra-thin films of van der Waals materials have potential for high speed and
low energy dissipation. The creation of all-metallic switches and electrical-
optical transducers will have a strong impact on the Nation's defense needs
owing to the inherent radiation hardness of all-metallic devices. The software
tools developed in this project will be made freely available to a broad R&amp;D
community. This research will increase US economic competitiveness, develop a
globally competitive STEM workforce, and contribute to undergraduate and
graduate STEM education. The project team developed a detailed Broadening
Participation Plan that will impact K-12, undergraduate and graduate education
of minorities underrepresented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This interdisciplinary project investigates
the broad class of two-dimensional materials and heterostructures of transition-
metal dichalcogenides, which reveal a range of novel switching phenomena related
to confinement-induced modification of electron and phonon band structure,
proximity effects, exciton condensation and strongly correlated phenomena. The
project goals are to synthesize high-quality, atomically-thin transition-metal
dichalcogenide films with controlled crystalline phase (e.g., 1T vs. 2H);
fabricate suspended two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenide films and
field-effect-transistor type devices; explore electrical, optical and thermal
phenomena in these structures and devices; and utilize novel switching phenomena
observed in these structures for the creation of low-power logic gates, all-
metallic radiation-hard switches and optical-electrical transducers. To achieve
these goals, the interdisciplinary project team includes recognized researchers
with complementary expertise, prior experience of cooperation and an extensive
publication record in two-dimensional materials. The results of this
transformative research will add to the growing core knowledge about the
electrical, optical and thermal properties of two-dimensional materials and
heterostructures implemented with transition-metal dichalcogenides and related
layered structures. The project will lead to a better understanding of
correlated phenomena, excitonic effects, and the hetero-interface electronic and
phonon properties of two-dimensional materials. The information about the
electron and phonon transport properties of heterostructures will allow the team
to exploit novel electrical and optical switching phenomena for developing
innovative devices. The team will produce a detailed Materials Property Database
with electron and phonon materials data for transition-metal dichalcogenide
films, heterostructures, and twisted few-layer materials. The research project
addresses all three EFRI thrust areas.