* 1433795
* Renewal: CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service Program at Stevens
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2023
* Koduvayur Subbalakshmi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,978,961.00

This project seeks to continue Stevens Institute of Technology participation in
the CyberCorps速: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-
qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce.
Holding the designation as Center of Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance Education since 2003 and Center of Academic excellence in Information
Assurance Research since 2008, Stevens offers a wide range of Cybersecurity-
focused degree programs - ranging from highly technical programs to broader
curricula geared toward software assurance, security engineering, privacy,
ethics, or risk management aspects. The proposed project will add three key
innovative components: (a) research engagement of all scholars through faculty-
guided independent study projects in Cybersecurity; (b) development of "soft
skills" for all scholars through short courses in leadership, project
management, innovation and entrepreneurship; and (c) implementation of a novel
pathway in Cybersecurity education between Stevens and community colleges in the
tri-state area. The NSF?s CyberCorps速 SFS program funds projects that address
Cybersecurity education and workforce development. The Scholarship Track
provides funding to award scholarships to students in Cybersecurity. In return
for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal,
State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related to
Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. The Capacity
Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability of the
United States higher education enterprise to produce Cybersecurity
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the Stevens CyberCorps速 SFS
scholarship project has provided funds for 11 scholars, including two
scholarships awarded in the context of a pilot program between Stevens and Union
County Community College. About 40% of students belong to demographic groups
that have traditionally been under-represented in the computing sciences.
Furthermore, the proposed program includes the implementation of a pathway from
2-year colleges into Stevens, whose successful outcome would serve as a model
for other institutions. Stevens CyberCorps速 SFS Scholars will be at the
forefront of advances and developments in the field. They will participate in a
bi-weekly scholar research seminar with two components: Cybersecurity faculty
presenting on their research and scholars giving an update on their own research
spanning from hardware-focused security, quantum cryptography, network and
software security, to privacy and economic aspects of security.