* 1433307
* EFRI 2-DARE: Ultra-Low Power, Collective-State Device Technology Based on Electron Correlation in Two-Dimensional Atomic Layers
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Eva Andrei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,150,000.00

Abstract Title: Ultra-Low Power, Collective-State Device Technology Based on
Electron Correlation in Two-Dimensional Atomic Layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical: Today's transistors cannot meet the demands of ultra-low power, high
speed operation required in future digital technologies. Therefore, to enable a
continuation of the relentless down-scaling, a transformation of the device
architecture must begin with materials that exhibit fundamentally different
functionalities beyond the single electron excitation in traditional
semiconductors. Strongly correlated 2D materials, where the electronic phase
transformation and collective excitation that determine the electronic response,
and devices based on these materials (Landau switch), have the potential to
become the successor of the conventional silicon technology. The logic operation
is based on completely different mechanisms and the successful realization of
the Landau switch concept will extend the road map of low power digital and
analog circuits with large societal impact affecting both governmental and
commercial sector. Our academic-industry partnerships will provide a close link
to large-scale manufacturers of advanced materials and devices, thus ensuring a
critical evaluation of manufacturability and large scale production while
fundamental science and engineering is performed throughout the proposed
research efforts. We will support four graduate students and one post-doctoral
fellow, who will take full advantage of the interdisciplinary, multi-
institutional, government, and industrial R&amp;D environment provided by this
collaboration. Mandatory internships at partnering institutions will enhance
their educational experience, and each will participate in outreach programs
designed to enhance STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
research will develop a "post silicon" transistor that operates on the principle
of strong electron correlation and the associated phase transitions in two-
dimensional materials. To achieve this goal we will: 1) develop theory to
predict the nonlinear electronic response in correlated 2D materials, 2)
introduce novel synthesis routes and doping strategies, 3) utilize advanced
nanoscale characterization techniques 4) develop unique device concepts enabling
steep sub-thermal switching characteristics beyond the single particle
excitation limit, explore advanced device fabrication and characterization, and
5) benchmark device performance and reliability against complementary metal
oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology. The proposed strategies build upon our
successful development of large area synthesis, integration, and
characterization of two-dimensional layered materials, theory, and
characterization of materials and devices exhibiting collective electron
phenomena. The themes that form the core research and outreach program are: 1)
Demonstrating the first electric-field induced, reversible, phase transition in
a three terminal transistor based on 1T-TaS2-xSex. [EFRI Thrust Area 1]; 2)
Understanding the fundamental role of defects, dopants, functionalization, and
heterogeneous integration on the electronic properties of 2D correlated systems.
[EFRI Thrust Area 1]; 3) Optimizing synthesis techniques for scalable nano-
manufacturing of high quality 2D layered materials. [EFRI Thrust Area 2]; 4)
Developing advanced theoretical models to predict electron-electron, electron-
lattice and electron-impurity interaction and its impact on electronic
structure, transport phenomena and ultimately device characteristics [EFRI
Thrust Area 3]; 5) Educating the next generation through a series of novel
education programs focused on broadening participation and providing unique
research opportunities to underrepresented minorities via collaborations with
international faculty, government laboratories, and industrial partners.
[Broadening Participation]