* 1433490
* EFRI 2-DARE: Monolayer Heterostructures: Epitaxy to Beyond-CMOS Devices
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Morten Eskildsen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,999,975.00

Title: EFRI 2-DARE: monolayer heterostructures: epitaxy to beyond-CMOS devices
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: Discovering new materials and learning how
to harvest their properties are among the most important activities for
advancing our society. Over the past six decades, the advent of semiconductors
in particular, has dramatically changed the ways in which we compute,
communicate and learn. Still, we long for opto- and electronics that are even
more energy-efficient, compact, flexible and convenient. New materials drive
novel applications, and innovative devices demand creative materials research.
This bidirectional thinking is epitomized in this EFRI 2-DARE project. The
material system of choice is 2-dimensional (2D) layered materials. Vigorous
investigations in the research laboratories will result in high quality student
training, enrich our knowledge to improve teaching in the classroom, and lead to
innovations that drive the progress of society. The leadership embodied in the
research, teaching, mentoring, service, outreach activities in this project in
turn better prepares the next generation of the STEM work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The rapid and recent advances in
graphene, a single sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a two-dimensional (2D)
honeycomb crystal, have raised tantalizing questions for other examples of 2D
materials that might have distinct and useful properties. "The rich variety of
properties that 2D layer materials offer can potentially be engineered on
demand, and they create exciting prospects for applications such as in
electronics, sensing, photonics, flexible electronics, energy harvesting and
storage, thermal management, mechanical structures, catalysis, and bio-
engineering in the future," (NSF EFRI-2014 program solicitation). In this
proposal, the aim is to educate the next generation of scientists and engineers
to address the grand challenges in energy, where an interdisciplinary team with
complimentary expertise will use an integrated approach for research and
outreach. Based on the rapid progress made by the PIs in the 2D layered
materials and heterostructure growth by molecular beam epitaxy, this EFRI team
proposes transformative approaches to control electronic doping and
heterostructure formation with monolayer precision. Based on the resulting
materials, the team will also explore theoretically and experimentally the
following three device themes. 1) Beyond CMOS switches: searching for correlated
effects. This represents a fundamental departure from the conventional
electronic switch mechanism. If successful, not only will the basic science in
correlated electron systems be advanced, but this will also lead to more energy
efficient switches, which addresses an urgent national need and grand challenge.
2) Gated RF oscillators: exploring charge density waves. This also represents a
fundamental departure from the conventional RF sources. Gated charge density
waves promises a tunable RF source over an extremely wide bandwidth in the
terahertz frequency region, which is a critical element in closing the THz
technology gap. 3) Gated thermoelectric batteries: investigating thermoelectric
properties of 2D crystals. The TMD materials have a unique combination of low
thermal conductivity and high electrical conductivity. Their 2D nature also
provides an ideal platform to investigate 2D thermoelectric effects.