* 1433054
* EAGER: Submicron Fracture Toughness Measurements for Cement Paste using Focused Ion Beam (FIB) and Nanoindentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Christopher Bobko, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 79,974.00

The research objective of this Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to measure the fracture toughness of cement paste at submicron
length scales using nanoindentation experiments with Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
milled sample structures. Modeling fracture and plastic failure of cement and
concrete materials often involves introducing the concept of microcracks, which
propagate and eventually coalesce to cause material failure at larger scales.
The small scale of these cracks and the volumes around them pose many challenges
for measurements and modeling. New experimental techniques are required to
quantitatively assess the quasi-brittle failure mechanisms at small scales that
govern microcracking and eventually material failure. Research tasks will begin
with development of experimental methods to create sample micro-structures using
FIB milling. Micropillars, notched beams, and wedge-splitting geometries are
will be tried as alternatives. Next, these sample structures will be tested
using nanoindentation equipment to apply loads and measure displacements. This
data will be analyzed to deliver strength and fracture toughness properties.
Finally, sample data will be collected to build a preliminary statistical model
of measured properties, focusing on the ability to measure material properties
that are repeatable within each phase but distinguishable between phases.

The production of cement generates between 3-5 percent of total carbon dioxide
emissions worldwide, but this could be significantly reduced if concrete is
engineered to be more resistant to quasi-brittle failure. Damage and failure of
concrete is often modeled by invoking the existence of microcracks in cement
paste, but the properties of these microcracks and the material behaviors that
lead to microcracks are not well understood. Concrete damage from extreme
loading conditions or from durability issues including alkali-silica reaction,
freeze-thaw cycles, reinforcement corrosion, and delayed ettringite formation
that lead to microcracking may be understood and prevented if the origins of
microcracking are understood. New knowledge about the fundamental origins of
failure behaviors of will enable rational design of modified and new materials
that will lead to more efficient use of natural resources and more sustainable
and resilient structures. The research in this project represents an important
first step towards this overall goal, and will enable future research to more
broadly characterize the failure behavior of cement and concrete at small length
scales. The techniques developed will be applicable to a wide range of other
materials, including sedimentary rocks such as shale and carbonates, and
biological materials such as bones, teeth, and shells.