* 1433681
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Socioeconomic and Spatio-Temporal Dimensions of the Geography of Food Access
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Daoqin Tong, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2017
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate food access and
food security issues by assessing how people's daily activities, the spatial and
temporal dimensions of their urban trip-making, and their demographic and
socioeconomic characteristics affect the ways food is accessed by different
populations. Special attention will be focused on the ability of low-income and
disadvantaged populations to access food and nutrition-assistance services. The
project will provide new knowledge regarding the geography of food access, time
geography, and location science by providing a new perspective for better
understanding the complexity of food access that explicitly incorporates travel
patters with socioeconomic characteristics rather than relying on more
traditional, simplistic measures that focused on spatial proximity and distance
between homes and food stores. The project will provide new insights into
travel-related issues associated with access to food and nutrition-assistance
services for the low-income population, the elderly, and other disadvantaged
groups with special needs, and the new spatial optimization model will
contribute to the literature in location science that largely has focused on the
spatial context and ignored the temporal variation of supply and demand across
space. The project will yield a more suitable planning mechanism for service and
facility planning that incorporates the spatial and temporal patterns of the
population demand. The project's emphasis on food access for low-income and
other disadvantaged populations will offer insights to agencies, groups, and
policy makers seeking to improve access and service to food. Because the
doctoral student is working with a local government agency, she will make
readily accessible models and findings that can help the agency determine the
best sites and time windows for providing food and nutrition assistance.
Although this project is being conducted in Tucson, Arizona, project findings
and outcomes will be adaptable for many other settings. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of this project, the doctoral
student will investigate how people's decisions about whether, where, and when
to obtain food are affected by their daily activities and travel patterns. She
will examine the space-time access patterns of low-income population for food-
assistance services, and she will compare them with the food-access patterns of
the general population. She also will develop and test new models that
incorporate people's daily travel patterns into planning for food and nutrition
assistance. She will use a unique household travel dataset with detailed space-
time travel activities as well as data on emergency food services sponsored by
The Emergency Food Assistance Program, a federally sponsored program that helps
supplement the diets of low-income population in order to relieve hunger on a
short-term basis. The student will conduct questionnaires, interviews, and focus
group studies at diverse food-access points to identify travel patterns and the
needs of the disadvantaged populations. In the final stage of the project, she
will develop spatial optimization models will be developed that incorporate
travel dynamics into service-facility planning.