* 1433378
* EFRI 2-DARE:  2D Crystals formed by Activated Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 2,348,215.00

Non-Technical: Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) crystallize as two-
dimensional sheets of atoms, giving them unusual electronic properties that can
be varied by changing the number, arrangement and compositions of the layers.
The adjustment of these parameters provides manufacturing challenges that must
be overcome to realize potential applications in electronics, photonics and
related technologies. The project will research new deposition and processing
methods for novel thin film and superconducting devices. This research will
enable atomic level film formation at low temperatures that are compatible with
low-cost glass and plastic substrates. Techniques to integrate metal contact
layers and dielectric films with TMCs to produe working devices will also be
researched. The project will support the research of five graduate students and
summer research opportunities for undergraduates and high school students from
underrepresented groups and economically challenged regions of Pennsylvania.
Undergraduates will also participate in the project as part of their senior
capstone engineering design project organized through the Learning Factory at
Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This EFRI 2-DARE project is aimed at
the development of new synthetic routes and integration strategies for monolayer
and multilayer transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) to enable discovery of
fundamental structure-property relationships, the exploration of novel physical
phenomena, and the creation of new thin film and superconducting device
technologies. An activated atomic layer deposition (ALD) process for WSe2, FeSe,
NbSe2 and related 2D materials will be developed that incorporates thermal and
plasma sources to promote precursor decomposition, thereby enabling reduced
substrate temperatures that are needed for deposition and dielectric/metal
integration on van der Waals surfaces. Epitaxial templating and substrate
patterning will be used to control nucleation and promote in-plane forces to
induce self-assembly of 2D islands over large areas. In-situ diagnostics will be
used to provide insights into the ALD chemistry. Ultra-high resolution
aberration-corrected (scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM)
imaging and related spectroscopy techniques will enable direct imaging and
chemical characterization of defects in monolayer and multilayer films,
providing information not always accessible by conventional TEM. Device
fabrication processes will be developed to enable detailed studies of electrical
transport and superconductivity in TMCs. Gated current-voltage measurements,
Hall-effect, and quasi-static capacitance-voltage measurements will be used to
characterize the transport properties of WSe2 and WS2 thin film devices.
Superconductivity in gated FeSe and NbSe2 structures will also be examined to
seek high-temperature and unconventional superconductivity.