* 1433690
* Scholarship for Service @ Carnegie Mellon
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Patrick Tague, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 5,903,723.00

This project seeks to continue Carnegie Mellon University participation in the
CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified
Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce. This
project will prepare the nation?s cybersecurity workforce through advanced
studies with interdisciplinary strengths in engineering, computer science,
humanities, management and policy, as defined by the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Workforce Framework. It will support 4 cohorts of
students, each comprised of approximately seven students with a technical focus
in the Master of Science in Information Security Technology and Management
program and up to four students with a policy focus in the Master of Science in
Information Security Policy and Management program. This program will require a
course in ethics for all CyberCorps® SFS students and a project in
cybersecurity, either as part of their formal curriculum or through a research
assistantship. &lt;br/&gt; The NSF?s CyberCorps® SFS program funds projects that
address Cybersecurity education and workforce development. The Scholarship Track
provides funding to award scholarships to students in Cybersecurity. In return
for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal,
State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related to
Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. The Capacity
Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability of the
United States higher education enterprise to produce Cybersecurity
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the U.S. federal government has
hired 148 Carnegie Mellon CyberCorps® SFS graduates who have gone on to serve
and protect the nation?s information infrastructure at the Department of
Defense, National Security Agency, Federally Funded Research and Development
Centers (FFRDC) and many other federal organizations. Carnegie Mellon has earned
three national Center of Academic Excellence (CAE) designations in the areas of
Information Assurance, Research and Cyber Operations. Leading cybersecurity
researchers, investigators and teaching faculty work side by side with the
CyberCorps® SFS students to explore and advance critical areas such as software
security, cryptography, reverse engineering, privacy, biometrics and cyber
forensics.