* 1433838
* Engaging Middle School Girls in Computational Electronic Design
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nichole Pinkard, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,365,379.00

This project will engage middle-school urban girls in learning sophisticated
computer programming and electronics within supportive communities where the
learning is embedded in meaningful projects. The project addresses the national
need to engage more girls in computer science and engineering. It is a hybrid
online and school-based/out-of-school (OST) program that integrates programming
and electronics through interactive narratives. The challenges will require
coding, designing, circuitry, or fabrication for the solutions using e-textiles,
an activity that should prove naturally engaging for girls. E-textiles are
fabrics that enable digital components, such as LEDs, speakers, sensors, mini-
computers and other electronics to be embedded in them. The use of commercial
E-textiles is rapidly growing, ranging from e-textiles that enable health
monitoring, monitoring the positions of soldiers in action, or monitoring of
pilot or driver fatigue. Program challenges, presented through the iRemix online
social learning network (SLN), will support participants in learning a skill so
they level up (i.e., master a level in a challenge) and eventually earn
electronic badges. For example, to level up in electronics, girls will have to
learn the fundamentals of both series and parallel circuits. By developing their
skills across these areas, girls will be able to create e-textiles. Participants
will work face-to-face and remotely with peers and mentors on projects that are
supported by the SLN and embedded in a compelling storyline. As girls level-up,
they will unlock access to more advanced tools and a richer set of e-textile
fabrication materials. Participants will be recruited from Chicago-area charter
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the hypothesis that
the girls involved within this girl-friendly context will develop a mastery of
these areas at least equal to boys and develop the perception that women can
succeed and be happy in STEM careers. The research-based rationale is that
interest in STEM develops through exposure to STEM in engaging ways and interest
can deepen from a casual interest to well-developed individual interest through
supportive activities that take place across time and space. The project will
use a mixed-methods approach to research that will gather and analyze data
regarding baseline digital and technical fluency, student surveys (access,
experience and future possibilities, online activities, analysis of social
network participation, and profiles of student engagement.