* 1433990
* Sensory Bases and Evolution  of Interspecific Eavesdropping
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Ximena Bernal, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 466,991.00

Males often use conspicuous signals to attract females but, in doing so, they
may also attract the unwanted attention of parasites. How does one species come
to have the ability to eavesdrop on the signals of other species? This project
will address this question integrating multiple levels of analysis (behavioral,
acoustical, biomechanical, and physiological) in laboratory and field
experiments to comprehensively investigate eavesdropping behavior in of midges
that home-in on the calls of singing frogs. This investigation will characterize
the midge's ear and relate the midge's hearing ability to its evolutionary
origins. This project will ultimately determine the sensory and behavioral
adaptations driven the ecology and evolution of eavesdropping in frog-biting
midges.

Intellectual Merit: The project will address a long-standing biological mystery
by exploring the origins of eavesdropping of between animal species. By
examining an evolutionary innovations in insect hearing, this study will have
implications for microphone design, bioacoustics and the co-evolution of sexual
and exploitive communication. In addition, the midge-frog system has parallels
to the mosquito-human relationship, which enlarges the evolutionary scope of the
questions addressed here. Overall, understanding the mechanisms underlying the
evolution and sensory ecology of eavesdropping will increase our understanding
of exploitation in animal communication systems.

Broader Impacts: Training of undergraduate and graduate students in cutting edge
techniques in animal communication and neuroethology will be an important
component of this project. Additional educational activities will include
workshops at elementary schools about frog calling behavior and eavesdroppers to
generate interest and enthusiasm about animal behavior and science in general.