* 1433953
* Cascading of Ocean Waters at the Continental Shelf Edge:  Winds, Cooling and Stability
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Kenneth Brink, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 421,582.00

Cascading refers to the process by which dense continental shelf waters pass
onto the continental slope and then sink to an equilibrium depth. This is the
way that much of the ocean's deepest waters are formed, for example in the
Weddell Sea off Antarctica. As such, it is important for shaping the global
meridional overturning circulation, and thus it is influential for climate in
general. It is argued that in most cases, cascading occurs in settings where
current variability is dominated by the eddy field. This study seeks to
understand cascading in the presence of wind and/or topographic effects. This
work will support the PhD research and career preparation of a graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When water becomes denser over the shelf (due to cooling,
brine rejection or evaporation), the resulting convection and cross-shelf
density gradient lead to an eddy field that drives cascading across the shelf
edge. This process is well understood in simple geometries when there are no
complicating effects due to winds. Also, the behavior of dense slope currents
(and their related eddies), such as those generated at the Denmark Strait or at
Gibraltar, is also well-studied. This project will focus on two other aspects of
the cascading problem. 1) A shelf-edge alongshore current is found off East
Greenland, and these flow features are not uncommon globally. This project will
address the stability of these currents, and, more importantly, the ability of
the resulting eddy field to expedite cascading. 2) Winds are an important driver
over much of the coastal ocean, so it makes sense to ask how they affect cross-
shelf transports in a region where intense surface cooling creates eddies that
contribute to cascading. It appears likely that wind and buoyancy forcing will
couple nonlinearly, so that we should not think about a simple linear
superposition of the two effects. Thus, this project will attack the question of
how these two important forcing agents (plus irregular topography) affect each
other. The approach used to address these problems involves multiple runs of
idealized (meaning, for example, simple geometries, but using a realistic range
of parameters such as forcing amplitude) numerical models, followed by a
dynamically based scaling analysis that encapsulates the results quantitatively
and that clarifies the processes involved.