* 1433753
* UTD SFS Renewal: Growing a Cybersecurity Community thru SFS Scholarship Program at UTD
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2021
* USD 4,481,855.00

This project seeks to continue the University of Texas at Dallas' (UTD)
participation in the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
prepare highly-qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the
government workforce. The main goals of this project, hosted at a Center for
Academic Excellence in Education and Research, are: (1) to train up to 28 highly
qualified graduate students to become expert professionals in various areas of
Cybersecurity, and (2) to provide necessary mentoring and support to
successfully place them in federal jobs to help address the shortage of skilled
professionals in this critical area. The students will complete a graduate
concentration track in Cybersecurity in the Computer Science department or a new
Cybersecurity interdisciplinary certificate as part of the Systems Engineering
program. A course on digital forensics is a collaborative effort with the North
Texas FBI labs. UTD CyberCorps® SFS students are involved in active research and
have published numerous papers in prestigious journals and conferences. The
NSF's CyberCorps® SFS program funds projects that address cybersecurity
education and workforce development. The Scholarship Track provides funding to
award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In return for their
scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal, State, Local,
or Tribal Government organization in a position related to cybersecurity for a
period equal to the length of the scholarship. The Capacity Track seeks
innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability of the United States
higher education enterprise to produce cybersecurity professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the program has graduated 22 CyberCorps® SFS
students and almost doubled graduate student enrollment in Cybersecurity
courses. This project involves several different aspects to build a
comprehensive program and to provide awareness, training and formal education in
Cybersecurity to various groups of the population. The annual Texas Security
Awareness Week event will serve as a state-wide Cybersecurity outreach activity.
UTD CyberCorps® SFS students become experts in high-demand areas such as
malicious code analysis. They learn practical aspects of computer systems during
hands-on labs including binary code analysis, kernel internals, malware
unpacking, or library interposition to transparently harden software.