* 1433651
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Reindeer and Dogs in Modern Tozhu Mixed Economy in the Republic of Tyva (Russia)
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2015
* Patrick Plattet, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 11/30/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports ethnographic research in the Republic of Tyva (southern
Siberia, Russian Federation). It examines the complex economic and social
relationships that have evolved between indigenous hunters and herders and their
working reindeer, dogs, and horses. The award will allow to study how
centralized economic planning affected the relationships between Tozhu reindeer
herders and hunters of Siberia and how, when these restrictions were removed,
the Tozhu successfully re-adapted to their ancestral way of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher accurately argues that understanding these
relationships are key to a wider understanding of indigenous economies'
resilience to change and the long-term sustainability of indigenous livelihoods
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tozhu traditionally relied on reindeer, dogs,
and horses for food, transportation, and hunting. However, during the Soviet era
large-scale reindeer herding was promoted by the government, which also
instituted a policy of killing dogs, which ultimately caused the disappearance
of indigenous breeds. In the post-Soviet system, dogs have once again become an
integral part of hunting and herding among the Tozhu and this research aims to
understand the complex role human-animal relationships play in the foundation of
the Tozhu reindeer herding communities in the 21st century. Very little research
has been done on this topic and none in this region of Siberia.