* 1433903
* EAGER: The Effects of Molecular Architectures on Lipid-Based Nanoparticulate Interaction through Polymer Linkers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Mu-Ping Nieh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 11/30/2016
* USD 149,920.00

PI: Nieh, Mu-Ping &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1433903&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Connecticut &lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: The Effects of Molecular
Architectures on Lipid-Based Nanoparticulate Interaction through Polymer
Linkers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator (PI), Professor Mu-Ping
Nieh from the University of Connecticut is proposing to follow a recent
discovery in his laboratory that he can self-assemble "stringed" clusters of
lipid vesicles or bilayer disks. These structures are quite novel and almost
nothing is known about them, so the PI proposes an EAGER to determine how to
control the "stringing" mechanism and whether they have the necessary properties
for sensing and controlled-release of therapeutics for delivery. If successful,
the platform of "stringed" NP clusters can be used for, but not limited to, two
immediate applications that is part of the PI's long-range research vision:
single-cell detection and theranostic delivery. The former will significantly
impact the public health in food/water safety since rapid and instrument-free
and low-cost single-pathogen detection can be performed service-at-point without
trained personnel, greatly benefiting people who live in a remote area and have
no access to testing instruments. The latter will provide insight to the
molecular design of delivery nanocarriers to target cancers or other diseases
more effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has a history of being committed
to student training for both undergraduates and graduates. Due to the simplicity
of the sample preparation, undergraduates involved in the project will have
hands-on experience in conducting this research. Moreover, this project can
provide good demonstrations of nanotechnology for the public and K-12 students.
An eventual successful outcome of stable ?stringed? NPs could have significant
impact on single-cell (single-pathogen) detection because of lower costs and
higher sensitivity attainable. Ultimately, instrument-free detection may be
achievable, allowing for service-at-point sensing for infectious diseases. If
this template can be shown to be potentially useful for incorporation of
hydrophobic molecules, then it also has potential as theranostic delivery
carriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to investigate several
parameters, which can potentially control the 'stringing' mechanism, including
the NP's curvature, the crystallinity of the lipid hydrocarbon chains, the
defects induced by the short-chain lipid, the hydrophobicity of two end blocks
of the copolymer, and the entrapped molecules (or surface-modified molecules).
The lipid mixture in study will be composed of long-chain dipalmitoyl (di-C16)
phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) and short-chain dihexanoyl (di-C6)
phosphatidylcholine (DHPC) doped with a slightly charged long-chain lipid,
dipalmitoyl phosphatidylglycerol (DPPG) where stable nanodiscs and nanovesicles
can be self-assembled. The objective of these initial studies is to establish a
baseline for how to control stability. Further studies will then be done on the
incorporation of hydrophobic moieties into the clusters to test their stability
for potential applications that will involve the incorporation of hydrophobic
molecules into the bilayer.