* 1433082
* International Quantum Cascade Laser School and Workshop 2014. To Be Held in Policoro (Matera)Italy from September 7-12 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Benjamin Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests funding from the National Science Foundation to support
the International Quantum Cascade Laser School and Workshop (IQCLSW), which is
to be held in Policoro (Matera) Italy from September 7-12 2014. The IQCLSW
workshop serves as a think-tank where the top researchers will report on recent
developments in the field of quantum-cascade (QCL) lasers, and brainstorm on
promising new directions ranging from questions of basic device physics to
applications. New strategic directions are expected to emerge and help define a
roadmap for future development of QCL technology. An important component is the
2-day school portion, in which hour-long tutorial presentations are aimed at
graduate students to rapidly acquaint them with the fundamentals of this rapidly
moving field. Applications, such as high-resolution spectroscopy, chemical
sensing for a variety of diagnostic uses, coherent detection, imaging, and
infrared countermeasures will be discussed.

Topics to be covered at IQCLSW include quantum cascade laser device design,
modeling, characterization and testing, as well as the basics of QCL transport
and optical confinement.. This workshop will address both the fundamental
physics aspect of these devices as well as new developments. The 3-day workshop
session will have approximately 30-35 invited and contributed talks, as well as
poster sessions. There will be 3 keynote speakers given by figures who have
played a major role in QC-laser development over a sustained time period. An
important facet of this is the international scientific participation and
dissemination of information, which may lead to new collaborations and advances
in the state of the art. This workshop will have a significant focus on
applications and will engage the nascent QCL industry. The school portion is
directly aimed at the training and education of graduate-student researchers.
The IQCLSW websites will archive the workshop presentations for general access.
Specifically, the NSF funding will help reduce the registration fees for
students, and will provide travel support for US attendees (with priority
towards student presenters).