* 1433761
* Strategies: Water SCIENCE: Supporting Collaborative Inquiry, Engineering, and Career Exploration with Water
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Carolyn Staudt, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,199,608.00

As part of an overall strategy to develop understandings of best practice
factors, contexts and processes contributing to K-12 students' motivation and
participation in STEM, the ITEST Program funds foundational and applied research
projects that build student awareness of STEM and STEM-related careers. This
ITEST Strategies project, Supporting Collaborative Inquiry, Engineering, and
Career Exploration with Water (Water SCIENCE), engages middle school students in
project-based learning around their community's water resources. Through the
innovative use of technology the project enables data sharing among schools in
different parts of the country and provides a forum for the development of a
professional learning community for teachers. The project turns tablet computers
now found in secondary schools into mobile science labs, harnessing the built-in
cameras for chemical and visual analysis of water
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 30 middle school science teachers from
diverse districts in southern Arizona, southeastern Pennsylvania, and Eastern
Massachusetts are participating serving more than 2000 middle school students
over the three-year project. Students will use an innovative mobile lab to
perform water quality analysis and aggregate the results on an existing data
sharing platform. In consultation with university mentors and stem
professionals, students design and conduct classroom engineering projects that
model real-world technologies for improving water quality. Virtual mentoring
sessions provide opportunities for students to ask questions of STEM
professionals and learn about careers in environmental science and conservation.
As a culminating experience students engage in a role-playing exercise involving
a simulated water emergency. Teachers will receive over 40 hours of professional
development as well as a classroom set of hands-on science and engineering
materials undergraduate and graduate students will participate as mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic investigation of the impact of integrating
purposefully designed inquiry, engineering, and career orientation activities
into science instruction at the middle school level will be conducted. Student
outcomes explored include stem career awareness and interests, stem content
knowledge, and the development of supportive mentoring relationships with
university students and stem professionals. Comprehensive data will be collected
using a variety of research instruments and analyzed both statistically and
qualitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project team is comprised of
specialists in K-12 curriculum and educational technology development (Concord
Consortium), environmental sustainability (Arizona State University), freshwater
science and conservation (Stroud Water Resource Center), and hands-on
engineering education (Machine Science, Inc.). The Water SCIENCE project helps
advance NSF's goal of broadening participation and diversifying the STEM
workforce.