* 1433514
* AGS-PRF:  Building a Microfluidic Platform to Study Atmospheric Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Andrew Metcalf, Metcalf                 Andrew         R
* Fellowship Award
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2016
* USD 172,000.00

Microfluidics is a multidisciplinary technique with applications in several
science and engineering disciplines that yields practical design of systems in
which small volumes (microliters or less) of fluids can be handled. Typically,
gas bubbles or liquid droplets can be moved, mixed, separated or otherwise
processed at a micro domain, and in ways that bulk processing simply cannot
attain. [Common examples are ink-jet printers, or 'lab-on-chip' analysis
systems].

There are several applications to the study of the physics and chemistry of
individual, or group aerosol particles or droplets to which microfluidic
approaches may be well tasked. Microfluidics allows precise control over droplet
size and shape. The chemical composition of generated droplets will be chosen in
order to replicate ambient atmospheric aerosol particles. When trapped in a
hydrodynamic trap, a holding device, these aerosol mimics will be further
examined by microscopy with an attached high-speed camera. Experiments with
changing fluid flow rates, and, thus, extensional strain rate on the droplets,
along with temperature, will change the environmental conditions experienced by
the droplets. Direct educational benefits include the mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students in a multi-disciplinary research group. The project has
the potential to foster increased partnerships between academia and industry
because the methods used in this project have general applicability.