* 1433140
* Continuation of the LARISSA Continuous GPS Network in View of Observed Dynamic Response to Antarctic Peninsula Ice Mass Balance and Required Geologic Constraints
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Eugene Domack, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 06/30/2017
* USD 37,480.00

This project aims to identify which portions of the glacial cover in the
Antarctic Peninsula are losing mass to the ocean. This is an important issue to
resolve because the Antarctic Peninsula is warming at a faster rate than any
other region across the earth. Even though glaciers across the Antarctic
Peninsula are small, compared to the continental ice sheet, defining how rapidly
they respond to both ocean and atmospheric temperature rise is critical. It is
critical because it informs us about the exact mechanisms which regulate ice
flow and melting into the ocean. For instance, after the break- up of the Larsen
Ice Shelf in 2002 many glaciers began to flow rapidly into the sea. Measuring
how much ice was involved is difficult and depends upon accurate estimates of
volume and area. One way to increase the accuracy of our estimates is to measure
how fast the Earth's crust is rebounding or bouncing back, after the ice has
been removed. This rebound effect can be measured with very precise techniques
using instruments locked into ice free bedrock surrounding the area of interest.
These instruments are monitored by a set of positioning satellites (the Global
Positioning System or GPS) in a continuous fashion. Of course the movement of
the Earth's bedrock relates not only to the immediate response but also the
longer term rate that reflects the long vanished ice masses that once covered
the entire Antarctic Peninsula?at the time of the last glaciation. These rebound
measurements can, therefore, also tell us about the amount of ice which covered
the Antarctic Peninsula thousands of years ago. Glacial isostatic rebound is one
of the complicating factors in allowing us to understand how much the larger ice
sheets are losing today, something that can be estimated by satellite techniques
but only within large errors when the isostatic (rebound) correction is
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed consists of maintaining a
set of six rebound stations until the year 2016, allowing for a longer time
series and thus more accurate estimates of immediate elastic and longer term
rebound effects. It also involves the establishment of two additional GPS
stations that will focus on constraining the "bull's eye" of rebound suggested
by measurements over the past two years. In addition, several more geologic data
points will be collected that will help to reconstruct the position of the ice
sheet margin during its recession from the full ice sheet of the last glacial
maximum. These will be based upon the coring of marine sediment sequences now
recognized to have been deposited along the margins of retreating ice sheets and
outlets. Precise dating of the ice margin along with the new and improved
rebound data will help to constrain past ice sheet configurations and refine
geophysical models related to the nature of post glacial rebound. Data
management will be under the auspices of the UNAVCO polar geophysical network or
POLENET and will be publically available at the time of station installation.
This project is a small scale extension of the ongoing LARsen Ice Shelf,
Antarctica Project (LARISSA), an IPY (International Polar Year)-funded
interdisciplinary study aimed at understanding earth system connections related
to the Larsen Ice Shelf and the northern Antarctic Peninsula.