* 1433677
* Strategies: Educational Pathways Into College &amp; Career
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,199,238.00

Educational Pathways Into College and Career is a multi-faceted summer program
designed to equip students from low-performing schools, low-income families and
ethnic/racial groups underrepresented in STEM fields with the knowledge, skills,
and attitudes necessary to succeed in STEM majors and pursue STEM-related
careers. Students, through the course of learning about innovative technologies,
will develop a project that can transform the lives of a community. During the
summer program, students will build real solar electric systems that are
designed to perform for many years, and will learn about electricity, energy,
system design (engineering); they will experiment with solar technologies and
have the opportunity to modify the loads, power production, and energy storage
of the systems. Students will send the solar electric systems they build to
schools or orphanages in developing countries where they will be the only source
of electricity for the school or orphanage, a source of power that is
sustainable, easily maintained, and renewable. The summer program will
incorporate interdisciplinary mathematics, problem solving, critical thinking
and communication to promote STEM literacy and 21st century skills, thereby
strengthening students' readiness for STEM majors and careers. This project will
also include a research component that will study the best ways to integrate
career technical education and service learning into STEM learning, providing a
better understanding of how different elements of the program influence student
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration involving
multiple organizations, including the Lawrence Hall of Science at University of
California, Berkeley (The Hall), Oakland Unified School District (OUSD), We Care
Solar, East Bay College Fund, and the Aspire program. OUSD has recently
incorporated science learning as a key element of its strategic plan. We Care
Solar is a non-profit organization that provides small-scale solar energy
systems to hospitals, orphanages, and schools in the developing world where the
lack of electricity, especially at night, often contributes to high mortality
and low achievement rates. East Bay College Fund is a community-based non-profit
organization that provides scholarships, mentoring ongoing college counseling
and life skills training to public high school students from low income families
and communities with historically low college enrollment and graduation rates.
The Aspire Education Project is an East Bay non-profit organization that
provides academic support tutoring to all students regardless of economic status
to improve their academic performance, standardized test scores, and college
readiness.