* 1433763
* Origin, Storm Track Dynamics and Convective Feedback of African Easterly Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Anantha Aiyyer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2019
* USD 481,728.00

African Easterly Waves (AEWs) are north-south undulations of the African
Easterly jet with wavelengths of 2,000 to 2,500 kilometers that form as far east
as Sudan and propagate westward across the Sahel. They are the principle form of
large-scale weather variability over the Sahel in summer and play a key role in
bringing monsoon rains to this drought-prone region. When AEWs continue their
westward (or easterly) propagation over the Atlantic they can develop into
hurricanes, and it is estimated that 85% of major Atlantic hurricanes (including
hurricane Sandy) form from AEWs. However, existing theories for the origin and
evolution of AEWs do not satisfactorily account for many of their observed
characteristics.

This project investigates several aspects of AEWs, including their origin and
evolution, the structure of the AEW stormtrack (the typical pathway along which
AEWs develop and propagate), intermittency in AEW activity, and interactions
between AEWs and moist convection. A key component of the research, developed in
previous work by the Principal Investigator (PI), is the idea that AEWs are
organized into wave packets in which the dispersion of energy can be tracked
according to an empirically determined group velocity. The dynamics are somewhat
equivalent to the "downstream development" observed in synoptic weather systems
moving along the midlatitude stormtracks, except that in the case of AEWs the
energy propagation can be upstream or downstream (as AEWs form along the African
Easterly Jet, the upstream direction is eastward). Upstream energy propagation
could have a number of significant consequences, including the possibility that
energy from mature AEWs on the western end of the stormtrack could propagate to
the region of AEW genesis on the eastern end of the stormtrack, thereby
promoting the genesis of new AEWs. To some extent, the consequences of upstream
and downstream propagation can be interpreted as the difference between
convective and absolute instabilities of a unstable jet of limited zonal extent.
In convective instability, wave packets growing on the instability of the jet
have downstream energy propagation which moves the packet out of the unstable
region. In absolute instability, the group velocity at the trailing end of the
wave packet is upstream, so that some of the wave packet energy remains in the
unstable region and promotes further growth. Thus, intermittency in AEW activity
could be caused by a transition from absolute to convective instability, as in
the latter case the energy does not propagate upstream into the AEW genesis
region.

The primary tool for research in this project is the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model, a regional atmosphere model applied over Africa north
of the equator and the adjacent portion of the Atlantic. Model simulations are
performed using both the standard full-physics version of the model and an
intermediate complexity version in which external thermal forcing terms are used
to produce an idealized version of the African Easterly Jet and AEW stormtrack.
In addition to simulations designed to examine the role of upstream and
downstream energy dispersion, additional numerical experiments are planned to
examine the dual structure often observed in the AEW stormtrack, in which
southern and northern branches of the stormtrack are found in the free
atmosphere (around 650mb) and in the boundary layer (925mb), respectively.
Coupling of AEWs to convection is also studied, using the full-physics version
of the model. Results of these simulations will be compared to field campaign
data collected in the African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis (AMMA) field
campaign.

The work has broader impacts due to the links between AEWs and Atlantic
hurricanes, including landfalling US hurricanes, and the monsoon rains of the
Sahel. A better understanding of the fundamental dynamics of AEWs could be of
value for forecasting both individual AEWs and also periods of enhanced or
reduced AEW activity. In addition, the work will support and train two graduate
students, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research area.