* 1433290
* AGS-PRF: Towards an Improved Understanding of the Dynamical Effects of Sea Ice Loss on the Extratropical Northern Hemisphere Circulation and Extreme Weather
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* John Dwyer, Dwyer                   John           G
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This award provides funds for a 2-year Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for the
PI, who will work under the mentorship of Professor Paul O'Gorman at the
Massachussetts Institute of Technology. The research topic is the effect of sea
ice loss on atmospheric circulation and extreme weather in the middle latitudes
of the Northern Hemisphere. Three issues in the atmospheric response to sea ice
decline are considered: 1) The location, strength, seasonality, and variability
of the eddy-driven jet and associated storm tracks, as well as the dominant
modes of atmospheric variability such as the Northern Annular Mode; 2) The
propagation of atmospheric waves and eddies, and atmospheric blocking patterns;
and 3) Extreme weather phenomena such as heat waves, cold spells, extreme
precipitation, droughts, and intense extratropical cyclones. The research is
conducted through analysis of observations and climate model simulations of sea
ice decline and atmospheric circulation change. A hierarchy of models at varying
levels of complexity is used to identify and isolate specific climate processes
that determine the atmospheric response to sea ice loss. Factors to be
considered include a possible relationship between sea ice loss and the mean
available potential energy of the midlatitude atmosphere, the reduction in pole-
to-equator temperature gradient accompanying sea ice loss, and changes in the
timing of the seasonal cycle.

The work has broader impacts given the societal consequences of extreme weather
events and the benefits that would come for a better understanding of how these
events may change due to the dramatic loss of sea ice in the Arctic. In
addition, the project supports a postdoctoral researcher who is at the beginning
of his scientific career, thereby providing for the future scientific workforce
in this area. An undergraduate student will also be engaged in the research and
mentored by the PI.