* 1433345
* Collaborative Research: Innovative Technology-Enabled Astronomy for Middle Schools II (ITEAMS II)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mary Dussault, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 590,907.00

Nationwide, middle-school youth from underrepresented communities have few
opportunities to engage in authentic STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics) investigations that build on the students' intrinsic interests in
space science and robotics to increase their interests in both ICT (Information
and Communication Technologies) and STEM careers. ITEAMS II is a collaborative
project of science educators and researchers at the Harvard College Observatory
and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. It is a nationwide online
learning community of grades 5-8 students, educators, and parents and
caregivers. The project goal is to transfer the intrinsic and active learning of
students in space science and robotics into increased interest in ICT or STEM
careers. ITEAMS II features research-quality, remotely-controlled, online
telescopes (http://mo-www.harvard.edu/Micro-Observatory/ ) accessible from
school, home, or any location with internet connection, plus complementary
curricula. ITEAMS II will use a wide range of cyber-learning tools to provide
ongoing professional development to the educators who are central to the online
learning community. At least 80 educators and upwards of 120 students will be
involved over the course of the three-year
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students access the robotic telescopes to acquire
solar system or deep space images, and use project software to process the
images. Then as part of an online learning community the students will engage in
events and contests, and complete and share capstone projects. Educators will
participate in online synchronous and asynchronous professional development and
take on leadership roles in the learning community. Upwards of 150 parents will
be involved each year, collaborating with their children in activities from
using the telescopes to shared learning in community events.