* 1433349
* US GEOTRACES ARCTIC: Measuring stable isotopes of carbon in dissolved inorganic carbon and oxygen/argon gas ratios to show impact of organic matter export on nutrient distributions
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2018
* USD 414,908.00

A scientist from the University of Washington will participate in the 2015 U.S.
GEOTRACES Arctic Ocean cruise and measure the vertical distribution of the
stable isotopes of carbon found in dissolved inorganic carbon (del13C), a tracer
of biogeochemical cycling. In addition, he will determine the spatial variation
in the ratio of oxygen gas to argon gas (O2/Ar) in surface water samples because
this ratio can be used as a proxy for organic matter export. In common with
other multinational initiatives in the International GEOTRACES Program, the
goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and quantify
fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the
ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing
environmental conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life, others are
known biological toxins, and still others are important because they can be used
as tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the
sea. Results from this study will further our understanding of the processes
that control observed trace elements, nutrients, and the stable carbon isotopes
in dissolved inorganic carbon in the present day ocean and use this information
to gain information on past changes in ocean circulation on carbon cycling. This
project will also provide training opportunities for undergraduate students, and
results will be integrated into public outreach activities and material for
class lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the impact of
physical and biological processes on the distribution of nutrient and trace
elements in the modern ocean is critical to our interpretation of future changes
in their distributions in the Arctic and their utility as proxies of circulation
and biological pump conditions in the historic ocean. One key parameter needed
to understand these processes is del13C of dissolved inorganic carbon, for which
little to no data currently exists in the Arctic Ocean. This study will aim to
measure the depth distribution of the del13C of dissolved inorganic carbon and
the dissolved O2/Ar ratio in the surface layer of the ocean. These measurements
will help to quantify the contributions of chemical processes and the biological
pump on the spatial distribution of nutrients, trace elements, and del13C, as
well as estimate organic matter export rates from the surface ocean.