* 1433008
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: MDONS (Massively Distributed Online Neuroscience) for Improving Virtual Experience
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Erik Viirre, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2015
* USD 130,000.00

The project proposes to create a distributed, multi-user social computing
environment that will develop the capabilities of human Electroencephalography
(EEG) to analyze users engagement with digitally based experiences. For this
project, users will wear non-invasive, EEG headsets while navigating a shared
virtual world. Beginning with a handful of EEG systems, the team will scale up
over the course of the project to gather signals from dozens of users, providing
a basis for larger scale studies. By comparing the EEG signals with each
participants activities in virtual world, and with the brain activity and the
activities of other users, a model of human brain activity will be developed for
different types of behavior profiles and subjective states. This will allow
significant improvement for the development of neural markers of human
perceptual, cognitive and affective states, the parsing of EEG signals, the
applicability of EEG interfaces to new types of experiences, all of which can
enhance distance learning, collaborative distributed work, improved mobile
computing interfaces and health care applications. The project will advance the
capabilities for determining an individuals cognitive state by the creation of
new computing methods utilizing comparative EEG analysis and data analysis of
event states in a digital simulation. Bringing methods of large scale data
analysis to articulate patterns across many users in the situated milieu of the
online virtual world will create a new method to utilize EEG analysis to infer
human subjective experience. The necessity of conducting this analysis in real-
time, with data gathered from distributed, wireless EEG instruments will provide
the impetus for utilizing accelerated hybrid multi-core techniques to bear on
this domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the project will be
applicable for a variety of digital environments including computer aided
learning and training, digitally mediated collaborative work environments,
visualization of complex data sets, and digitally based entertainment
experiences such as virtual worlds and computer games. The project will improve
the functionality and outcomes of these digital media environments, better
adjusting them to the cognitive states of the users. The PIs will train and
employ a diverse body of participants to be involved in these activities. As
part of an internship program at the Preuss School, a nationally recognized
middle and high school on the campus of UCSD, UCSD faculty and staff mentor high
school seniors to provide these students valuable experiences in a research
laboratory. In addition, UMBC operates the very successful Meyerhoff program for
minority students, primarily African-American, for which over 90% of a yearly
entrance number of more than fifty go on to graduate school in science or
engineering. Many of these students are computer science majors that have had
the elective graduate course of Service Oriented Computing for Scientists and
Engineers.