* 1433432
* AGS-PRF: Atmospheric Lifecycle of Organic Carbon Through Multiple Generations of Aging
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Gabriel Isaacman-VanWertz, Isaacman-VanWertz, Gabriel A
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This is a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship with the objective of characterizing
the chemical properties of gas- and particle-phase carbon in the atmosphere.
Laboratory experiments will be conducted in an environmental chamber to observe
the formation of secondary organic aerosol and the aging of organic compounds
over several days. The results will lead to a better understanding of the
atmospheric carbon cycle essential for developing policies that mitigate the
effects of organic carbon on air quality and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experiments will take place in a reaction chamber at MIT using a Total Gas-phase
Organics (TGO) instrument, an Aerodyne Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (AMS), a
Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer (CIMS), and other instrumentation to
provide detailed compositional data about specific classes of compounds and
their oxidation products. Up to three days of atmospheric aging will be
simulated in the reaction chamber through the atmospheric oxidation of
precursors using the photolytic formation of hydroxyl radical from a steady
stream of nitrous acid. Several reduced parameter chemical representations will
be developed to describe the chemical properties and chemical transformations of
organic aerosol and to model its oxidation pathways in the atmosphere. The
experiments will help to constrain the budget of total carbon in the atmosphere.