* 1433440
* A Reciprocal Model for Teaching and Learning Computational Competencies: Connecting Pre-Service Teachers and Urban Latino Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Anton Puvirajah, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 01/31/2020
* USD 773,237.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by engaging students
and teachers in authentic computational tasks associated with real-world
challenges. The after-school program will engage urban Latino middle school and
high school students in activities aimed at developing computational
competencies and promoting interests in pursuing computer science related
studies and careers. The project will also engage pre-service teachers in a new
professional development model that will include a specialized computer science
teaching methods course, and will have them teach computational competencies in
the after-school program. A new 16-month computer science curriculum will be
designed and tested for the College and Beyond after-school program sponsored by
the Latin American Association. The curriculum activities will be organized
around four themes: Block-Based Programming, Embedded Systems, Game Development,
and App(lication) Development. Students will develop skills in planning,
designing, programming, running, and debugging algorithms to solve problems and
accomplish tasks. The interactive curriculum will incorporate a variety of
learning tools that will provide multiple ways for students to learn and
demonstrate their computational competencies. As students become more familiar
with designing algorithms that are efficient, they will also come to appreciate
the importance of logical reasoning, creativity, and working within real-world
constraints to their designs. Development of the new curriculum will be guided
by input from focus groups that include Latino students, mentors and teachers
who work with Latino students, and representatives of industry. In conjunction
with the new curriculum, new instruments will be developed and tested to measure
shifts in student motivation, attitudes, and competencies in computational
thinking, as well as pre-service teacher aptitude, motivation, and aspirations
related to teaching computational competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
design and development research project that will iteratively design, develop
and test a new curriculum, a set of assessment instruments, and a computer
science education methods course for pre-service teachers. Project participants
will include 50 Latino middle school students, 50 Latino high school students,
and 16 pre-service STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
teachers over a period of 3 years. Development of the new after-school
curriculum will be framed by the skills and dispositions associated with
computational thinking as defined by the International Society for Technology in
Education and the Computer Science Teachers Association. The project team will
work in partnership with the Latin American Association and the Technology
Association of Georgia Education to ensure that the resulting curriculum is
culturally relevant to the target population and responsive to the real-world
context of the STEM workforce. The project will consist of three phases: a)
resource development; b) resource implementation; and c) pilot testing. Pilot
test quantitative data will be analyzed using descriptive statistics and
repeated measure Analysis of Variance. It is anticipated that student
participants will exhibit improvements in skills, aptitudes, and habits of mind
associated with computational and algorithmic thinking, along with increases in
motivations and aspirations to pursue studies and careers associated with
computing and STEM fields. The project will also produce new and modified
research instruments for measuring these outcomes. The outcomes of this project
will likely have broad impacts on teaching and learning in formal classrooms and
out-of-school learning environments, and on our understanding of how to best
tailor learning experiences to the cultural contexts of underserved and
underrepresented populations.