* 1433442
* NSF/DOE Solar Hydrogen Fuel: Engineering Surfaces, Interfaces, and Bulk Materials for Unassisted Solar Photoelectrochemical (PEC) Water Splitting
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Thomas Jaramillo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2017
* USD 750,000.00

Principal Investigator: Thomas F. Jaramillo&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1433442&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing
urgency to develop renewable alternatives to fossil fuels for satisfying global
energy and chemical demands. Hydrogen gas is a promising renewable fuel that can
be made from sustainable resources. One particularly promising route to produce
renewable hydrogen gas is photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, in which
the photons of solar energy are used to convert water into hydrogen and oxygen
gas in the presence of a catalyst material. This proposed research effort is
aimed at tackling fundamental research challenges in this field, facilitating
the development of active, stable, and readily available materials that can
absorb the sun's photons and use these photons to drive the splitting of water
into hydrogen gas on the surface of the material. Towards this end, the proposed
research effort will modify the surface chemistry of mixtures of metal oxide
compounds and elements abundant in the earth's crust to enable the electronic
properties that improve light absorption and catalyse water splitting. Continued
studies will improve the stability of these materials in water. Graduate
students and undergraduate students will be the primary researchers on this
project, building the skills necessary for them to grow into future leaders in
the renewable energy technology sector. The project activities also feature
significant outreach efforts to the Latino community, including K-12 and
undergraduate students in Puerto Rico, as well as Latino students and parents in
the Palo Alto, California community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen gas is a promising renewable fuel
which can be made from sustainable resources. This project will perform an
integrated study of the surfaces, interfaces, and bulk materials for unassisted
photoelectrochemical (PEC) splitting of water to hydrogen gas. Computational
modeling suggests that a tandem cell consisting of a Si photocathode and a
bismuth vanadate photoanode can reach solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiencies of
10%, corresponding to100 J/s of chemical energy per square meter of solar energy
collection surface. The goal of this project is to gain a fundamental
understanding of materials designed to achieve 10% STH in a tandem cell that is
stable in acid and consists of only earth-abundant elements. To achieve this
goal, Si photocathodes as well as high-performance III-V semiconductor
photoanodes will be engineered for improved activity and stability in acid by
modifying the surface with molybdenum sulfide nano-materials. Similarly, bismuth
vanadate photoanodes will be engineered for improved electronic properties,
durability, and catalysis in acids. Outcomes from studies will provide a
fundamental understanding of the failure mechanisms in PEC materials. Tandem
cells of Si and bismuth vanadate will be fabricated and tested for hydrogen and
oxygen gas production in both the laboratory under controlled conditions and at
outdoor testing facilities under true solar conditions using US Department of
Energy National Renewable Energy Laboratory facilities. Overall, this approach
has the potential to advance fundamental understanding while also creating new
technologies with the potential for efficient and stable hydrogen production by
PEC water-splitting. With respect to education and broadening participation,
graduate students and undergraduate students will be the primary researchers on
this project, building the skills necessary for them to grow into future leaders
in the renewable energy technology sector. The project activities also feature
significant outreach efforts to the Latino community, including K-12 and
undergraduate students in Puerto Rico, as well as Latino students and parents in
the Palo Alto, California community.