* 1433660
* Digital East St. Louis: An Urban Place-Based Learning Model to Promote Information Technology and Computer Science Career Interests of Minority Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Sharon Locke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 846,460.00

A high quality, technical workforce requires that students, particularly those
from underserved populations, have innovative experiences with computational
tools and informational technology. The main goal of this Strategies project is
to experiment with new content and methods for engaging students who are
underrepresented in STEM fields in the computing sciences via a place- based
curriculum that asks students critical questions about the environment and
culture of their own region. Working with East St. Louis teachers and project
partners, students will produce a richly annotated web-based community map with
associated images, texts, audio and video that highlight features and events
deemed important by students and the community. Partners include the Southern
Illinois University (SIUE) STEM Center, the Interdisciplinary Research and
Informatics Scholarship Center, and Curriculum and Instruction Center, the
Department of Historical Studies, the Black Studies Program as well as the
Virtual East St. Louis Historical Society, Harris Stowe State University and the
East St. Louis School district. Beginning in the sixth grade, a cohort of 40
students will progress though a three-year out-of-school program in which they
will engage in increasingly complex projects that involve the use of information
technology and computing tools. Expected outcomes for the students include
increased student self-efficacy, enhanced technological skills, and awareness of
IT and computing careers. The project will also provide extensive professional
development for six teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a
longitudinal quasi experiment that will follow students through the three years
of their participation, including the transition to high school. Data will also
be collected from a comparison group, allowing for an assessment of any outcome
differences from the student cohort participating in the program. Program
evaluation data for answering research questions and assessing progress on the
project objectives will be collected using instrumentation specifically designed
for this study. Data sources include (a) student pre-/post-STEM questionnaires;
(b) student interviews; (c) observations of program activities; (d) student-
created artifacts; (e) annual coursework/career intentions questionnaires; and
(f) parent/caregiver questionnaires and/or interviews.