* 1433086
* Collaborative Research: Reconciliation Between In-situ and Remote Sensing Analyses
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Ralph Albano, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2020
* USD 253,055.00

Eruptions on the Sun eject clouds of electrically charged gas and strong
magnetic fields called coronal mass ejections into space. Some of these clouds
are harmless while others can penetrate into and disrupt the space environment
around Earth in space weather events called geomagnetic storms. Understanding
the solar disturbances that produce storms is important because severe space
weather can damage satellites orbiting around Earth, endanger astronauts, and
even disrupt power grids on the Earth?s surface. Accurate forecasting of strong
magnetic storms is hindered by the fact that the features of a coronal mass
ejection observed near the Sun do not remain constant but continually evolve as
it moves through the background heliosphere on its way to Earth even interacting
with other solar disturbances and with large scale magnetic fields and plasma
structures in interplanetary space. Major storms have occurred due to changes in
the structure of the coronal mass ejection during its propagation to Earth. In
an effort to understand and eventually better predict the impacts of coronal
mass ejections on the Earth?s space environment, this project takes a detailed
look at the changes in the characteristics of coronal mass ejections as they
move through the heliosphere, and at the physical mechanisms responsible for
those changes, by combining remote-sensing and in-situ observations and
comparing to large scale simulations. As an outcome of the project, a large
database of events and associated observations will be made available online for
the broader scientific community. Results will be disseminated in scientific
publications, and through presentations at workshops and conferences. The
project supports the training of a post doctoral researcher who will be based at
the University of New Hampshire but will spend time working with co-
investigators at both NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and the Naval Research
Laboratory. Support of this postdoctoral researcher also serves to broaden the
participation of an underrepresented group in a STEM field. In addition, the
project will contribute to the training of an undergraduate student each year
during the summer months through involvement in high-impact research at NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage
of a suite of satellites currently observing the inner heliosphere with remote-
sensing and in-situ instruments to answer fundamental questions about transient
solar disturbances (in particular, coronal mass ejections) and how they change
during propagation. These satellites include Wind, ACE, Messenger, STEREO, SOHO,
and SDO. Remote-sensing instruments view the coronal mass ejection as it lifts
off the Sun while in-situ instruments measure its internal structure as it
sweeps by on its way outward through the heliosphere. The characteristics of
coronal mass ejections are inferred from each type of measurement using
previously tested models. A key requirement is a consistent and robust
methodology for combining these two very different types of data, which will be
applied to some 100 events. As part of the development of the methodology, the
discrepancies in the inferred characteristics of the coronal mass ejection from
the various data sources will be reconciled. When combined with large-scale
magnetohydrodynamic simulations a study of the underlying physical mechanisms
will be made albeit restricted to a limited number of these cases. Issues to be
investigated include: the identification of unclear solar sources, undefined
expansion rates, evidence of longitudinal/latitudinal deflections in the
propagation, evidence for modifications of the coronal mass ejection due to
collisions with solar wind structures or other transient events, and
identification of magnetic flux-rope rotations.