* 1433014
* Bridge to Research in Environmental and Applied Metagenomics: An inquiry-based module to build core STEM competencies and improve retention among underrepresented students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Susan Alter, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 269,124.00

A major goal of current efforts to improve life science education is to provide
opportunities for students to engage in original research. The Bridge to
Research in Environmental and Applied Genomics (BREAM) project is a scaffolded
inquiry-based teaching and learning module that seeks to develop, implement, and
assess a transformative STEM experience for first-year students through inquiry-
based, relevant science experiences. The long-term goal is to develop a model
for undergraduate research that provides students with early research experience
in a relevant and truly meaningful social context at an urban college. In the
context of a pressing local environmental issue, the restoration of Jamaica Bay
in New York City, students will learn to use cutting-edge scientific tools, such
as applied environmental metagenomics, to investigate ecosystem function and the
restoration of urban estuaries. The project will be implemented at York
College/CUNY, drawing participants from a diverse student population. This
effort is ideally timed to take advantage of the newly energized relationship
between CUNY, the City of New York, and other partners with the goal of
understanding and restoring Jamaica Bay.

This project will bring together several research-informed practices (such as
problem-based learning, authentic research experiences, and scaffolded
instruction) that have been shown to be effective in STEM education with more
novel elements intended to improve student motivation, confidence and expertise.
Scaffolded activities will introduce students to concepts like hypothesis
development, scientific literature review, and experimental design, with an
overwhelming emphasis on active participation. The project will assess whether
explicit scaffolding in an inquiry-based program improves learning and retention
in STEM majors. Project outcomes will be rigorously assessed by external
evaluators based on measured changes in scientific literacy, critical thinking
skills, and communication. The BREAM module will be ultimately disseminated to
educators at regional two- and four-year institutions through seminars and
training workshops.