* 1433422
* Student Support: 2014 Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium; Austin, Texas; 4-6 August 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* David Bourell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 04/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The objective of this grant is to enhance student participation in the 2014
Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium by providing student support. The
conference is a forum bringing together top researchers from around the world
and numerous graduate students to discuss their research, to exchange ideas, to
network, and to develop collaborative relationships centered on additive
manufacturing research. The 2014 Symposium will be held at the Thompson
Conference Center on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin on August
4-6, 2014. All registering students will receive support based on a reduction in
the meeting registration fee. It is estimated that about 90 of the anticipated
240 attendees will be students. Two plenary sessions at the 2014 meeting will
celebrate the 25th anniversary of the meeting by dealing broadly with "looking
back 25 years" and "looking forward 25 years". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2014
Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium will be a mechanism for transfer and
dissemination of knowledge and understanding in the field of additive
manufacturing. Presentations represent state of the art in additive
manufacturing research. The networking of world-class researchers with students
is strong since the meeting encourages through its pricing structure the
involvement of students. Through the heavily cited proceedings, information is
widely disseminated to an extensive network of researchers and students around
the world. The proceedings of previous Symposia are freely available on line at
the conference website, and the 2014 proceedings volume will be similarly
available. The societal impact is identification of pre-commercial technologies
and sharing of information pertaining to additive manufacturing that will
eventually be developed and implemented into machines and processes that will
enhance domestic productivity.