* 1433262
* RAPID: Tag Team Hurricane Haiyan Wind and Storm Evaluations in the Philippines
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Shen-en Chen, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 29,902.00

This Rapid Response Grant (RAPID) project is to establish an interactive web
site for the data obtained by field team documenting damage from Super Typhoon
Haiyan that made landfall in Philippines. Super Typhoon Haiyan may have been the
strongest land falling tropical cyclone in recorded history. The damage caused
by wind, wave, surge, and debris are characteristics of the storm and not highly
dependent on the structures. American Society of Civil Engineers, a professional
organization, has sponsored an eight person team to collect damage data in the
field. This project sponsored by the National Science Foundation will permit
deposition of data at one central web site and allow other designated
specialists in the United States to view the data, make comments and pursue
analysis on real-time basis. The advantage of one web site is that the data will
be preserved at one location.

Because Super Typhoon Haiyan was (probably) the strongest recorded land falling
storm in history, it represents one end of the envelope for design purposes. For
this reason, ascertaining both the hazard and damage levels will give a good
estimate of the types and quantities of damage, and failure mechanisms that
might occur in the United States. The PI will establish a web site on a
dedicated server at the Institution which can provide interactive connection to
field investigators as well as to specialists in the U.S. A protocol will be
developed for data uploading and sharing. The specialists in the U.S. can
provide analysis and comments on the data. The field team will document damage
data on two-story residential structures, churches, airport, bridges, docks and
government buildings. The damage data, comments and analysis will be transferred
to a national repository when available within three years.