* 1433552
* Engaging Youth in Expanded STEM Career Pathways through Clean Energy Literacy Development
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2021
* Kevin Cuff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,900,191.00

The University of California, Berkeley, Lawrence Hall of Science plans a five-
year project to investigate the capacity of a previously developed clean energy-
focused intervention model to affect positive learning outcomes and greater
career awareness among a broader audience of under-represented group students
aged 14-16. Students (approximately 975) at 12 school sites located in East San
Francisco Bay Area urban communities with large underrepresented group
populations will participate in opportunities to learn and apply STEM content
and information and communication technology (ICT) skills in the context of
investigating energy and its usage. These opportunities will be presented in
school day courses and in after school programs. Project participants will:
learn clean energy-related and NGSS-aligned content; conduct research on related
topics that generates scientifically accurate information valuable to local
communities; and make links between particular content areas and a range of
career pathway options. Students also will also make public information sessions
aimed at increasing community awareness of clean/green energy related topics.
This proposal builds on a prior project by studying the capacity of the
intervention to affect student career and academic choices and determining what
modifications will support effective broad-scale implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the impact of its activities
on participant development of functional identity (i.e., the disposition, skills
and knowledge necessary for effectively pursuing and maintaining STEM-related
educational and career-related trajectories in the future). It will address
several key research questions: (1) How successful the intervention model is in
fostering NGSS mastery, in impacting how students value the application of
science, in affecting course taking choices, and career interest with a group
currently not in the traditional STEM pipeline; (2) How the experience of the
intervention model differs for participants who are recruited through different
strategies, i.e. self-selected vs. assigned; and (3) Does the project have an
effect at the school level related to student preparation and career trajectory
as a result of the implementation of the model. Successful implementation of the
project will result in an effective, scalable intervention model that can be
used in a variety of settings for the purpose of preparing youth to participate
in clean energy/STEM related careers.