* 1433185
* A Sleep Education Program to Improve STEM education in Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Janet Roveda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,441,965.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging young
learners in authentic science investigations and linking them to STEM-related
professions. The project will address a real-world issue, sleep insufficiency,
and its health consequences, as an innovative means to foster interests and
engagement in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) among
elementary school students. Partnering with the Catalina Foothills School
District, researchers at the University of Arizona will develop, implement, and
evaluate a new STEM education program that includes: a) a novel set of sleep
science lessons developed in collaboration with Biological Sciences Curriculum
Study; b) project-based learning experiences; and c) out-of-school exposure to
STEM professionals and opportunities for students to present findings from their
own investigations. The project will also develop a teacher professional
development component tailored to the new program, and a strategy for increasing
parental involvement in the learning process. Portable devices will enable
students to track sleep patterns in their own natural environments, and all data
will be routed to a new, online platform, MySleep, which will provide real-time
feedback, options for communications with teachers and parents, and data
analysis capabilities. Through partnerships with businesses and organizations, a
set of supplemental resources will be developed for parents and caregivers,
including webinars and interactive presentations. Study of all these project
components will provide data about strategies caregivers and teachers can adopt
to promote among young students greater understanding of STEM fields, improved
proficiency in STEM skills, and greater interest in pursuing STEM education
pathways and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a three-year design and
development study that will employ a quasi-experimental design with a non-
equivalent control group in years two and three to examine student and parent
outcomes from field tests of newly developed sleep study lessons. Following the
initial year of curriculum development, participants in the first cohort of
field trials during year 2 will include approximately 220 students across four
4th grade classrooms and four 5th grade classrooms in one elementary school.
Another set of 4th and 5th grade classrooms in a school having similar
demographics in the same school district will serve as a comparison group.
Following curriculum revisions based on findings of the initial field test
during year 2, refined sleep study lessons will be implemented in the classrooms
of approximately 440 students in the 4th and 5th grades across the same two
schools in year 3. Outcomes to be measured include student interests in STEM
areas and careers, student proficiency in selected STEM-related skills, and
level of parental engagement with their students' STEM learning. Six features of
the new set of lessons are hypothesized to increase engagement and motivation of
4th and 5th grade students in STEM-related experiences: (1) content (sleep) that
is relevant to everyone's lives (students, teachers, and parents) and essential
for healthy day-to-day functioning; (2) inquiry-based sleep science lessons
using an evidence-based instructional model; (3) use of interactive educational
software and various technologies (personalized) that allow students to actively
engage by collecting, analyzing, and interpreting their own data; (4) a teacher
professional development paradigm using face-to-face, online, and educative
curriculum materials; (5) parental involvement/engagement strategies using a
well-developed model of family-school involvement; and (6) out-of-school
learning experiences including exposure and interactions with STEM professionals
from diverse backgrounds. The outcomes of this project will likely have broad
impacts on both classroom practices with young learners and our understanding of
how to engage young students in personally relevant studies that inspire them to
consider STEM-related careers and the education pathways that lead to those
careers. The development of curriculum materials in both English and Spanish
will assist teachers in engaging underrepresented and underserved populations in
activities of high interest and personal relevance that demonstrate the
importance of STEM learning to our society.