* 1433147
* Cerro Magoni Mapping and Excavation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 12/04/2013,07/31/2015
* J. Heath Anderson, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,334.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. J. Heath Anderson and a team of
Mexican colleagues will conduct the first intensive archaeological exploration
of Cerro Magoni, a site in Central Mexico in imminent danger of destruction.
Cerro Magoni is located just north of Mexico City in an area called the
Mezquital Valley, which is best known as the location of the site of Tula, the
capital of the Toltec state (AD 950 - 1150). The project addresses a recent
resurgence in scholarly interest in the collapse and regeneration of complex
societies. This topic has been of interest to anthropological archaeologists
since the 1970s and 1980s and continues to be an important focus of
investigation and critical debate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research tests an
emerging model for the regeneration of complex society in the Tula area in
Central Mexico ca. AD 550 - 950, a time period called the Epiclassic. From
approximately 0 to 550 AD, the Tula area was integrated into the political and
economic networks of Teotihuac√°n, located to the southeast in the Basin of
Mexico, which was the capital of Mesoamerica's first empire and the largest
urban center at the time. Four centuries later, power and population were again
centralized in the form of Tula Grande, a densely occupied city in its own right
located to the northwest of the Basin, and the capital of the Toltec state. The
processes involved in the regeneration of complex society in the Tula area
during the intervening centuries remain unknown. Over the past six years,
ceramic analysis and new radiocarbon dates have indicated that the political
landscape during this period might have been much more fractious than was
previously thought. Several centers once thought to have been occupied at
different times may have in fact been contemporaneous, competing political units
that ultimately coalesced into the Toltec state. Absent from these
reconstructions, however, is Cerro Magoni, which according to surface survey
data was the most extensive and populous settlement in the region during the
Epiclassic. However, reliable information derived from excavation regarding the
site's true span of occupation is not available. This is critical for testing
the emerging multicentric model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides
insight through a program of topographic mapping and stratigraphic excavation.
Unfortunately, real estate developers are in the process of purchasing Cerro
Magoni to construct a luxury housing development on the site, which will destroy
most if not all of the prehispanic remains. The summer of 2012 may be the last
opportunity to map and explore this site before its integrity is severely
compromised.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will improve the production,
curation, management, and sharing of archaeological data at Tula by producing a
digital database to centralize and back up perishable paper records to improve
organization and access. This project also facilitates involvement of local
populations in archaeological projects, providing training in archaeological
laboratory analysis techniques, continuing a tradition of local involvement in
archaeological projects at Tula that spans more than 70 years.