* 1433837
* Motivating Bilingual Hispanic Youth Towards STEM &amp; STEM Cognate Study and Careers (MIO STEM)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Sasha Barab, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,199,011.00

The Arizona State University Center for Games and Impact will collaborate with
VME (Vme Media), E-Line Media, and HACU (Hispanic Association of Colleges &amp;
Universities) to develop a project designed to engage Hispanic middle-school
students in learning about STEM careers. The project will initially stimulate
career interest as youth reflect on game play using the Career Illumination
Tool. They will then work through a number of targeted quests using a bilingual,
game-infused platform, followed by submitting an application expressing interest
in pursuing a STEM focused degree program, and culminating in a HACU tour at
universities and community colleges in the Phoenix and San Antonio areas.
Students and their parents will be recruited through: (1) nationally broadcast
Vme television (Spanish-language public television) episodes and web-based
shorts in Spanish and English introducing STEM careers and the college
application process and (2) community-level outreach. The project will involve
approximately 1300 middle-school students in the Phoenix, AZ and San Antonio, TX
school districts, as well as participants from other regions reached by media
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An online guidebook will facilitate the adoption
of the program by other communities across the nation. The project will develop
a web presence on the Vme Television website, and will use an original
television series to promote the program among a Hispanic audience of more that
11 million viewers. The project and its resources will be further disseminated
through presentations at conferences, journal article submissions, outreach to
Hispanic-serving institutes of higher education, and the use of social media to
target Latino students. This project will advance efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better
understand how online resources, gaming and media increase students' motivations
and capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering,
or mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design is based on a
growing body of research that documents the successful use of technology in
developing student interest and engagement in STEM activities. A mixed methods
approach will be used to examine research questions that will look at the
communities formed by participants, reciprocal influences of the project on
participants and their caregivers and teachers, and student uptake of concepts
and resources along with the effects on their self-efficacy and interest in STEM
career pathways. The project will access data analytics (user data) to determine
how users are participating and use these interactions to understand what areas
and resources are drawing students in. The project will further analyze STEM
learning from games, self-efficacy, and attitudes towards STEM careers using
validated instruments.