* 1433323
* Toward an understanding of Neogene plate dynamics:   Completion of a high-resolution, closure-enforced chronology of global plate motions since 20 Ma
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Dennis DeMets, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2020
* USD 302,254.00

Motivated by work to date, which documents changes in the motions of all the
major tectonic plates during the Neogene period (~23-2.5 million years ago), the
proposed effort will systematically quantify the geographic scope, nature, and
timing of global plate motion changes since 20 million years ago. The Principle
Investigators will create a first-ever kinematic framework that will be broadly
useful for understanding the relationship of instantaneous plate movements
measured by geodetic techniques to movements over millions of years, as well as
for modeling the forces that have determined plate motions during the Neogene.
The results will be broadly useful to geoscientists, particularly geodesists,
paleomagnetists, seismologists, structural geologists, and plate dynamicists.
Key papers published on this topic over the past few decades have been cited
thousands of times and provide an essential conceptual and quantitative
framework for teaching and understanding the Neogene tectonic and geologic
evolution of the ocean basins and nearly all the continents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principle Investigators will complete a high-
resolution chronology of global plate motions since 20 million years ago,
comprising most of the Neogene period. Sequences of closure-enforced plate
rotations, at ~1 million year intervals, will describe the relative motions
since 20 million years ago of all the major plates. The path to completing the
study is well defined and consists of (1) new identifications of magnetic
reversals from the southern Mid-Atlantic Ridge and Southeast Indian Ridge, as
well as compilation of suitable fracture zone and transform fault flow lines
along these and other spreading centers, (2) updates to largely complete sets of
magnetic anomaly identifications from the southern Central Indian Ridge and Gulf
of Aden, (3) compilations of existing reversal identifications from Pacific
Basin spreading centers, if suitable, or new identifications for some Pacific
Basin spreading centers, (4) methodological upgrades to estimate rotations
consistent with plate circuit closures, to search more efficiently for best
solutions, to include random and systematic data errors and the influence of the
data geometry in rotation uncertainties, and to use a Bayesian methodology to
suppress random noise in the rotation sequences. Half or more of the work needed
to build the Neogene model has already been accomplished, partly by the
Principle Investigator and a Russian collaborator via two NSF-funded projects
that have spanned the past decade and partly by other investigators who have
worked on the Neogene plate tectonics of the Pacific Basin. The existing data
already include nearly 40,000 magnetic reversal identifications interpreted by
the Principle Investigator for existing projects and 15,000 crossings of oceanic
fracture zones and transform faults. Abundant data are available for completing
the proposed analysis, including high-quality aeromagnetic data from the
southern Mid-Atlantic Ridge that were previously unavailable for this kind of
work.