* 1433835
* AGEP-BPR: A Study of the Cultural Factors Affecting Underrepresented Minority STEM Doctoral Students and Academic Pathway and Transition Programs
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Courtney Tanenbaum, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2019
* USD 754,301.00

This project is supported by the Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program and is a Broadening Participation Research in STEM
Education (AGEP-BPR) award. The AGEP-BPR awards target investigator initiated
empirical research projects that seek to study theory-driven models and
innovations related to the participation and success of underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in STEM graduate education, postdoctoral training, and
academic STEM careers at all types of institutions of higher education. This
award funds a qualitative research study to advance foundational knowledge about
the extent to which bridging and pathways programs for doctoral STEM students
impact cultural change within underrepresented minority students and their
universities, and how the cultural contexts relate to student retention and
successful pursuit of doctoral degrees. The results of this investigation are
expected to inform the field about future research, both basic and applied, that
will increase the understanding of the barriers, practices and policies URM
doctoral students experience when they participate in academic STEM bridge
programs that are designed to increase student retention and degree completion.
Findings will also inform university administrators, faculty, staff and
students, as well as the public about the key features of programs intersecting
with the cultural contexts in which the pathway programs operate; and such
information has the potential to ultimately improve the experiences, retention
and successes of URM STEM doctoral students in our nation?s
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers conducting this study will explore
the following questions: What criteria are STEM doctoral pathway programs using
to recruit and admit URM students? What interventions or supports do STEM
doctoral pathway programs use to promote URM students' social and academic
preparation and integration for success in STEM doctoral programs? What cultural
factors of the STEM department and the larger institution affect URM students'
experiences in the doctoral pathway programs? Basing their work on Tierney's
model of higher education organizational culture, the investigators will use
document reviews, interviews with administrators, faculty, staff and students,
and observation techniques to gather a collection of qualitative data to analyze
and interpret to address the research questions. There is an external evaluator
and a group of external advisory board members who will work together to provide
formative and summative project assessment. Products are expected to include
publications in peer-reviewed journals.