* 1433747
* STEM Career Clubs: Enhancing the potential of underrepresented students in STEM careers through a Strategic Teaming Model
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Margaret Blanchard, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,287,536.00

STEM Career Clubs builds on a successful and research-based Strategic Teaming
Model to increase the likelihood that participating students will pursue STEM
majors and careers. The project is driven by three key objectives: 1) Facilitate
students' and parents' identification with the STEM community by increasing
their awareness of, interest in, and positive perceptions of STEM fields and
careers; 2) Increase students' and teachers' STEM content knowledge and skills;
and 3) Enhance the impact of the Strategic Teaming Model on leader, teacher,
parent, & student perceptions of STEM Career Clubs innovation. STEM Career Clubs
is a partnership between North Carolina State University's College of Sciences
(The Science House), the Departments of Science, Technology, Engineering, &
Mathematics (STEM) Education, and Curriculum, Instruction, & Counselor Education
(CICE) in the College of Education, and four high poverty school districts in
northeast North Carolina: Northampton, Vance, Nash-Rocky Mount and Warren
Counties.

STEM Career Clubs will allow students to explore project-based learning
activities in science, technology, engineering, mathematics and entrepreneurship
that will extend the curriculum taught in the classroom and build student
competency in STEM workforce skills, tools, and technology. In the Strategic
Teaming Model, school administrators and teacher-coaches will work in teams and
will attend professional development to collaboratively develop plans to support
and sustain the innovation of the STEM Career Clubs. University team members
will engage Club student teams with STEM professionals, mentoring opportunities,
and activities emphasizing STEM workforce-relevant experience. The researchers
will employ a mixed-methods approach to address eight research questions,
exploring whether student participation in STEM Career Clubs enhances student
(1) awareness of, interest in, positive perceptions of, and identification with
STEM careers; (2) learning in mathematics and science; and (3) enrollment in
advanced courses. The project will contribute to fundamental research in STEM
education by highlighting individual and joint effects of peers, parents,
teachers, and university partners on students' motivation and performance in
STEM areas, using potentially transformative social media component (i.e.,
Twitter), project-based learning, a residential university experience, and
explicit career links. STEM Career Clubs will directly serve 120 or more student
Club members and their parents, 24 STEM Teacher-Coaches, and 40 leadership
personnel in 4 middle schools in 4 school districts, each academic year.