* 1433467
* EFRI 2-DARE: Enhancing Electronic and Thermal Properties in Epitopotaxial Ge/Sn Graphane Heterostructures
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2020
* David Cahill, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2020
* USD 2,105,999.00

Non-Technical: The ability to design new materials in which the flow of
electricity and heat can be tailored in a controllable way is fundamentally
important for addressing the challenges of modern science and technology. It is
essential to numerous fields including microelectronics, optoelectronics and
thermoelectrics. Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials open new opportunities
for addressing this important need. While the vast amount of research on 2D
layered structures has been focused on the 2D carbon crystal, graphene, the goal
of the current project will be to fabricate and to understand the properties of
2D layered structures based on Germanium (Ge) and tin (Sn). These Ge/Sn graphane
analogue structures offer the possibility to manipulate the electronic, optical
and heat transport properties by adjusting the number of layers, chemical
composition of constituent layers and tunable chemical bonding between layers,
as well as showing great promise for a wide range of electronic and
thermoelectric applications. State-of-the-art materials synthesis, measurements
and theoretical modeling methodologies will be established for understanding how
to tune electronic and thermal transport in 2D materials beyond graphene.
Furthermore, we will develop a novel, scalable route towards integrating 2D
materials directly into existing semiconductor growth and fabrication
technology. Complementing the project's major research goals are its broader
aims, which include efforts to enhance thermal science education in the
participating institutions, and to increase awareness in local communities of
the importance and excitement of cutting edge research in thermal sciences,
which has often been perceived as a mature field because of insufficient
interactions between the research community and the public. Finally, this multi-
institutional collaboration will allow the research team to carry out a joint
effort to recruit and retain students from underrepresented groups across
multiple scientific and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
The overall research objective of this project is to develop the fundamental
knowledge needed for enhancing the coupled electronic and thermal properties of
Ge/Sn graphane analogues, a promising system that offers the ability to vary the
anisotropic electronic and thermal properties along both the in-plane and cross-
plane directions by using different main group elements and different surface-
terminating ligands. To accomplish this, a novel, scalable synthesis method will
be developed for the direct integration of Ge/Sn van der Waals heterostructures
into existing semiconductor fabrication processes, by combining the epitaxial
growth of precursor thin films on Ge(111) wafers with their topotactic
conversion into the van der Waals material. These "epitopotaxial" structures
will facilitate a comprehensive suite of cutting edge measurements of in-plane
and cross-plane electronic, thermal, and thermoelectric properties of single
sheets, multilayer heterostructures, bulk 2D crystals, and different
substrate-2D interfaces. These measurements will in turn be supported by first-
principle theoretical calculations to verify, predict and establish the
underlying principles for controlling anisotropic thermal and electronic
properties of these 2D van der Waals heterostructured materials. Elucidating the
key mechanisms for controlling anisotropic thermal, electronic, and
thermoelectric properties in single and multilayered 2D van der Waals systems
will facilitate the development of next-generation electronic and thermoelectric
devices.