* 1433769
* Design-Basaed Information Technologies Learning Experiences (DITLE)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Helen Meyer, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

To address the needs of the US to increase the Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) workforce with enhanced preparation and a diverse population of
prepared secondary students, this strategies ITEST project will strengthen the
current regional partnerships in place between secondary schools, the University
of Cincinnati's Instructional Technology (IT) and STEM education programs, and
local industries. This collaboration will develop layered programs for cohorts
of secondary students, including those typically under-represented in ICT
careers and in-service and pre-service secondary STEM teachers. The participants
will engage in a range of ICT experiences beginning with fundamental ICT
exposure coursework through selective accelerated courses and internships. This
effort will incorporate university-based learning experiences, school-based
learning experiences, and industry-based experiences for the students and
educators. The project will also develop an innovative network and cloud-based
virtual lab infrastructure for resource sharing across a multi-faceted
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will add to the research in the area of
ICT focused on mechanisms for expanding student participation; understanding the
sets of experiences that support student competency and persistence into ICT
careers; and broadening the demographics of students in ICT programs and
careers. The research responds to the need to understand how students with
different levels of academic success and support consider ICT career pathways.
This can serve to develop better support systems to expand the ICT workforce.
Finally, the research will document how regional networks can be leveraged to
form a coherent effort, rather than a diversity of individual efforts with the
similar but potentially divergent goals. The research/evaluation questions are:
(1) What is the impact of students' previous academic preparation on
understanding of ICT careers and workforce choices? (2) How does a student's
previous academic preparation influence the student's success in engaging in
design-based ICT learning activities? (3) Which activities are most engaging for
students typically underrepresented in ICT careers and programs? and (4) In what
ways do the partners, parents, and industry interact to form a comprehensive
network in support of ICT career pathways for students?