* 1433881
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mesoscale Impacts of Soil Moisture on Convective Precipitation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Steven Quiring, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2016
* USD 11,874.00

The goal of this project is to quantify the impact of soil moisture on the
location and occurrence of convective precipitation. Although many previous
studies have attempted to describe and/or quantify the impact of soil moisture
on convective precipitation, none have used observed soil moisture measurements
or separated soil moisture-precipitation interactions into the two distinct
components (soil moisture-evaporation and evaporation-precipitation). These
considerations are necessary to examine the cases in which soil moisture
directly influences convective precipitation. The project's three main
objectives are: (1) determine if convective precipitation falls preferentially
over dry or wet soils, (2) quantify the influence that soil moisture has on low-
level atmospheric temperature and humidity, and (3) evaluate how soil moisture
spatial gradients influence the probability of convective precipitation. Ground-
based radar precipitation will be used to identify mesoscale convective systems.
The soil moisture conditions prior to precipitation and the atmospheric humidity
and temperature will be determined for each event. The sources of atmospheric
moisture will also be determined for each convective event to quantify the
proportion of locally- and remotely-sourced moisture. The results of this
research will enhance our understanding of land-atmosphere interactions in semi-
arid regions around the world.

Soil moisture can have an influence on future precipitation. This coupling
between the land surface and the atmosphere is important because it provides the
basis for improving seasonal climate forecasts. This project will use soil
moisture observations in Oklahoma to investigate the physical linkages between
soil moisture and precipitation; it is a significant advance since most prior
studies have relied on modeled or satellite-based estimates of soil moisture.
This project will focus only on localized convective precipitation events since
they are hypothesized to be more strongly influenced by soil moisture than
large-scale precipitation events (e.g., precipitation events associated with
warm fronts and cold fronts). Soil moisture will not simply be correlated with
subsequent precipitation, but the physical linkages between soil moisture and
the near-surface atmosphere will be examined. The results of this project will
enhance our understanding of how soil moisture influences convective
precipitation and under what conditions the land surface has the strongest
impact on precipitation. The findings of this project will be disseminated to
the climate modeling community through conference presentations and
publications. It will help improve the accuracy of seasonal climate forecasts
since existing climate models do not accurately represent land-atmosphere
interactions. An undergraduate researcher assistant will be hired from a diverse
group of undergraduate to assist with data collection, processing and analysis.
The undergraduate student will receive specialized training in scientific
programming and data visualization, and the research will be summarized in an
undergraduate thesis and it will be presented at a national scientific meeting.