* 1433955
* Collaborative Research: Governing Complex Commons: Policy Networks and the Local Ecology of Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/31/2013,12/31/2014
* Ramiro Berardo, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 12/31/2014
* USD 46,446.00

This team is exploring questions about how policy making actors decide which
problems to tackle, what policymaking venues to participate in, and who to
collaborate with in solving the problems. They hypothesize that the patterns of
collaboration, or policy networks, strongly affect the efficiency and
effectiveness of governing institutions in resolving complex problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study involves three estuaries located in California,
Florida and Argentina, where problems such as declining water quality, dwindling
water supply, flooding, and threats to biodiversity require coordinated action
from multiple stakeholders. The three sites provide different mixtures of
regulatory, collaborative, and voluntary institutions governing these issues,
and thus provide an ample range of conditions in which to study the questions.
Data will be collected from news media and internet analysis as well as surveys
of all major policy actors in each estuary. Analytic techniques will include
qualitative descriptions of the local ecologies as well as quantitative analyses
based on Social Network Analysis (SNA) techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study seeks to integrate informal networks and institutional structure into a
theory of governance more relevant to complex policy problems. In particular,
the team seeks a better understanding of how natural resources are managed
through cooperative activities when actors are embedded in complex policy-making
systems. Many policy analyses focus on single policy programs, and advice from
these studies can to lead to unintended consequences when they fail to recognize
the complex interaction of actors, institutions, and problems within the full
ecology of games. This study seeks to understand the interrelatedness of
economic, environmental, and social benefits at stake in estuaries and similar
ecological systems. In addition, the comparisons between the U.S. and Argentina
enable analysis of how different political cultures and national institutions
affect the ability of policy actors to solve these key environmental problems.