* 1433181
* A Study Group on Diversity, Equity and Excellence in Achievement and Assessment in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Edmund Gordon, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 359,001.00

This project seeks to find ways to make the measurement sciences more useful to
the production of intellective competence in diverse students of the STEM
disciplines. A Study Group on Diversity, Equity and Excellence in Achievement
and Assessment in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education
will be established to address a set of issues posed as critical to the future
of assessment for education. Building on the work of the Gordon Commission on
the Future of Assessment in Education, the Study Group will undertake a series
of activities culminating in the production of a report to the field including
conceptual analyses, knowledge syntheses findings, and recommended
specifications for a program of research and development to advance STEM
education through assessment for education.

The Study Group will consist of fifteen research scientists and scholars of
pedagogical practice who are being organized to inquire into the potential of
the measurement sciences to more effectively inform the teaching and learning of
STEM subject matter for students whose development is challenged by the demands
of diversity, equity and excellence in intellective competence. Group members
are especially interested in balancing the capabilities of the measurement
sciences in the assessment of developed abilities, with equal strength in the
analysis, documentation and understanding of the learning and teaching processes
by which intellective competence is developed. The Group will conduct a
conceptual inquiry into the interrelatedness of diversity, equity, and
achievement in STEM. Special attention will be given to variance in
attributions, contexts and perspectives associated with differences in life
conditions, cultural experience and cultural identity. The Study Group will
utilize in-person and virtual deliberations; consultative conversations; and
commissioned position and review papers to generate recommendations and
suggested specifications for programs of research, development and praxis
designed to better inform the teaching and, especially, the learning of STEM
disciplines.