* 1433122
* Collaborative Research: Construction of the Upstream Tracker for the LHCb Upgrade
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Sheldon Stone, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 4,812,762.00

Overview&lt;br/&gt;One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th
century was the development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This
model succeeded in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time
into a hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of
this model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC)at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it
currently exists, leaves open many questions about the universe. These include
why matter dominates over anti-matter in the Universe (CP violation), the values
of the masses of the fundamental constituents, the quarks and the leptons, the
size of the mixings among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the
properties of dark matter. Most explanations require the presence of new forces,
which we call Beyond the Standard Model Physics (BSM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
LHC is the premier Energy Frontier particle accelerator in the world and is
currently operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland. It is one of
the foremost facilities for answering these BSM
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large Hadron Collider beauty (LHCb) is the first
experiment designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing
beauty or charm quarks at a hadron collider. The goal of LHCb is to identify new
physics in nature by examining the properties of hadrons containing these
quarks. New physics, or new forces, are manifest by particles, as yet to be
discovered. These particles would modify decay rates and CP violating
asymmetries, and thus allow new phenomena to be observed indirectly. In direct
searches for new particles, the accelerators' energy must be high enough to
allow the particle to be produced. In indirect searches effects of new particles
can be seen even if they have a much higher mass than can be seen directly,
because the effects are quantum in nature, and appear in calculations where the
particles are "virtual" so they are emitted and absorbed over short times. LHCb
has operated very successfully starting in late 2010. The data are being
analyzed and published. The experiment has shown many results, but none so far
have clearly demonstrated new physics. LHCb has proposed an upgrade to be
completed in the 2018-2019 time-frame when the LHC accelerator will not be
running. This upgrade will allow LHCb to collect an order of magnitude more data
in decay modes that will either show new physics or severely restrict the
allowed mass range. LHCb is comprised of about 10 different sub-detectors or
sub-systems. The Syracuse, Maryland, Cincinnati and MIT groups participating in
this award have the responsibility of upgrading a part of the charged particle
tracking system. The intent is to significantly enhance the capabilities of this
system above and beyond the requirement that data can be taken at an order of
magnitude higher luminosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this award is that it is part of an
upgrade of LHCb that will allow a much more sensitive search for BSM physics.
The main deliverable will be a new inner tracking device, the Upstream Tracker
(UT). This device will increase the data throughput over the current tracking
device by an order of magnitude, allowing the LHCb experiment to probe BSM
physics. The UT, which replaces the current tracker, will consists of four
planes of single-sided 250 micron thick silicon strip detectors, read out by a
custom-made front-end electronic integrated circuit. With its reduced material
budget and optimized segmentation as a function of the distance from the beam
line, it plays a crucial role in reducing the rate of fake tracks and in
providing fast momentum measurements in the residual field of the dipole magnet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work
span several areas. Undergraduate and graduate students will be direct
participants in the construction and testing of the detector that will be
constructed. For many years a steady stream of undergraduate and graduate
students have been working in the PIs' laboratories, where it is a tradition to
ensure that graduate students have both hardware experience as well as data
analysis capabilities. The upgrade work will be integrated into the Syracuse
Quarknet program to involve high school teachers and some of their better
students as well. Test results from this detector will be discussed at
conferences and published. This detector is an integral part of the LHCb Upgrade
and is essential for LHCb to continue to produce cutting edge physics results.