* 1433257
* AGS-PRF: Soil Exchange of Carbonyl Sulfide (COS):  Towards an Independent Proxy for Terrestrial Gross Primary Production (GPP)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Mary Whelan, Whelan                  Mary           E
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship supports a series of field and laboratory
experiments to demonstrate the use of atmospheric carbonyl sulfide (COS) as an
independent proxy for terrestrial gross primary production. Gross primary
production is the total amount of carbon dioxide "fixed" by land plants per unit
time through the photosynthetic reduction of carbon dioxide into organic
compounds. It is an important parameter for describing carbon-climate feedbacks,
assessing ecosystem-based carbon dioxide capture and storage projects, and as an
important input parameter in models of ecosystem carbon exchange. This
investigator is actively involved in education and outreach to promote literacy
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To use COS exchange as an approximation of
carbon uptake on an ecosystem scale, soil exchange rates of COS need to be
characterized to distinguish COS plant consumption from COS uptake in soils. The
investigator is developing a novel application of the isotope pool dilution
technique (using 13COS) to enable measurements of soil COS consumption and
production, thereby untangling factors that control net COS exchange. She will
conduct controlled laboratory experiments to assess the role of environmental
variables such as temperature, UV light, and enzyme activities in soils on the
variations in COS exchange. Field measurements will be made at a variety of
sites, including at a montane gradient in southern California that is a
designated FLUXNET site and at a chaparral and a desert site that is already
instrumented with eddy flux towers and continuously monitored environmental
variables. FLUXNET is a regional network in which each participating site uses
eddy covariance methods to measure the exchanges of carbon dioxide, water vapor,
and energy between terrestrial ecosystems and the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will take place under the guidance of
senior scientists at the University of California Merced and the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory.