* 1433311
* EFRI 2-DARE: Crystalline Atomically Thin Layers for Photonic Applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Lan Yang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,139,999.00

Non-technical Description: The goals of this project are to synthesize
atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting layers, which possess novel
properties often unavailable in their bulk counterparts, and incorporate them
onto devices for novel photonic applications. Once demonstrated, these active
and nonlinear photonic devices using 2D materials can potentially create a new
paradigm of optoelectronics and may lead to numerous optical information and
quantum information related applications. A multidisciplinary team from four
academic institutions (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Pennsylvania State
University, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and Washington
University in St. Louis) is formed to investigate key research areas from 2D
material synthesis, condensed matter theory, and optical engineering. This
project also includes a comprehensive education and outreach plan at all levels,
from encouraging underprivileged K-12 students into the exciting field of
material sciences and optical engineering all the way up to faculty
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project aims to
predict, synthesize, characterize, and engineer semiconducting transition metal
dichalcogenides (STMD) such as molybdenum and tungsten disulfides and
diselenides, and utilize them to develop a new class of potentially
transformative active and nonlinear photonic devices. A key challenge to develop
high-quality 2D STMD materials is the control of these materials with
predetermined thickness (number of layers), stacking and composition, and to
tailor their optical properties for specific photonics applications. The
synthesis strategy of this project is based on chemical vapor deposition (CVD),
which has been proved suitable for synthesizing large-area (cm) 2D crystals of
STMD, and for controlling the growth, clustering, doping, alloying and stacking
of different STMD. The research team aims to establish a comprehensive first-
principles framework for modeling the doping, alloying and stacking of a few
layered STMD. The team develops more realistic approaches for the band structure
(GW approximation) and excitonic behaviors by solving the Bethe-Salpeter
equation. Such studies directly inform material design and CVD synthesis, and
enable new photonic applications and devices based on STMD dressed fiber optics,
plasmonic nanostructures, and micro-resonators. The research can potentially
lead to new paradigms of STMD functionalized optoelectronics, with examples
including parity-time symmetric systems for unidirectional invisibility,
nonreciprocal light transmission, novel low-power optical switching and photon
routing, ultra-low threshold lasers and amplifiers, TMD-plasmonic systems with
nonlinear efficiency enhanced up to several orders of magnitude, and high-
efficiency nonlinear/quantum optical devices.