* 1433592
* Middle School Pathways in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Fred Martin, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,198,639.00

There is a growing recognition of the need to engage youth in meaningful
experiences with computing. This ITEST Strategies project will create a
partnership of the University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML), the Tri-City
Technology Education Collaborative Inc. (TRITEC), and the urban school districts
of Medford and Everett, MA to bring project-based, socially-relevant computing
experiences to district middle school students. The project will have immediate
impact on the Medford and Everett districts' students and teachers. The project
will result in a sustainable program with ongoing benefits for the districts.
The project will contribute to the growing literature on computational thinking
and appropriate ways to assess that learning in middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a 15- to 20-hour computing
curriculum that is integrated with existing district technology and engineering
courses. By the second project year, the curriculum will be in all seven
district middle schools, and will be delivered to 450 students per year. In
addition, the team will conduct intensive 30-hour summer camps attended by 140
students per project year. Over the project's 3-year period, 1,100 students will
participate during the school day, with 360 students also receiving a summer-
intensive experience. Project curriculum will include creative project work and
career awareness activities. Using MIT App Inventor, a blocks-based design
environment for building mobile apps, students will develop their own apps that
support socially relevant activities in their communities. University computer
science students and industry professionals will visit project classrooms and
work with middle school students. The team will investigate (1) student learning
outcomes: how the project's school-day and summer-intensive project work and
career awareness activities influence students' attitudes toward computing and
ability to engage in computing practices; (2) teacher outcomes: how the
project's collaborative professional development model leads to teacher content
learning and curricular adoptions; and (3) broadening participation outcomes:
how the school-day intervention leads to students' choice of continued
involvement in computing, including the summer camps and future opportunities
beyond middle school.