* 1433173
* Summer Training in Field Research Methodologies, 2015-17
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2018
* USD 366,759.00

Cultural anthropologists conduct research on a wide range of important topics,
including migration, natural resource management, food security, family
structure, resilience after natural and anthropogenic disasters, and the social
and cultural influences on health and healthcare. The impact of research in
these and other areas depends in part on the methodological rigor of
anthropological research. Therefore, enhancing the methodological training of
cultural anthropologists strengthens the discipline's contribution to basic
understanding of the causes and consequences of human social and cultural
diversity and to the development of public policy. To those ends, the Cultural
Anthropology Program supports programs that contribute to the training of the
next generation of cultural anthropology scientists.

This award to the University of Florida supports a community-based
methodological training program for graduate students in cultural anthropology.
The highlight of the program is a summer field school in Tallahassee, Florida,
that will be directed by Dr. Clarence C. Gravlee and Dr. Sarah M. Szurek. The
field school provides hands-on experience in all phases of research, from
formulating important questions to selecting appropriate methods of data
collection and analysis. Students learn and use a range of qualitative and
quantitative methods and are closely mentored by faculty instructors. The field
school also benefits from a long-term partnership between researchers and
community members, so that students also learn about collaborating with local
residents and adapting research plans to the needs and expertise of a host
community. Over three years, the program will provide intensive training for at
least 24 doctoral students in anthropology. The high level of collaboration with
community partners also has potential to improve community capacity for research
and to enhance public understanding of anthropology.