* 1433492
* NSF/DOE Solar Hydrogen Fuel: Tunable Semiconductor/Catalyst Interfaces for Efficient Solar WaterSplitting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* G. Charles Dismukes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 749,997.00

Much research has gone into creating new materials and processes for making
solar fuels cell devices that convert and store the energy in sunlight as fuels
(hydrogen and hydrocarbons) from renewable feedstocks (water and carbon
dioxide). However, no commercial products of this type yet exist due to the high
cost of fuel cell materials, low solar to chemical conversion efficiencies,
instability and short lifetime. An award is being made to Profs. Charles
Dismukes, Eric Garfunkel and Martha Greenblatt of Rutgers University through the
joint NSF/DOE Solar H2 Fuel Solicitation to create new nanomaterials and combine
them in a special fashion to produce a new device that circumvents these
limitations, while increasing the solar efficiency by a factor of 2. The new
materials in the solar photovoltaic cells will be integrated with existing
catalysts to make standalone light-driven electrolyzers for splitting water into
its elements and, separately, reducing carbon dioxide to a liquid fuel. The
device will feature earth abundant catalysts that rival the efficiency of
existing platinum group catalysts, yet are economical and scalable. Syntheses of
new composite photovoltaic materials to be used as solar absorbers for the anode
and cathode that feature complementary spectral coverage are predicted to
deliver a two-fold increase in solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency relative
to current systems. New methods for integration of catalysts with solar
absorbers will be devised. Attainment of these goals read directly on
environmental and energy security benefits to the USA. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this award require the design of new materials and the
coupling of them into new working devices. The specific milestones to be
achieved are: 1) To achieve a two-fold increase to 10% of the current state-of-
the-art solar-to-hydrogen efficiency by constructing a tandem
photoelectrochemical cell with catalysts for Oxygen evolution (cubic
LiCoO2/ionomer) and Hydrogen evolution (Ni5P4/ionomer) coupled to (dual) bandgap
absorbers as photoanode (perovskite oxynitrides ABO3-xNx) and photocathode (pn-
silicon), using an alkaline exchange membrane as a hydroxide conducting medium.
2) Synthesize selected members of the perovskite oxynitride series ABO3-xNx
where A = alkaline earth or rare earth cation and B = Ti, V, Zr, Nb, Ta, and
with B site substitutions Nb or Ta for Ti. 3) Prepare thin films of the
foregoing perovskites, first by pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and, in
subsequent years, explore other methods to grow gradient films. 4) Characterize
the optical bandgaps and photoinduced carrier lifetimes of these materials prior
to attaching O2 evolution catalysts. 5) Using PLD, prepare thin films of cubic
LiCoO2 both in direct contact with the photoanode and as a buried junction with
intervening transparent conductors. 6) Produce stable interfaces between Ni5P4
with various photocathodes (silicon and other low bandgap semiconductors) to
achieve efficient electron capture for H2 evolution. 7) Produce stable
interfaces between Ni5P4 and alkaline exchange ionomers to achieve efficient
hydroxide transport, slower charge recombination, and long term stability. 8)
Investigate two electrolyte systems for connecting the photoelectrodes: aqueous
alkaline electrolyte solution (pH 14), and alkaline exchange membrane.
Achievement of these milestones will represent a significant advance in the
technology.