* 1433822
* Nebraska Wearable Technologies (WearTec)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Bradley Barker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2018
* USD 984,189.00

Research studies, commissioned reports, and national and international tests of
educational progress in STEM fields show that a large gap exists, in interest
and achievement, between underrepresented students and their counterparts. The
exclusion of these currently underrepresented students from STEM education and
STEM careers will likely impact the Nation's scientific and engineering status
in the world, as their diversity of perspectives, which is essential in
innovation, is largely absent from the STEM workforce. The Nebraska WearTec
project will address this gap by providing high-quality STEM learning activities
in both formal and informal learning environments. The project will target at
least 900 underrepresented youth in grades 4 through 6 from 30 schools in urban
and rural Nebraska. The project will test a teaching and learning model based on
a hybrid problem-based learning approach to engineering design. Curriculum
modules will focus on engineering design processes that merge electricity,
circuitry, and computer programing with fashion (wearable technologies) and
aesthetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professional development workshops and
activity guides for 90 teachers and out-of-school-time educators will be
provided throughout the project. These individuals will oversee student
engagement in authentic experiences supported by a collaborative effort
involving the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, the University of Nebraska at
Omaha, and the Nebraska Department of Education's 21st Century Community
Learning Center (CCLC) program (a federally funded statewide grants program
designed to support the establishment of community learning centers serving
students attending high-need schools). WearTec will use recommendations from the
2009 National Research Council's comprehensive report on engineering education
as the framework for this project. WearTec will employ initial redesign of
wearable technologies in formal classroom settings followed by more extensive
iterative design in out-of-school-time environments to provide the flexibility
and freedom required for immersive extended activities. The activities will
include both online and print-based formats that will be designed to transform
understanding of instructional methods that foster motivation, interest, and
knowledge acquisition to inspire and prepare students to pursue STEM careers;
thereby positively impacting the STEM workforce. A quasi-experimental research
design will be used to examine differences between knowledge and interest in
engineering design of students who participated in the WearTec intervention and
a comparison group who did not participate in the intervention. The project will
employ instruments specific to measuring engineering design and knowledge as
well as STEM student interest and motivation previously tested for validity and
reliability in prior studies funded by NSF and the U.S. Department of Education.