* 1433003
* I/UCRC FRP:  Electrocoagulation for the Mitigation of Emerging Biological and Chemical Contaminants
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Zitomer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,679.00

This I/UCRC Fundamental Research Program project seeks to address some of the
critical knowledge gaps by elucidating the mechanisms of mitigation of
Environmental Protection Agency's Contaminant Candidate List (CCL) viruses and
estrogens using electrocoagulation (EC) as a sustainable alternative for
drinking water treatment. This research provides the first fundamental
assessment of the treatment efficacy of 3 CCL viruses (adenovirus, calicivirus,
and enteroviruses) and 4 CCL estrogens (E1, E2, E3, and EE2) via EC.
Understanding of system capabilities will advance through direct comparisons of
EC, conventional coagulation, and oxidation using chlorine and reactive oxygen
species (ROS). The role of floc adsorption followed by sedimentation or
flotation will be quantified, as will the potential for oxidation by
electrolytically-generated active chlorine or ROS species. These findings are
intended to provide the scientific basis for improved water treatment process
design, environmental regulatory framework, and deeper understanding of the
potential of related treatment processes, including those that rely on
adsorption as well as conventional and advanced oxidation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort effort has broader implications for
improved water and wastewater infrastructure (with potential for implementation
in municipal, household, and emergency potable use scenarios), public health,
energy, and the associated economic implications. The work is supported by the
Industry Advisory Board as well as individual industry members of the center and
has the potential to extend the center's portfolio while potentially attracting
new members. This industry-relevant research leverages participation of three
PIs with diverse areas of expertise, two graduate student researchers, and
industry mentors. Student interest and involvement in STEM education and careers
is encouraged by connecting students with the effort's research as well as
industry contacts.