* 1433931
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parenting and Employment Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Erin Leahey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 5,954.00

The proposed dissertation investigates how information about partnership status
(married or single) impacts workplace outcomes for mothers and fathers. Previous
studies have found that due to lower perceived competence and commitment,
mothers are less likely to be hired and promoted; they also reap lower starting
salaries than working fathers and childless workers. Such negative outcomes for
mothers are known as the motherhood penalty. In contrast, fathers experience a
boost in starting salaries as well as positive competence and commitment
evaluations, known as the fatherhood bonus. Findings of previous research,
however, focus primarily on married mothers and fathers. The proposed research
seeks to examine the mechanism of workplace bias by comparing cultural
assumptions about single mothers' and fathers' expected workplace performance to
that of married parents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is designed
to test an argument that when the roles of caregiving and breadwinning are
combined in one person - a single parent - employers' performance expectations
for employee parents should be less affected by a parent's gender. Therefore,
both the motherhood penalty and the fatherhood premium should diminish. The
above predictions will be tested in a controlled laboratory experiment. In the
experiment, paid undergraduate volunteers will rate a pair of ostensibly real
(but actually fictitious) candidates for a job position. The two candidates will
be equally qualified, of the same gender (male or female) and same parental
status (has children or no information about children), varying only on
partnership status (married or single). The experiment proposed here will
recreate an evaluative setting where people make decisions about workplace
outcomes in a highly controlled environment, allowing researchers to separate
the effects of gender, parenthood, and partnership status on employment
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main intellectual contributions of
this research is examining the role partnership status plays in sustaining or
changing gendered assumptions about parenthood and workplace performance.
Understanding how bias is produced and sustained is the first and critical step
in eliminating it and increasing tolerance and equality at the workplace. Social
change in this area can be gradually achieved by institutional agents having
access to research findings and educating employers about hidden biases in order
to reduce or prevent them. Eliminating bias should serve employers by increasing
the pool of highly qualified candidates. Most importantly, uncovering the
dynamics of discrimination and seeking to reduce it should greatly benefit those
with less socially valued characteristics - women, single parents, and
caregivers in general.