* 1433425
* PISCES 2019: Partnership in Securing Cyberspace Through Education and Service: Renewal
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Lance Hoffman, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 6,332,434.00

This project seeks to continue George Washington University (GWU) participation
in the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-
qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce.
The project takes advantage of at least 50 courses in eight departments covering
various aspects of Cybersecurity. The students enter the workforce with
knowledge of Cybersecurity obtained from their disciplinary course material and
from their interactions with fellow students and guest lecturers from several
disciplines. In the past, this CyberCorps® SFS project graduated students with
degrees in Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, Information Systems,
Engineering Management, Business Administration, Forensic Sciences, National
Security Studies, and Public Policy. This interdisciplinary approach produces
graduates with both technical knowledge and a broader understanding of
Cybersecurity. The Principal Investigators described this holistic approach to
cybersecurity education in their 2012 paper in IEEE Security &amp; Privacy
Magazine. The NSF?s CyberCorps® SFS program funds projects that address
cybersecurity education and workforce development. The Scholarship Track
provides funding to award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In return
for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal,
State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related to
cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. The Capacity
Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability of the
United States higher education enterprise to produce cybersecurity
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the GWU project has graduated 61
CyberCorps® SFS students with at least 36% of women and 27% of declared
ethnicity minority. The current project plans dissemination of their Signature
Seminar to all CyberCorps® SFS schools. In addition, CyberCorps® SFS students
will also teach cybersecurity, risk analysis, and privacy to all senior design
students in computer science. They will also speak to local community groups
such as neighborhood associations, condominium associations and senior citizen
groups on cybersecurity ?hygiene? - how a simple precaution can protect them
from many cyber attacks. Approximately 25% of the time in the class will be
spent in laboratory projects such as Optical Mouse Spy Device, Honey Pot
Experiments, Intrusion Defense System ? Installing and Experimenting with Snort
and Metasploit, Hardening Linux, testing top web security vulnerabilities,
social engineering with QR codes, spear phishing, Border Gateway Protocol,
Bluetooth Security, incident response platform development, and secure mobile
messaging.