* 1433922
* Collaborative Research: Global Ocean Repeat Hydrography, Carbon, and Tracer Measurements, 2015-2020
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2024
* Rana Fine, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 3,001,393.00

Earth's climate is changing, with large natural decadal variability in some
regions. Among the most important and basic climate system components are the
heat, freshwater, and carbon content and transport of the oceans, which directly
interact with other essential components of the climate system in the atmosphere
and cryosphere. In turn the associated variability and trends in the ocean's
carbon content, carbonate saturation state, oxygen, and nutrients impact its
internal biological environment, with notable large-scale regional changes. This
joint study of the ocean carbon cycle and circulation is critical to identify
critical areas where changes in ocean circulation could have serious
consequences for future anthropogenic carbon uptake. Global warming-induced
changes in the ocean's transport of heat and freshwater, which could affect the
circulation, are being followed through these long-term measurements. Results to
date have shown that the abyssal ocean is warming, taking up to 30% of the
excess heat in the entire Earth system, leading to changes in circulation
patterns and ventilation rates in the upper ocean. The uptake of anthropogenic
carbon from the atmosphere to the ocean has been mapped and shows that the
oceans are acidifying. Oxygen concentrations are declining in the ocean
thermocline, and tropical oxygen minimum zones are expanding. The project is
based on the fundamental concept that data collected belong to the community and
need to be made quickly and freely available to the community at large through a
recognized international data center. The project will continue to promote
training and learning for graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and new
scientists in sea-going work. Outreach activities will continue as opportunities
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systematic and global re-occupation of select
ocean hydrographic sections conducted for the past decade (2003-2014) will be
extended into the 2015-2020 period with the continued objective of quantifying
changes in the full-depth ocean. The project is in support of the U.S. CLIVAR
(CLImate Variability and predictability) and the Carbon Science Programs, and is
a component of a global observing system for the physical climate and carbon
system. This long-standing project continues to contribute to the following
overlapping scientific objectives: Data for Model Calibration, Validation and
Model Based Synthesis; Carbon System Studies; Heat and Freshwater Storage and
Flux Studies; Deep and Shallow Water Mass and Ventilation Studies; and
Calibration of Autonomous Sensors. By integrating the scientific needs of the
carbon, tracer and hydrographic communities, major scientific synergies and cost
savings will continue to be achieved. In addition to efficiency, the coordinated
approach produces scientific advances that exceed those of having individual
programs. An average of two sections will be conducted every year, sometime
collaboratively with international partner. The measurements made on each
section include hydrography (full-depth vertical profiles of salinity,
temperature, oxygen, nutrients, currents), Underway surface temperature,
salinity, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2), air-sea fluxes, bathymetry,
navigation), carbon system (dissolved inorganic carbon, pCO2. Total Alkalinity,
pH, dissolved organic carbon and nitrogen), and transient tracers. This project
will collect the data and perform the quality control measures routinely carried
out by providers of reference-quality data. Post-cruise data updates,
distribution, and archive will continue to be managed by groups with separate
funding. This ongoing project is integrated with a larger international effort
to monitor the ocean's response to climate change.