* 1433904
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: High-Resolution, Late Quaternary Climate and Vegetation Record for the American Midwest: Isotope and Pollen Evidence from Stalagmites and Flowstone
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,05/31/2016
* George Brook, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,964.00

Climate proxies from ice sheets and ocean cores have revealed major global
climate changes during the past 150,000 years and beyond. Much less is known
about the effects of these global changes at the regional to local level,
however. This doctoral dissertation research project will create a southern
Indiana paleoenvironmental record for periods of the past 150,000 years using
cave-based proxies from three sites. This record will be used to examine the
substantial regional climate fluctuations that occurred due to ice sheet
proximity during glacial advances and retreats. Because a firm understanding of
the causal mechanisms of regional- to local-scale climate variations is crucial
to improving and checking the accuracy of global climate models, this focused
study will help contribute to a much broader range of inquiry into long-term
climate dynamics. This research also will have positive implications for
research on climate dynamics in the Midwestern U.S., a region whose economy is
strongly influenced by climate, because current global climate models for the
region struggle to replicate some past aspects of climate, such as late glacial
wind fields and non-analog climates indicated by pollen records. Because the
caves to be studies in southern Indiana are close to locations where the
Laurentide Ice Sheet reached its southernmost limit in central Indiana during
glacial maxima, climate gradients that were very abrupt immediately south of the
ice margin and associated climate changes should be readily recorded in climate
proxies, thereby contributing to basic understanding about the localized
climatic dynamics near ice sheets. This project will provide much-needed high-
resolution paleoclimate data and modern precipitation isotope records that
currently are lacking for this part of the Midwest, thereby helping to develop a
more complete understanding of the natural variations of Indiana's climate to
aid scientists, policy makers, and the public in dealing with issues associated
with climatic variation and change. Data will be made freely accessible to
researchers through the NOAA Paleoclimatology database, while results will be
shared with cave owners, schools, and state organizations for dissemination to
residents to improve scientific awareness and teach the value of preserving
fragile cave environments. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.

Cave speleothems (mineral deposits like stalagmites, stalactites, and
flowstones) can preserve a record of environmental changes in the area above the
cave and are particularly valuable because they offer very accurate uranium-
series ages up to 450,000 years. Through the conduct of this project, the
doctoral students whose dissertation research will be supported by this award
will determine the processes controlling modern precipitation isotope
(delta-O-18, delta-H-2, and d-excess) values for the Midwestern U.S. and the
relative effect of each process. He will create a paleoclimate record by
analyzing stalagmites from three caves, develop a vegetation record from pollen
trapped in flowstones that extends existing regional pollen records, and
integrate the stalagmite and vegetation data to produce a single regional
paleoclimate record. Variations in the oxygen isotope characteristics of
speleothem carbonate will offer clues to changes in rainfall source, amount, and
seasonality, while analysis of modern day precipitation isotope signatures will
provide insight into what caused these changes. Analyses of carbon isotopes and
ultraviolet-stimulated speleothem luminescence will reflect variations in soil
productivity, while pollen trapped in speleothems will provide evidence of local
vegetation at the time of deposition. The analyses of stalagmites from three
southern Indiana caves therefore will produce overlapping paleoclimate records
that will be combined to determine regional climate patterns and history. The
combined speleothem records will produce a robust environmental record from
multiple proxies with strength drawn from integrating spatially distinct
samples.