* 1433710
* Collaborative Research: Isotopic insights to mercury in marine food webs and how it varies with ocean biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Joel Blum, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2020
* USD 358,982.00

Mercury is a pervasive trace element that exists in several states in the marine
environment, including monomethylmercury (MMHg), a neurotoxin that
bioaccumulates in marine organisms and poses a human health threat.
Understanding the fate of mercury in the ocean and resulting impacts on ocean
food webs requires understanding the mechanisms controlling the depths at which
mercury chemical transformations occur. Preliminary mercury analyses on nine
species of marine fish from the North Pacific Ocean indicated that intermediate
waters are an important entry point for MMHg into open ocean food webs. To
elucidate the process controlling this, researchers will examine mercury
dynamics in regions with differing vertical dissolved oxygen profiles, which
should influence depths of mercury transformation. Results of the study will aid
in a better understanding of the pathways by which mercury enters the marine
food chain and can ultimately impact humans. This project will provide training
for graduate and undergraduate students, and spread awareness on oceanic mercury
through public outreach and informal science programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mercury isotopic variations can provide insight into a
wide variety of environmental processes. Isotopic compositions of mercury
display mass-dependent fractionation (MDF) during most biotic and abiotic
chemical reactions and mass-independent fractionation (MIF) during photochemical
radical pair reactions. The unusual combination of MDF and MIF can provide
information on reaction pathways and the biogeochemical history of mercury.
Results from preliminary research provide strong evidence that net MMHg
formation occurred below the surface mixed layer in the pycnocline and suggested
that MMHg in low oxygen intermediate waters is an important entry point for
mercury into open ocean food webs. These findings highlight the critical need to
understand how MMHg levels in marine biota will respond to changes in
atmospheric mercury emissions, deposition of inorganic mercury to the surface
ocean, and hypothesized future expansion of oxygen minimum zones. Using field
collections across ecosystems with contrasting biogeochemistry and mercury
isotope fractionation experiments researchers will fill key knowledge gaps in
mercury biogeochemistry. Results of the proposed research will enable scientists
to assess the biogeochemical controls on where in the water column mercury
methylation and demethylation likely occur.