* 1433551
* AGS-PRF: Assessing Causes of the Divergence between Past and Projected Responses of Global Aridity to Greenhouse Warming
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Jacob Scheff, Scheff                  Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2016
* USD 172,000.00

This award provides funds for a 2-year Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for the
PI, who will work under the mentorship of Professor Richard Seager at Columbia
University. The goal of the project is to reconcile an apparent discrepancy
between expected changes in hydroclimate due to global warming with paleoclimate
proxy data from past climates. Global warming simulations typically suggest that
water will become more scarce over the continents as temperatures rise, due to
increases in evaporative demand that outpace increases in precipitation. But if
drying accompanies warming then the same logic would suggest that colder
climates, including ice age climates, should be wetter. This argument is
apparently in conflict with the geological evidence, which suggests that the ice
ages were in fact dryer than today's climate. Moreover, there is evidence that
the warm climate of the early Cenozoic (about 55 million years ago) was wetter
than today's world despite the higher temperatures.

Three avenues of research are pursued to address this discrepancy, the first of
which is a careful examination of modern-day climate simulations from climate
models participating in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 5
(CMIP5). The premise is that the drying produced in climate change simulations
from these models could be associated with biases in the present-day
simulations, thus models may overestimate future drying if they are consistently
biased dry in their control simulations. The second activity is a diagnostic
examination of continental hydroclimate in model simulations of the last glacial
maximum (LGM, roughly 20 to 25 thousand years ago), taken from the Paleoclimate
Model Intercomparison Project version 3 (PMIP3). While changes in precipitation
and potential evapotranspiration have been examined in detail for future climate
simulations, comparable diagnoses have not been performed for LGM simulations.

The third is a reexamination of the paleo-proxy record to make sure that the
evidence for LGM drying has not been misinterpreted. Much of this evidence is
based on vegetation, and it is possible that the vegetation is responding to
lower values of carbon dioxide (CO2) and a reduction in CO2 fertilization,
rather than a reduction in available water. The PI proposes to address this
possibility by looking at proxy data which is not related to vegetation, for
example lake levels and evaporite deposits. If the non-vegetation proxies do not
show the same aridity signal found in vegetation-based proxies (pollen, fossils,
carbon isotope ratios), a role for CO2 fertilization would seem likely.

The work has inherent broader impacts due to the profound consequences of water
shortages for human well-being and natural ecosystems. The work specifically
addresses the potential for climate change to produce water shortages and the
question of how well we can anticipate such shortages based on climate model
simulations. In addition, the postdoctoral research fellowship, under the
mentorship of an established scientist, will help to build the career of the PI,
thereby providing support for the future workforce in this scientific
discipline.