* 1433756
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Lake Water Quality and ALS Spatial Clusters
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Ernst Linder, Applied GeoSolutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 12/31/2016
* USD 149,977.00

There is broad scientific consensus that some diseases are influenced by the
environment. Recent work has suggested that harmful algae in lakes are linked to
some illnesses and diseases. This project will study relationships among lake
water quality, harmful algae, and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also
known as Lou Gehrig's disease. An interdisciplinary team of geographers,
neurologists, epidemiologists, and statisticians will collaborate to assess how
and under what conditions algal levels and water quality impact ALS incidence, a
very poorly understood disease. This work will contribute to research on disease
ecology as well as inform a wide audience concerned with health outcomes
including public health and environmental agencies, medical centers, those
potentially exposed to the risk factors, and property owners.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, fatal disease with an
average life expectancy of two to five years from time of diagnosis.
Approximately 90% of ALS cases have no known genetic cause and are commonly
known as sporadic ALS (sALS). Despite many recent discoveries about the genetics
of ALS, the etiology or causal origins of sALS remain largely unknown. It is
most likely that sALS results from a combination of underlying genetic
susceptibility coupled with environmental exposure to one or more toxins. Recent
work has shown linkages between lake water quality and high ALS incidence, with
the [algal] cyanotoxin beta methyl-amino-alanine (BMAA) as a potential trigger.
The overarching goal of this study is to characterize the relationship between
sALS incidence and lake water quality parameters that favor cyanobacteria
growth. Multi-scale satellite remote sensing imagery will be used to map lake
water quality attributes including cyanobacteria, phycocyanin, chlorophyll-a,
and total nitrogen in freshwater lakes in northern New England. An ALS database
with completed questionnaire surveys, including information on residential
history and related risk factors, will be integrated into a spatial analysis
framework that will be generalizable to other similar freshwater / residential
systems. Eco-epidemiological modeling will be conducted to test the
relationships among lake conditions, risk factors, and sALS. This work will
develop tools for assessing stressor response relationships improve
understanding of sALS. The results will assist in identifying potential causal
factors as well as and means by which they may be remotely monitored, thereby
contributing to the quantification of the role of freshwater aquatic ecosystems
in human health risk.