* 1433670
* Causal Relationships Underlying the Collective Dynamic Behavior of Swarms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

Living in groups affords several benefits for animals such as better feeding
opportunities and reduced predation risks. In both instances-foraging and
predator avoidance-critical information is transmitted nonverbally throughout
the group, at different time scales. While current methods in animal behavior
allow for inferring information sharing during coordinated maneuvers, these
interactions are only a small subset of the complex behavioral repertoire of
animal groups. This award supports fundamental research to investigate
directional information flow underlying collective animal behavior, through the
integration of dynamical systems theory and behavioral studies on the zebra fish
animal model. The implications of this research are potentially transformative
in the area of behavioral brain research and neuropsychobiology, where zebra
fish is rapidly emerging as a valid preclinical animal model. Complementing the
research are interdisciplinary education and outreach activities that will
foster outside-the-box and multidisciplinary thinking in underrepresented
students in engineering, and benefit the education of underprivileged students
in Brooklyn public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks to
demonstrate that an information-theoretic approach can be used to measure social
animal behavior. Specifically, this award will establish a rigorous model-free
framework to study causal relationships in animal interactions. A series of
hypothesis-driven experiments on zebra fish will be conducted to emphasize
unidirectional information transfer by controlling visual feedback between
conspecifics and using independently controlled robotic replicas. Subsequently,
the proposed model-free framework and established experimental paradigms will be
used to investigate information flow in shoaling and schooling zebra fish along
with the social implications of individual differences on their collective
behavior. Toward this aim, robotics-based platforms, multi-target tracking
software, and novel experimental protocols will be utilized for engineering and
dissecting causal relationships that are central to the validation of the
envisioned approach. The unique datasets from these laboratory experiments will
support the validation of a multitude of theoretical dynamical-systems
approaches toward unraveling causality in complex biological and technological
systems.