* 1433043
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Maya State Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Ashley Sharpe, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 21,192.00

A central archaeological goal is to understand the mechanisms which permit
societies to integrate large number of individuals into functioning social
group. Archaeology can provide a unique insight into this process because it can
trace - sometimes over millennia - this developmental across time. This project
examines the emergence of such social complexity at a prehistoric Mayan site
with a particular focus on how uneven distribution of valuable resources serves
to establish and maintain the hierarchical structure necessary for large scale
social organization. Animals served as objects of value both for the sustenance
they provided and for the symbolic functions they served. Animal bones are an
excellent source of data because they are well preserved in many archaeological
sites.

This study addresses the role of animal resources in the formation of the
earliest Maya states. Ashley Sharpe, working under the guidance of Dr. Kitty
Emery, will analyze animal bones and shells from four Preclassic period (c. 2000
B.C - A.D. 250) Maya sites in Guatemala and Belize. She will address such
questions as how and when animals and their products (e.g. meat, fur, feathers,
bones, and shells) began to be differentially used among community members for
food, crafting, ceremonial rituals, and as markers of status and political
authority. This study will also combine traditional zooarchaeological methods
with novel stable isotopic techniques to identify past animal management
practices and long-distance exchange.

The central focus of the investigation is the site of Ceibal, Guatemala, which
boasts one of the earliest and longest occupational sequences in the Maya area
(c. 1000 B.C. - A.D. 1000). Ceibal became a politically-dominant civic center
much earlier than many other Preclassic sites, in part due to its residents'
ability to acquire and manage resources, including those of animals. Sharpe will
identify animal remains recovered at Ceibal, comparing proportions, diversity,
and uses of animals in the site core and periphery to track the development of
social complexity. Carbon and nitrogen isotopic signatures of mammal and avian
bones will identify whether wild animals, particularly deer, peccary, and
turkey, were raised in captivity. Strontium, oxygen, and lead isotopes will
identify non-local animals at Ceibal that were acquired through long-distance
exchange networks established as the site rose to political dominance. To obtain
a broader regional understanding of early animal resource use, Ceibal's
zooarchaeological data will also be compared with assemblages previously
examined by Sharpe for this dissertation project from the neighboring Preclassic
sites of San Bartolo, Cival, and Cerros. This is the first large-scale study of
animal resource use in the Preclassic period of Maya history. It is also the
first study to incorporate lead isotopic analysis of Mesoamerican animal
remains, and will establish baseline data for future investigations sourcing
archaeological material.

The faunal identification and analysis portion of the project will be carried
out in the Environmental Archaeology laboratory of the Florida Museum of Natural
History, University of Florida, and the Ceibal Archaeological Project laboratory
in Guatemala City. These analyses will incorporate the training of US and
Guatemalan undergraduate researchers. Isotopic studies conducted at the
University of Florida Anthropology Bone Chemistry Laboratory will include
undergraduate and graduate researcher training in the fields of anthropology and
biology, who will be using these same techniques to address research questions
in other disciplines. Results will be published and presented in both English
and Spanish in Guatemalan and US venues, including publication in open access
journals and presentations to local community members to release information to
both scientific and public audiences.