* 1433501
* Belmont Forum-G8 Collaborative Research: Bangladesh Delta: Assessment of Sea-Level Rise Hazards and Integrated Predictive Development Towards Mitigation and Adaptation (BanD-AID)
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Faisal Hossain, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 138,733.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will develop
natural and social science frameworks to promote the adaptation to sea-level
rise and related coastal hazards in coastal Bangladesh. Sea-level rise, changes
in land-surface topography, and changes in the frequency of storms contribute to
increasing vulnerability to coastal regions. This is especially true in
Bangladesh, a low-lying coastal nation with a high population density that is
also prone to hazards including monsoonal flooding, saltwater intrusion,
erosion, and drinking water hazards. This project will quantify the causes of
sea-level rise and land movement as well as the human interactions that govern
coastal vulnerability in Bangladesh. An earth system analysis and prediction
system will be constructed to promote the adaptation to and mitigation of these
detrimental hazards. Using a range of satellite and ground instrumentation as
well as socio-economic tools, this project will integrate improved sea-level
rise predictions with land subsidence. This project will contribute an analysis
and prediction framework to improve the coastal resilience of Bangladesh. The
integrated development of a natural and social science framework will provide a
novel decision support tool for the adaptation of sea-level rise that is
transportable to other coastal regions of the world.