* 1433396
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Complex Choice Behavior into Assortment, Inventory, and Pricing Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paat Rusmevichientong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,000.00

Offering a diverse product assortment brings numerous benefits to a firm, such
as larger market share, increased customer satisfaction and more repeat
purchases. However, determining the right assortment variety is difficult
because products within the assortment maybe complementary or substitutes. Thus,
the demand of each product depends on the availability of all other products in
the assortment, complicating inventory planning and pricing decisions. A diverse
product assortment also means that the demand is dispersed among a larger number
of products, which may result in increased safety stocks and other additional
operational expenses. Given these complex tradeoffs, how should a firm deal with
the operational consequences of product variety and customer choice behavior?
The goal of this project is to develop models and algorithms that allow
decision-makers to offer the right assortment of products, stock the right
amount of inventory, charge the right prices and sell to the right customer,
while taking the customer choice behavior into consideration as they make these
decisions. By studying the state-of-the-art choice models to capture customer
choice behavior and by incorporating these choice models into critical
operations management problems, the project offers an integrative framework to
address assortment planning, inventory management, pricing and product
personalization decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project covers various
problems that apply to numerous industries, with focus on assortment planning,
inventory management, pricing, and product personalization decisions. (a) One
focus of the project is assortment decisions when inventories are not a limiting
concern, which is appropriate when selling products that do not require
consumption of physical inventories. The project will develop exact and
approximate algorithms to find the right assortment of products to offer under
various choice models. (b) Offered assortment determines the demands for the
different products, indicating that assortment decisions interact with stocking
decisions. The project will study models that make joint assortment offer and
stocking decisions, as well as models that make assortment offer decisions under
fixed inventory availability. Standard formulations of these models require a
separate decision variable for each possible assortment, which can get too many.
The goal is to develop compact formulations under different choice models and
investigate the structural properties of the optimal assortment. (c) The project
covers pricing decisions when customers choose among the offered products. The
project will investigate such pricing problems under a variety of choice models
and incorporate various constraints on the prices. (d) Developments in
availability of real-time data on customers allow personalizing the assortment
offering to each customer. The challenge is to quickly assess the choice
behavior of each customer and compute the optimal assortment to offer in real
time based on choice behavior and inventory availability. The project will study
assortment personalization models with performance guarantees and investigate
how to incorporate customer forecasts. (e) An important step in building models
under customer choice is the estimation of the choice model that drives the
choice behavior. The project will investigate how to estimate choice models from
sales data. When data is limited, there is a tradeoff between increasing the
predictive accuracy by using complex models and over-fitting complex choice
models to limited data. An important goal is to derive robust criteria to
balance the tradeoffs.