* 1433170
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanisms of Freshwater Exchange Across the East Greenland Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 394,862.00

Freshwater flowing out of the Arctic and from Greenland ice melt has the
potential to modulate or even shut down deep convection in the sub-polar North
Atlantic. The processes that control this exchange, and how they depend on
external factors such as wind and outflow from the Arctic, are not well known
and are not well resolved in basin-scale and climate models. Better
understanding of the freshwater budget on the shelf, and how these waters get
into the deep ocean interior, is essential to improve climate models and
understand how the ocean will respond to a changing climate. The dynamically-
based diagnostics planned in this project using a hierarchy of numerical ocean
circulation models will also inform on mechanisms, locations, and times of
exchange in other sensitive areas, such as the east coast of Labrador. Findings
from the project will be used in undergraduate and graduate classes.
Undergraduate students supported by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Summer Student Fellowship program and assisted by graduate students will gain
research experience. Material from the project will also be used in a textbook
on ocean circulation. A graduate student will be trained in physical
oceanography, geophysical fluid dynamics, and ocean modeling at Johns Hopkins
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exchange of freshwater between the east
Greenland shelf and the interior of the sub-polar North Atlantic and Nordic Seas
is a key element in the maintenance and variability of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and its sensitivity to changes in atmospheric
forcing and freshwater outflow from the Arctic Ocean. A realistic, very high
resolution, regional model of the east Greenland shelf and adjacent deep ocean
will be combined with idealized, process oriented models and in-situ
observations to identify the strength, mechanisms, and sensitivity of this
exchange. Processes likely important for this cross-shelf exchange include:
surface and bottom Ekman layers; nonlinear eddy fluxes; local and remote wind-
forcing; and wind-driven sea ice. The exchange will be diagnosed in a series of
realistic model runs. Experiments will be designed with the idealized model to
isolate the relevant processes for further study and understanding, and
comparisons will be made with in-situ mooring and hydrographic observations and
remotely sensed sea ice data. The main goal of the project is to reach a basic
understanding of what controls the flux of freshwater from the shelf to the
basin interior and how it depends on external forcing (wind, outflow from the
Arctic, Greenland runoff) and environmental conditions such as bottom bathymetry
and the ambient stratification.