* 1433574
* Advancing Geospatial Thinking and Technologies in Grades 9-12: Citizen Mapping, Community Engagement, and Career Preparation in STEM
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kevin Czajkowski, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2018
* USD 573,981.00

Given recent advancements in geospatial technologies and the expanding
geospatial technology industry, this project is timely in its focus on spatial
thinking and strengthening geospatial technology skills among high school
students. Students will investigate real world issues in the context of their
own neighborhoods through citizen mapping activities. Students will use a
variety of data collection devices, including GPS units, georeferencing cameras,
and smartphones, along with secondary data, to investigate issues that students
perceive as significant for their communities. Students will do field work on
topics ranging from the distribution of grocery stores to environmental hazards
and the conditions of local sidewalks, street lights and crosswalks, or other
physical conditions impacting the community. Students will analyze their data
and use on-line, open-source mapping applications to produce visualizations of
the phenomena they are investigating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study includes
students at an inner city high school in the Toledo, Ohio metropolitan area.
Students will participate in summer workshops designed to introduce them to
recent advances in geospatial technologies, especially in relation to
understanding their communities and preparing them for the STEM workforce of the
future. Students will be guided through the scientific processes of synthesis,
analysis, and interpretation, and will input data they have produced as
volunteered geographic information (VGI) into open-source mapping programs to
produce maps for civic action that they will present to key individuals and
organizations in the area. They will take a pre- and post-spatial thinking
ability test (STAT) to assess changes in their spatial thinking knowledge and
skills, as well as a pre- and post-sketch map of their neighborhoods to analyze
changes in their perceptions of the community.