* 1433510
* EFRI 2-DARE: Scalable Growth and Fabrication of Anti-Ambipolar Heterojunction Devices
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2019
* USD 2,139,506.00

Communications systems such as WiFi, GPS, wireless sensor networks, and radio
frequency electronics are critical to the nation?s infrastructure and have had a
transformative impact on daily life. However, existing applications of wireless
technologies are often limited by the power consumption and speed of the
underlying electronic switches, or transistors, that send and receive signals.
Furthermore, current classes of transistors must be integrated into complex
circuits to perform simple functions. This award supports the fundamental
research necessary to make new classes of transistors that can improve the
performance of existing communications technologies and open up new applications
by enabling simplified circuit designs on flexible substrates. The development
of inexpensive and scalable approaches to new transistor materials will
facilitate the incorporation of these devices into new technologies. Computer
models of novel transistors and communications circuits will be shared with
industry partners to facilitate the transfer of knowledge and capabilities to
industry, growing the high-tech economy. Outreach programs including cooperation
with the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry will recruit a broad group of
young people to careers in science and technology crucial to the nation?s
economy and defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed work is
to create, characterize, understand, and exploit new classes of electronic and
optoelectronic devices by integrating promising two-dimensional monolayer
transition metal dichalcogenides with other low dimensional semiconductors
including p-type organic semiconductors, sorted semiconducting single walled
carbon nanotubes, and other two-dimensional materials. The project will
fabricate novel ultrathin p-n heterojunctions of mixed dimensionality that
exhibit unique and quantitatively advantageous properties arising from gate
transparency and flexibility, and characterize the devices with advanced scanned
probe techniques in addition to conventional current and capacitance versus
voltage measurements. Custom chemical precursors will be designed and
synthesized with the goal of achieving scalable growth and fabrication of
ultrathin dichalcogenides by atomic layer deposition over large areas at reduced
temperatures. To understand how the device physics leads to new properties and
circuit performance, phenomenological models will be integrated into industry
accepted nanodevice simulators, and a compact model will be developed. The
fundamental knowledge and predictive models of ultrathin heterojunctions will
expand engineering frontiers through quantitative understanding of charge
transport, the demonstration of novel device characteristics, such as the
recently discovered anti-ambipolar behavior, and the exploitation of these
behaviors to create novel electronic circuits on flexible substrates with
simpler designs and fewer elements than conventional unipolar field effect
transistor-based circuits.