* 1433978
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intersection of Place Attachment, Aspirations, and Rapidly Changing Environments on Decisions to Support Resettlement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Julie Silva, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,717.00

Involuntary displacement will impact almost 2.3 billion people by the end of
this decade. Displacement arises from a variety of factors including economic
reasons. The United States sends significant amounts of foreign direct
investment to Africa, exceeding $50 billion in 2012, and while many African
governments welcome foreign direct investment as a mechanism to decrease
poverty, development projects often displace local residents in ways that do not
enhance their economic well-being. This can lead to increased civil conflict and
social unrest. Incentivizing voluntary resettlement presents one way to diminish
the negative outcomes of resettlement agendas. This project will: (1) develop
theoretical insight into what incentivizes human behaviors promoting voluntary
resettlement; (2) design new methodologies to measure how viewpoints of post-
resettlement environments influence decision-making and outcomes at the
household level; and (3) improve understandings of the dynamics at work in the
trade-offs individuals make between wanting to remain in one's home and taking a
chance on relocating for a possibly better future. Understanding how to minimize
post-resettlement dissatisfaction among poor and marginalized populations, by
theorizing what incentivizes voluntary resettlement, can greatly reduce the
social conflict and civil unrest associated with many resettlement
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines how decision-making about
resettlement programs at the household level involves evaluations of the costs
and benefits of resisting resettlement and the potential for a better life in
the post-resettlement environment. The project explores the decision-making
process employed by resettled households in Moatize, Mozambique, which have been
displaced by rapid growth in the coal extraction industry. Three questions
underpin this research: (1) What characteristics increase the likelihood a
household will choose to voluntarily resettle?; (2) What criteria are important
in the household's decision-making process to resist or accept resettlement?;
and (3) How does the backdrop of a rapidly changing environment influence this
process? This project employs a theoretical framework that analyzes the dynamic
interface between aspirations about the post-resettlement site and attachment to
one's previous home from the perspective of the person, the process, and the
place. Qualitative data will capture the aspirational capacity and place
attachment of households to compare with semi-structured survey data on the
specific physical and social features of the pre- and post-resettlement sites.
Using multivariate regression, ethnographic decision-tree modeling, and content
analysis, this project will theorize how aspirations about one's future home and
place attachment to one's previous home interact in rapidly changing
environments to influence a household's willingness to voluntarily resettle.
This relationship will be used to construct a place profile for policy makers to
use in designing post-resettlement sites that meet household aspirations.
Successful implementation of this project's policy recommendations has the
capacity to significantly reduce post-resettlement unrest by anticipating and
managing the conflict between place attachment and aspirations for a better
future.