* 1433236
* Early Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Training Chief Scientists for Shipboard Research
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2014,11/30/2015
* William Byam, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 11/30/2015
* USD 89,397.00

Proposal 1433236 Chief Scientist Training Cruise
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests $89,397 to conduct a
short cruise aboard R/V Hugh Sharp with the principle aim of training early
career oceanographers to conduct research cruises. A cruise will be scheduled,
that consist of a 7-day cruise immediately preceded by two days of
informational&lt;br/&gt;presentations, facilities tours, and cruise mobilization
and one day of post cruise critique and&lt;br/&gt;demobilization. This
proposal?s PIs, Dr. Mark Moline and William M. Byam (Director of
Marine&lt;br/&gt;Operations), University of Delaware Marine staff and guest
speakers will take part as presenters&lt;br/&gt;at the information sessions. On
the cruise, up to 12 participants and 2 instructors
(Senior&lt;br/&gt;Scientists) as well as the ship?s Marine Technicians and crew
will work together to accomplish&lt;br/&gt;science objectives. &lt;br/&gt;The
need to improve the skills of early career scientists has been recognized by
UNOLS as well as Program for several years. Previous similar activities
conducted on the West and East Coast under Clare Reimers were highly successful,
and this effort would build on those experiences. Udel proposes a series of
UNOLS Chief Scientist Training Cruises to provide opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for
teaching early career marine scientists how to effectively plan for, acquire,
utilize&lt;br/&gt;and report on, time at sea for multi-disciplinary research
projects and education. These&lt;br/&gt;cruises, to be held on the R/V Hugh
Sharp in 2014, they will also offer new investigators&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to
test preliminary or unfamiliar research methods, work
collaboratively,&lt;br/&gt;with others and acquire samples and experience
critical for developing future&lt;br/&gt;oceanographic programs for both
research and education. Because berthing is limited&lt;br/&gt;on R/V Sharp, the
plan is to run three short cruises and a series of day cruises.
This&lt;br/&gt;approach will allow for a large number of participants, but will
also provide&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for several participants to lead a
cruise.&lt;br/&gt;The funding for the cruise is modest.&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of this activity will be the results from the expedition to a
scientifically important and interesting area. The activity is not just a "look
and see", but rather "learning from doing" real science. The proposals lays out
a very organized and proven time table for meeting the objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the activity are the majority focus. Training
the next generation of sea-going scientists is essential to maintaining
effective US oceanography. It is particularly important at this juncture as the
Academic Research Fleet downsizes and modernizes. This consideration, as well as
advancement in technology to support field work, mandates that new users become
familiar with capabilities that are rapidly evolving. This is one reason behind
shifting the paradigm from learning through osmosis from seasoned veterans to
actively participating in modern oceanography. The experiences of the previous
generation are rapidly becoming less relevant to the careers of the up-and-
coming scientists of tomorrow.