* 1433832
* EAGER: Leading Computer Science Growth: A Toolbox for K-12 Teachers, Administrators, and Other Stakeholders
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Michael Lach, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2015
* USD 249,843.00

The University of Chicago proposes a project to develop an online resource of
tools and recommendations for K-12 computer science leaders in schools and
districts. The Toolkit will use three organizational frameworks--implementation
pathways, user needs by role, and topical Q&amp;As--to make it as useful as
possible. The Toolkit will curate existing resources and tools currently under
development, and it will generate new tools, reports, and recommendations, all
focused on helping education leaders make well-informed decisions about their
computer science programs. The goal of this project is to present the best
available, timely information about developing and leading a K-12 computer
science education effort in a format that is easily accessible to school
district and state leaders, empowering them to make stronger decisions in their
efforts to broadly change educational outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
unprecedented time for the computer science education field as funding, public
awareness, and employment needs are all merging for potentially coordinated
support. The committed, long-standing leaders of the computing community,
however, have little experience in leading larger, distract-based efforts. This
project brings expertise from mathematics and science education reform
communities to the newly emerging computing efforts. The Toolkit will translate
this experience into the context of computer science and, thus, will contribute
to a foundation of knowledge on the design, implementation, and evaluation of
computer science education investments. The work will increase the scale and
effectiveness of computer science teaching and learning. It will leverage and
accelerate the many efforts already underway.