* 1433264
* AGS-PRF:  Laboratory Studies of the Heterogeneous Oxidation of Organic Compounds Found in Biomass Burning Aerosols by Hydroxyl Radicals
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Nicole Richards, Richards                Nicole         K
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 172,000.00

Atmospheric aerosols emitted into the air by biomass burning undergo many
chemical reactions in the atmosphere as they age. These reactions can
significantly change the impacts that these particles have on air quality and
climate. The research conducted by this Postdoctoral Fellow will investigate
several factors that can influence these reactions for both simple and complex
aerosol mixtures.

The overarching goal of this research is to increase the understanding of
heterogeneous OH oxidation mechanisms on organic aerosols by performing
laboratory studies on multi-component mixtures of organics (variety of
functional groups, and mixtures) and inorganic components (sulfate and nitrate),
that more closely mimic the compositional complexity of BBA in the atmosphere.
This goal will be achieved by four objectives: (1) Determine the effect multi-
functional organic groups have on OH heterogeneous uptake kinetics and oxidation
products; (2) Examine whether heterogeneous oxidation of single component
organic aerosol systems are different than in mixtures; (3) Determine the effect
relative humidity has on single organic systems and mixed inorganic-organic
mixtures on heterogeneous reaction mechanisms; and (4) Integrate the data to
assess what complexities in model BBA systems have the greatest impact on
heterogeneous oxidation mechanisms. The results of this effort will provide
useful information to climate modelers in estimating the impact of aerosols on
climate change.