* 1433724
* FUSE Studios: A New, Interest-Driven Model for Engaging Youth In STEM and Career Development Through Challenges and Partnership with Industry
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Reed Stevens, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,243,285.00

The FUSE Studios project seeks to engage youth in meaningful ways on sustained
pathways towards STEM-related careers and involvement in science in later life.
FUSE Studios are organized around sequences of interest-driven challenges (e.g.,
robot mini-golf, MP3 amplifier, mobile app development jewelry design using
3D/cad) involving both digital and hands-on activities that are informed by
authentic science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) occupations
and practices, and linked together in a progression modeled after computer-game
sequences. The challenges will be designed to broaden youth perspectives about
what counts as STEM and provide them with more clearly marked pathways towards
deepening interest, developing expertise, and broadening exposure to possible
career trajectories in STEM. The interest-driven framework is supported by: (1)
online mentoring from STEM industry experts; (2) on-demand video clips of
experts discussing career linkages relevant to a particular challenge; (3)
individual competitions that involve artifact judging; and (4) studio-wide
contests that provide a prize to all members of a studio based on collective
achievements. The project has enlisted partnership commitments supporting the
development of career-related challenges from eight STEM organizations including
large and small businesses, non-profits, and university research centers. The
project currently operates in 19 Chicago-area sites, including libraries,
schools and community centers, and will expand to additional sites in late 2014.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project research will study participants' engagement with
challenging sequences, considering both how participants engage, and what they
learn when doing so. Building upon pilot work and initial evaluation findings,
the project will investigate research questions that address whether and how
engagement with the industry- and university-themed challenge sequences affect
participants' STEM career interests and the widely-recognized dispositional
qualities of innovation, adaptive flexibility, and persistence in the face of
difficulty. The project will collect quantitative data from: (1) youth
participation computer records (e.g., the number of youth who choose specific
challenges, how much time they spend, how many levels they complete); (2) self-
efficacy surveys; and (3) pre/post surveys of changes in career interest.
Qualitative data will be obtained via: (1) micro-ethnographic studies; (2)
structured participant and facilitator interviews (administered during and after
challenge participation); (3) evaluation of the artifacts produced by
participants for each challenge level; and (4) longitudinal follow-up.