* 1433327
* Integrated computer science in elementary classrooms (iCS)
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Chris Thompson, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,199,952.00

This collaborative project between the International Society for Technology in
Education (ISTE), Georgia Technical Institute, and Georgia State University will
develop and test a model curriculum for grades 3-6 that aligns with ISTE's
standards and computational thinking goals. The strategy is to leverage three
existing computational environments (Scratch, Alice, and MAD-learn) to build
upon the activities and materials for them that exist, to create an elaborate
curricular guide. Teachers will collaborate regularly over three years with
computer science mentors and science educators to iteratively create this
curricular guide, which will be based on their own efforts and experiences
implementing the computer science activities in their classrooms. The activities
will aim to teach students computational thinking, as well as increase their
motivation and interest in computer science related fields. Each year the
program will culminate with an annual fair at which student products will be
displayed. The population of the charter school where the project will be
implemented includes a majority of students from underrepresented groups and
from low-income families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This curricular effort will be
augmented with mentor networking among teachers and students with professionals
in computer science industries. Research will be of two forms: (1) Design
research approach will collect quantitative and qualitative data on the
curriculum development process, including summative measures of learning and
attitudes toward science as well as general academic ability. Data will also
include qualitative results of an existing observation protocol for instruction
that supports computational thinking, qualitative ethnographic field notes of
meetings and classroom instruction, and video recordings of select events. (2)
Data from quantitative instruments will be compared to another school with
similar demographics that employs a project-based curriculum but does not use
the technological environments or curriculum developed here. This project has
potential for considerable impact, first immediately on the 452 students that
will experience this innovative program, and then indirectly on others based
upon the documented results of this innovative effort to integrate computational
thinking support into elementary education, and to document curriculum and
instruction that achieves this.