* 1433629
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Competition Theory, Conflict, and Indigenous Peoples
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Peter Owens, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 10,545.00

This research explores the structural and collective determinants of ethnic
violence against indigenous peoples in California, from 1850 to 1865. In this
context, violence encompasses killings resulting from both state operations and
civilian lynch mobs, vigilante parties, and individual homicides. By employing a
"mediated competition" approach, which argues that structural sources of
potential grievance formation are a necessary but insufficient basis for violent
ethnic mobilization, this research focuses on how actors mobilized in various
ways, with varying degrees of lethality, to suppress the indigenous population
of the state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, this research employs a unique
multi-methods approach. First, to explain variability in the timing and
intensity of violent victimization, the investigators will construct an original
historical dataset that documents roughly 780 incidents of anti-indigenous
violence in the state, as well as relevant county-level political, economic, and
demographic conditions. Fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA) will
be employed to specify the precise ways in which these structural determinants
combined with meso-level mechanisms to produce varying levels of indigenous
victimization in different counties and regions. Next, using formal techniques,
the fsQCA results will be used to specify theoretically relevant regions that
represent divergent "micro-climates" of violent mobilization. Detailed
qualitative data on these regions will then be used to compliment structural
insights with an exploration of meso-level mechanisms that either facilitated or
inhibited mobilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the potential scholarly
and evidentiary value of the project's original historical dataset, the
investigators will make the quantitative dataset and relevant qualitative
materials accessible to teachers, educators, and the public. It will also
produce scholarly material augmenting a growing historical literature on
American colonial violence in California, with a systematic and theoretically
informed account of specific patterns of violent mobilization among different
state and civic actors. Research findings and data will be disseminated in a
manner to support research, education, policy and community organizing related
to historical indigenous justice topics and contemporary remedial efforts.
Results can inform the work of a wide range of social science scholars working
on ethnic repression and violence in societies transitioning to democracy.