* 1433543
* Placing our Solar System in Context Through the Characterization of Long-Period Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 08/17/2013,08/31/2015
* Stephen Kane, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2015
* USD 184,350.00

This project, which is called the Transit Ephemeris Refinement and Monitoring
Survey (TERMS), will determine improved orbital information in order to provide
more accurate transit windows for intermediate-to-long-period planets with
subsequent observational follow-up at the predicted transit times. High
precision radial-velocity and photometric measurements of the newly identified
exoplanets will be used to determine planetary composition and test models of
planetary formation. The PI and his collaborators will focus on long-period (P >
20 days) planets, which have been excluded from most other studies due to a bias
toward shorter periods (due to observational constraints).

Transiting planets have orbital inclinations which cause them to appear to pass
in front of their host star, and thus temporarily block some of the starlight.
Transits provide special opportunities to measure the relative radii and masses
of planets compared to the host star, which is useful to determining planetary
density and composition. This project will result in measurements of a group of
exoplanets for which very little is known ? namely, cooler and less-massive
planets that are farther from their host star. This will provide an important
balance to exoplanet databases, which are currently heavy with ?hot Jupiters,?
which to now have been easier to observe, and provide more opportunities to
observe planets which are closer to Jupiter and Saturn in our solar system.
Additionally, the ephemeris data and light-curves provided will be useful to
other astronomers in the community.