* 1433521
* NSF/DOE Solar Hydrogen Fuel: Accelerated Discovery of Advanced RedOx Materials for Solar Thermal Water Splitting to Produce Renewable Hydrogen
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Charles Musgrave, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 541,371.00

Principal Investigator: Charles B. Musgrave Number: 1433521

Nontechnical Description

There is growing urgency to develop renewable alternatives to fossil fuels for
satisfying global energy and chemical demands. Hydrogen gas is a promising
renewable fuel which can be made from sustainable resources. One particularly
promising route to produce renewable hydrogen fuels is solar thermal water
splitting (STWS), in which the heat of solar energy is used to split water into
hydrogen fuel and oxygen in the presence of a catalyst material at high
temperatures. To efficiently produce hydrogen gas by STWS, two technical
challenges must be met. The first challenge is the discovery of catalyst
materials that can efficiently drive thermal water splitting, and the second
challenge is to develop a reaction system to collect solar energy and deliver it
efficiently to the water splitting reaction. In this regard, a major problem is
that typical STWS processes have temperature changes of up to 500 degrees
Celsius, which puts severe stress of the stability of the catalyst materials and
the reaction process that the catalyst material is contained in. Recently, the
principal investigator?s team has developed a solar thermal water splitting
process that operates at constant temperature. The goal of this project is to
discover new STWS materials which exploit this constant temperature process. New
STWS materials will be discovered through an accelerated screening process which
involves computational prototyping of materials and experimental validation of
these predictions. Relevant data from the materials screening studies will be
assessable to researchers through a publically available web-based database. The
project activities will train two graduate students and number of undergraduate
students in advanced techniques for materials screening which may valuable for
the materials industry. The research will also be incorporated into engineering,
materials science and chemistry courses at the University of Colorado, Boulder.

Technical Description

A promising route to produce renewable hydrogen fuels is solar thermal water
splitting (STWS), in which the thermal input from solar energy is used to drive
the splitting of water into hydrogen fuel and oxygen gas in the presence of a
RedOx material at high temperatures where the reaction thermodynamics and
kinetics are favorable. Typical STWS processes have temperature swings of up to
500 degrees Celsius, which puts severe stress of the stability of the catalyst
materials and the reactor that the catalyst material is contained in. Recently,
the principal investigator?s team has developed a solar thermal water splitting
process that operates at constant temperature. The goal of this project is to
discover new isothermal STWS RedOx active materials which exploit this constant
temperature process. The approach involves multistage screening using ab initio
quantum simulations of increasing accuracy to down-select candidate RedOx
materials with the best performance, followed by experimental validation and
refinement of the model. Rapid screening tools will also assess the kinetics of
rate-limiting surface reactions for use in solar thermal chemical reactor
models. This accelerated materials discovery approach will be expanded to screen
for multicomponent metal oxide RedOx active materials for isothermal water
splitting. The project also includes activities to provide broader impacts. Two
graduate students and a number of undergraduate students will gain training in
advanced material screening tools and associated computational methodology which
are likely to be important for the materials industries in the future. Since the
screening efforts will generate vast quantities of materials data which may be
useful to researchers studying metal oxides, a publicly accessible online
database will be created containing the calculated heats of formation and band
gaps. Course modules for materials screening will be developed for University of
Colorado, Boulder.