* 1433979
* Functional Diversity and Performance of Ciliated Marine Invertebrate Larvae:  Measuring and Modeling Larval Swimming, Feeding and Hydrodynamic Signaling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Houshuo Jiang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2017
* USD 282,606.00

Many marine organisms, including mussels, oysters, and barnacles, have a
planktonic (drifting) larval stage and a sedentary (less mobile) bottom-dwelling
adult stage. The adults of these organisms release a large number of larvae into
the water column, where the larvae develop and grow and often, disperse long
distances before settling and changing into adult forms. Larval survival and
transport in the water column and larval ability in finding suitable habitat for
settlement shape the abundance and distribution of the adult population. All
these factors are significantly influenced by the interactions between
individual larva and its surrounding fluid. However, current knowledge of
larval-fluid interactions, especially at the individual level, is scarce. This
project will carry out state-of-the-art observational and modeling studies of
larval-fluid interactions. This project provides hands-on training opportunities
for undergraduate students. Findings from this highly interdisciplinary project
will be incorporated to inquiry-based undergraduate curriculum material that
will be taught and evaluated in classrooms and made publicly available through
digital libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between individual larva
and its surrounding fluid significantly impact survival and transport in the
water column. Examples of these interactions include: 1) generating currents for
movement and particle capture, 2) reducing predation risk through minimizing the
hydrodynamic signals, and 3) rapidly adjusting swimming patterns in response to
fluid movements, such as near-bottom turbulence during settlement. Understanding
these key larval-fluid interactions requires observations at fine spatial and
temporal scales due to small larval size and rapid viscous decay. Although the
overall morphology of larvae is highly diverse there are common shapes shared
between taxonomic groups, such as the "armed morphology" of larval molluscs and
echinoids whereby larvae use long ciliated extensions for feeding and swimming.
It is unclear how morphology influences larval-fluid interactions. This project
aims at filling in these knowledge gaps by applying high speed, high resolution
micro Particle Image Velocimetry (microPIV) and computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) modeling to quantify and mechanistically examine larval-fluid
interactions. This project addresses three groups of questions: (1) How do fine-
scale larval-fluid interactions differ between ciliated larvae with similar
overall morphology? What are the ecological consequences of these differences?
(2) How rapidly can larvae vary their influences on surrounding fluid? (3) What
are the limitations of microPIV as a way to observe freely swimming larvae at
the relevant scale? To address these questions, a series of microPIV
observations will be conducted on 3 pairs of related species that have armed
larvae. The hypothesis is that despite similarity in overall shape, larval-fluid
interactions differ between species and larval performance peaks at ambient
condition that the larvae are found. Hypothesis testing will be achieved through
comparing the larval-fluid interactions between these studied species through
ontogeny and at different temperatures and viscosities. The obtained
observational data will be compared against theoretical hydrodynamic models and
CFD models to build a mechanistic understanding of how larvae move water around
their bodies and the resulting signals.