* 1433943
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Citizenship, Ethnic Identity and Health
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Trenita Childers, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2015
* USD 11,970.00

Linda K. George&lt;br/&gt;Trenita B. Childers&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposes to make a theoretical
contribution to the literature on the immigrant health paradox by incorporating
key sociological perspectives-stress processes and identity theory. The
established trends on the topic provide a good picture of how immigrant status
and health are related. This project, however, will complete a qualitative
analysis to provide more nuanced information about the key mechanisms by which
specific social factors impact mental health. Existing literature on immigrant
health and health status is largely based on results from the U.S. This research
studies a non-U.S. context, adding greater depth to our understanding of how
social factors influence immigrant health. Specifically, the research will
examine immigrants within a developing country context with the goal to clarify
the strength and generalizability of existing theoretical relationships of
immigrant health . The study will include undocumented persons which could
potentially further expand current understandings of how identity serves as a
protective factor for mental health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using original
qualitative data, this dissertation research will examine immigrant status
differences in mental health among ethnic Haitians living in the Dominican
Republic (D.R.). The Dominican Republic has a unique racial structure, history,
and documentation legislation, which create an ideal place to sift through
relationships among social factors that influence mental health. This project
emphasizes three primary themes: perceived discrimination, documentation status,
and ethnic identity salience. The research question is two-fold: 1) How does
immigrant status impact the mental health of ethnic Haitians living in the
D.R.?, and 2) How do perceived discrimination, documentation status, and
identity condition the relationship between immigrant status and mental health?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation examines the ways that social factors
influence mental health in a particular context. While all participants for this
project are ethnic Haitians, the primary point of comparison is between those
born in the D.R. and those born in Haiti. This comparison is critical because
many people of Haitian descent who were born in the D.R. have been stripped of
Dominican citizenship rendering them effectively stateless. Data are derived
from two primary sources: a ten-month ethnographic investigation of a Haitian
community in the D.R. and 60 in-depth interviews with residents. The secondary
data collection strategy involves interviews with key informants at a clinic
that serves people of Haitian descent in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
has the potential for a significant broader impact. First, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and service providers for immigrant populations will
possibly gain greater insight into the immigrant experience. In the D.R., as in
the U.S., organizations fund interventions aimed at improving immigrants' health
and well-being. Mexican immigrants to the U.S. are an example of an immigrant
group that also confronts issues surrounding perceived discrimination,
documentation status, and ethnic identity salience. Given these similarities,
this research is well-positioned to facilitate discussion in in the U.S. among
sociologists, psychologists, migration and human rights scholars, and global
health scholars. Finally, this project will establish partnerships with
Dominican scholars including faculty and graduate students in the D.R. who are
engaged in similar research. This will enhance the infrastructure for future
collaborative research and education. Results will engage multiple audiences in
the critical conversation about the impact of sociopolitical factors on mental
health.