* 1433967
* CAREER: Novel Wireless, Micro-Force Sensing Mobile Microrobots for Mechanobiology and Automated Biomanipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* David Cappelleri, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 02/28/2018
* USD 439,062.00

This project, creating a novel class of magnetically-controlled, mobile
microrobots with two-dimensional vision-based micro-force sensing end-effectors,
has the potential to advance both the state of the art in microrobots and the
state-of-the-art in biological cell micromanipulation. By combining advanced
mobile manipulation microrobots with a MEMS-based micro-force sensor, a novel,
transformative tool for future advancements in mechanobiology and automated
biomanipulation will result.

The end-effectors of the proposed mobile microbots consist of micro-compliant
mechanisms with custom-designed force-deflection characteristics whose
deformations are observed with a camera attached to an optical microscope. The
grippers will be fabricated along with a soft magnetic microrobot body and
therefore controllable with external magnetic field gradients. These micro-force
sensing mobile microrobots will have real-time micro-force-control manipulation
capabilities specifically tailored for mechanobiology and automated
biomanipulation tasks. A portable ìBio-Robotics test-bed, designed to fit
comfortably around both inverted optical or confocal microscopes, is proposed to
facilitate outreach and future collaborative research. Finally, a series of
proof-of-concept application studies related to single cell and biomaterial
adhesion and cell characterization will be conducted to showcase the efficacy of
the system.

Broader Impacts: Advances in mechanobiology and automated biomanipulation
enabled by this proposal will directly impact the healthcare of many. The
research and educational/outreach efforts of this proposal will impact students
from the high school to the graduate levels. Student teams will participate in
an international mobile microrobotic competition, as well as the ASME Student
Mechanism and Robot Design Competition, to stimulate students' interests in
undergraduate research. Local elementary and high school students will be
enriched through the Stevens' Center for Innovation in Engineering and Science
Education and the Stevens Exploring Career Options in Engineering and Science
program.