* 1433921
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Minority Youth and Everyday Negotiations of Place and Marginalization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Paul Adams, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2015
* USD 10,636.00

Researchers and policy makers have long been interested in understanding how
growing up in impoverished neighborhoods impacts the life prospects of minority
youth. As the gap between affluent and impoverished neighborhoods widens and as
young adults remain stuck in poor urban communities, it has once again become
imperative to understand how place shapes young people's aspirations and
perceptions of their future. This project will address these questions by
analyzing what urban minority youth learn about their community and how they use
this knowledge to assess their future options and opportunities. Given the
proliferation of place-based programs and policies geared to benefit youth in
marginalized communities, this project will provide timely, policy-relevant
information about the spatial factors most influential to structuring young
people's aspirations and pathways to adulthood. The findings from this project
will therefore inform urban reforms taking place within neighborhoods that have
recently become part of a federally supported Choice Neighborhood program. The
project will also contribute to efforts to create place-based indicators that
capture young people's access to opportunities and prospects of attaining upward
mobility. Additionally, by positioning young people's knowledge and perceptions
as central to analyzing the effects of place, this project will generate
theoretical insight that furthers our understanding of how particular places
take on significance in shaping young people's lives and life course. In doing
so, it will help advance geographical research on life course transitions and
push sociological research on neighborhood effects to account for the everyday
experience of growing up in a marginalized community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
project blends literature from children's geography, social mobility, and life
course studies to examine how young people's aspirations are shaped through
their experiences in and of everyday places. Conceptually, the project frames
young people's communities as formative geographies, learning spaces wherein
they are absorbing information about their everyday surroundings and using this
knowledge to evaluate the opportunities and pathways that are available to them
and to people from their neighborhood. The study will explore how young people's
everyday surroundings become formative by combining participant observations
with go-along interviews to examine what African American and Latino/a youth
have learned about their community and how that links to the way how they plan
their lives. These methods will enable the researchers to gather in-depth,
ethnographic information about what young people see, hear, say, and feel about
the people, places, and spaces around them and observe the messages and advice
they receive about how to grow up and get ahead in life. Semi-structured
interviews will also be conducted with community members, teachers, and property
managers who help construct young people's experiences of their community. Taken
together, this methodological approach provides the spatialized perspective
necessary to analyze how urban minority youth make sense of where they start out
in life and evaluate what the possible pathways to success are from their
particular social and spatial location.