* 1433496
* EFRI 2-DARE Proposal: Spin-Valley Coupling for Photonic and Spintronic Devices
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* David Cobden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,602,874.00

Non-Technical: The performance and capabilities of key present solid-state
technologies, such as light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and other electro-
optic components, are ultimately constrained by the fundamental properties of
conventional semiconductors such as silicon and gallium arsenide. Monolayers of
the layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (with formula MX2, such as MoS2 and
WSe2) have recently been discovered to be a new class of semiconductors
effectively at the atomically thin limit. They have dramatically different
fundamental properties which can defy previous constraints, allowing observation
and discovery of new physical phenomena and offering potential for
unprecendented solid-state device possibilities. Fundamentally new properties in
MX2 include the relationship between electron spin, the "valley index"
specifying which of two equivalent momentum states the electron occupies in the
2D lattice, and the "layer index" specifying which layer the electron is in when
two monolayers form a bilayer. The spin, valley and layer quantum numbers in
this material are linked and can be manipulated jointly, as has already been
demonstrated theoretically and experimentally by the investigators. The proposed
work aims to study all aspects of this "spin-valley-layer coupling", ranging
from its role in electrical transport to its interplay with optical cavities,
with a view to novel yet practical device technologies with electrical,
magnetic, and optical control. The work will be done by a mixed team of physics
and engineers and will provide interdisciplinary research education to a large
number of graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
In monolayer MX2 the strong spin-orbit coupling locks the real spin at the band
edges to the valley index to produce spin-valley coupling. At the same time the
valleys, and hence spins, are addressable using circularly polarized optical
selection rules. Additionally, in bilayers and heterostructures the valley index
is further coupled to the layer index for a given valley index, leading to new
magnetoelectric effects. MX2s thus provide the first solid-state system in which
electric and dynamical control of combined valley pseudospin and real spin are
possible, opening up a wealth of hybrid spin and valley device possibilities.
The focus of the proposed work is on the studying the unique spin, valley and
layer pseudospin couplings in MX2 monolayers, bilayers and heterostructures with
photonic and spintronic device applications in mind. The specific goals and
methods are as follows: (1) develop microscopic theories for coupled spin-
valley-charge transport to guide and model the experimental efforts and
synthesis of monolayers, bilayers, heterostructures, and hybrid systems; (2)
develop highest quality, large-area crystal growth with controllable charged and
magnetic dopants; (3) combine electrical and optical investigation of intrinsic
spin and valley properties to determine the fundamental parameters of monolayers
and bilayers in various device geometries for hybrid spin-valleytronics; (4)
investigate and demonstrate manipulation of spin and valley polarizations in
heterostructures and hybrid photonic devices combining MX2s with structures such
as photonic-crystal cavities, addressing aspects including spin-valley-charge
transport across interfaces, interlayer exciton physics, exciton-polaritons in
integrated cavity structures, and strong photon-valley exciton interactions
within a nanocavity; and (5) develop MX2 lateral junction devices for efficient,
controllable, and spin and valley specific light emitters, modulators and
detectors.