* 1433005
* Collaborative Research: The Tuskegee Alliance to Develop, Implement and Study a Virtual Graduate Education Model for Underrepresented Minorities in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2020
* USD 993,353.00

Tuskegee University, Auburn University and Alabama State University will
collaborate to create the Tuskegee Alliance to Forge Pathways to Academic
Careers (T-PAC). This project was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF
14-505) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T track targets
strategic alliances of institutions and organizations to develop, implement, and
study innovative evidence-based models and standards for STEM graduate
education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM career preparation that
eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote positive practices for URMs.
The T-PAC project will develop, implement, study, and evaluate a model of STEM
graduate education focusing on underrepresented minorities (URMs) who are U.S.
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed AGEP-T project will be unique and
will have potential to contribute to foundational knowledge about how two
Historically Black Universities that focus on baccalaureate degree production
will collaborate with a research university to develop, implement and study a
model of graduate education and comprehensive professional development for URM
graduate students in STEM. The project will also emphasize on-line instruction
and professional development. The lessons learned as this project progresses,
and the ultimate results from the work, will provide information that will be
beneficial to educators, administrators and policymakers, as well as the general
public.