* 1433573
* Developing Workforce Skills in Analyzing Large and Complex Earth Science Datasets
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Michelle Hall, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2019
* USD 423,228.00

The size of Geoscience datasets is a significant challenge in the study of many
Earth processes and systems because sophisticated technology allows us to
collect datasets much larger than ever before. An ability to manipulate and
analyze these datasets is important because they contain critical information
about the state of our world, the impact of natural disasters, and the extent of
natural resources. Large geoscience datasets have traditionally been accessible
only to those with specialized training in computer programs such as Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) tools. This project will address obstacles to learning
how to use large Geoscience datasets and solve authentic problems without having
to master all aspects of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) tools themselves.
This project will create a model curriculum focused on the topic of tropical
cyclones: exploring their lifecycle, hazards, and drivers in atmospheric and
ocean circulation, with an emphasis on the timely question of possible linkages
to climate change. It will develop new investigations on the devastating and
scientifically unique cyclones, Typhoon Haiyan and Hurricane Sandy. It will also
improve our understanding of how students learn with the powerful analytical and
visualization tools of a GIS and how these learning experiences influence their
interest in, awareness of, and persistence towards geosciences and other careers
that depend upon analysis of large complex data sets to solve important societal
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate widespread use of
GIS as an introductory level analysis tool by providing high quality curriculum
that works with both the leading free open source and commercial GIS
applications. It makes these GIS tools accessible to novices through
modifications to the GIS applications' user-interfaces. To increase
accessibility, the curriculum will be published using low cost e-publishing
strategies. The new curriculum design model will include workforce skills
components that challenge students to think about how choices in data analysis,
representation, and visualization impact interpretation and understanding. It
will develop students' abilities to reason and solve problems by training
students to think critically about how best to analyze and represent data to
solve a problem. This project will investigate the extent to which it
successfully leads to student improvement of targeted knowledge, technical
skills, and scientific thinking abilities by using embedded forced choice
questions within the curriculum modules. In addition, students will complete a
culminating open-ended investigation testing their ability to apply what they
have learned. This will be scored by a set of rubrics developed by the PI team.
This project will also investigate the extent to which it is able to influence
students' awareness of, interest in, and intent to pursue STEM careers
generally, and those in geoscience specifically. This will be accomplished using
a pre-test/post-test model to measure changes in students' affective responses
to these issues. Previously validated instruments will be augmented with
additional questions to specifically measure awareness of and interest in
geoscience in general and geoscience careers. Inferential statistics will be
used to determine areas of change in the pre-test/post-test answers, indicating
likely impact of the curriculum.