* 1433220
* Transforming Potential into Promise: A Depth-First Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Rajiv Gandhi, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 337,147.00

The "depth-first" educational approach allows students with almost no background
in a particular subject to study advanced topics in that subject in a relatively
short time. The PI has successfully used this approach to train undergraduate
students in computer science at Rutgers University-Camden and inspired them to
pursue graduate studies. The program in Theoretical Computer Science (TCS for
short) provides an opportunity to translate the potential of promising students
into measurable impact. The program introduces undergraduate and high school
students to TCS in a depth-first manner. New students join the program each
summer, with almost no background in computer science and are introduced to
topics in discrete mathematics and algorithms. The meetings with the students
continue during the academic year. Students who return to the program in
subsequent years study advanced topics in theoretical computer science and
participate in research. Students participating in this program gain robust
exposure to the field of computer science and are ready to study advanced topics
early in college, which will enable them to do substantive research before they
graduate. The program has been quite successful in attracting and retaining
female participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue to test the
success of depth-first approach in training students to conduct research in TCS.
Various research topics in optimization and approximation algorithms will be
explored by high school and undergraduate students. In the end, a more diverse
pool of students contribute to the research progress in TCS.