* 1433841
* Collaborative Research: ITEST-Strategies: Human-Centered Robotics Experiences for Exploring Engineering, Computer Science, and Society
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Seta Bogosyan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2018
* USD 743,688.00

Involving more students from urban and rural areas in STEM fields and careers
has been at the forefront of national STEM education reform efforts for decades.
Research shows that engaging these students in STEM activities relevant to their
everyday lives is critical to increasing their motivation, interest, learning,
and participation in STEM. This project will address this need through
engineering and computer science activities aimed at helping 400 middle and high
school students grasp the intricacies of scientific principles and technology
design. The goal is to inspire and prepare a greater number of students from the
targeted population to understand how these principles and design strategies
contribute to a stronger educational and technological society. To do this, the
project will use a teaching and learning model that will integrate human-
centered robotics and telepresence theme-based activities in a problem-based
learning and systems thinking environment. In this project, human-centered
robotics will involve the development of robotics technologies and applications
for everyday use while telepresence robots will enable better communication,
operation, and exploration across enormous distances. This dual strategy makes
the proposed technological approach highly relevant to the daily needs of
students in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted by an
interdisciplinary team of students and faculty mentors from the Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science Departments at the University of Alaska at
Fairbanks and from the School of Informatics and Computing and the Center for
Research on Learning and Technology at Indiana University at Bloomington.
Through this partner-effort, the research team will develop a curriculum that
addresses the technical and societal aspects of the human-centered robotics and
telepresence that underlie the engineering and computer science concepts
students will learn about. Each year, students will actively engage in a 9-month
problem-based learning strategy using two basic open-architecture platforms
based on the Arduino microcontroller. Students will be able to customize these
platforms through design variations and with the addition of new sensors,
actuators, program parts, and other technology-related functions. User-friendly
software will help teachers and mentors assist students with their designs and
redesigns. Through this approach, students will gain STEM knowledge and skills
that will be useful to their own individual lives and for sharing with other
students, who might be chronically ill, reside in remote places, live in the
lower 48 states, or even internationally via ties established through prior NSF-
supported efforts. Hence, this project will help student develop technology-
based products adaptable to peoples' daily environments, needs, and practices in
some meaningful way, which in turn, could increase student's motivation and
interest in STEM and STEM careers.