* 1433358
* AGS-PRF:  Radical Precursor Chemistry in the Northeast United States
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Dorothy Fibiger, Fibiger                 Dorothy        L
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 172,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (PRF) supports the participation of an
early career female scientist in a large NSF-supported field campaign to measure
nitrogen compounds in the atmosphere. The Wintertime Investigation of Transport,
Emissions, and Reactivity (WINTER) campaign scheduled during January-February
2015, in the Mid-Atlantic region of the Northeastern U.S. focuses on atmospheric
multiphase chemical transformations that generally occur more slowly in
wintertime, enabling the resulting pollutants to be transported over wider
geographic areas downwind of source regions. The results of this research are
important for understanding how nitrogen chemistry influences air quality and
climate.

Measurements of nitryl chloride (ClNO2) will be made with a chemical ionization
mass spectrometer utilizing iodide ion-molecule clusters (I- CIMS). Measurements
of NO, NO2, N2O5, NO3 and O3 will be made using a cavity ring-down spectrometer
(CRDS). These instruments will be deployed on the NSF/NCAR C-130 aircraft along
with many additional instruments being contributed by other investigators. Other
related compounds being measured include Cl2, HONO, HNO3, HNCO, HCl and peroxy
nitrates.

The three primary research objectives of WINTER are to: 1) Characterize the
chemical transformations of wintertime emissions via multiphase, nocturnal, and
photochemical processes; 2) Assess the dominant mechanisms of secondary aerosol
formation and quantify the geographical distribution of inorganic and organic
aerosol types during winter; and 3) Constrain wintertime emission inventories of
key pollutants for urban areas, power plants, and agricultural areas, and
characterize their export over the North Atlantic.