* 1434175
* Collaborative Research:  Reconstructing Interactions Between the East Asian Monsoon and Westerly Jet at Multiple Timescales via the Flux and Provenance of Eolian and Fluvial Supply
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Andrew Kurtz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 237,774.00

Original Title&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Interactions
Between the East Asian Monsoon and Westerly Jet at Multiple Timescales via the
Flux and Provenance of Eolian and Fluvial Supply&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Revised
Title&lt;br/&gt;Reconstructing interactions between the East Asian Monsoon and
Westerly Jet at multiple timescales based on wind-supplied dust and fluvial
inputs to continental margin sediments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research will build robust new records of East Asian
climate variability, which determines precipitation seasonality and intensity
for over 20% of the world's population. The proposal seeks to determine the
average state and variability of the Westerly Jet and its relationship to the
East Asian Monsoon during key intervals of the last 3 million years spanning a
wide range of background climates. This will yield a heretofore unrealized
understanding of climatic sensitivity and behavior in this globally critical
region. The researchers will examine the input of wind-blown dust and riverine
material by studying their chemical and isotopic composition at several key
marine locations in the Japan Sea/East Sea and East China Sea. Land-derived
material is primarily delivered to the Japan Sea/East Sea by wind, reflecting
Westerly Jet behavior, and to the East China Sea by the Yangtze River,
reflecting precipitation intensity and distribution in interior China. Tracing
changes in these inputs can be used to make inferences about the atmospheric and
precipitation regimes of Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
climate sensitivity and behavior of a critical part of the climate system that
is of high relevance to society. In addition to integrating efforts at three
participating institutions, this proposal builds on collaborations with other
scientists developing complementary records of regional climate, including
multiple studies reflecting East Asian summer monsoon strength. The proposed
research involves 40% of the expedition's US scientific party, brings together a
high number of national and international collaborators, leverages off of other
funding resources (US and internationally), and directly contributes to
undergraduate and graduate education at all three institutions and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
build robust new records of East Asian climate variability on millennial to
million-year timescales through examination of chemical and isotopic tracers of
terrigenous provenance and flux in the Japan Sea/East Sea and East China Sea.
Terrigenous material is primarily delivered to the Japan Sea/East Sea by wind,
reflecting Westerly Jet behavior, and to the East China Sea by the Yangtze
River, reflecting precipitation intensity and distribution in interior China.
The proposal aims to determine the mean state and variability of the Westerly
Jet and its coupling with the East Asian Monsoon, with a particular focus on the
Plio-Pleistocene boundary, the Mid-Pleistocene Transition, and the last ~450 ka,
and will yield a heretofore unrealized understanding of climatic sensitivity and
behavior in this globally critical region. Newly collected sediment cores from
IODP Expedition 346 (Asian Monsoon) offer a unique opportunity to produce
continuous records with millennial-scale resolution spanning millions of years.
The researchers will use XRF core scanning to provide high-resolution,
continuous records, and perform elemental and isotopic analyses in specific time
intervals to provide detailed insights into changes in eolian and fluvial
sediment sources. Integrating XRF scanning records with quantitative chemical
and isotopic tracers is surprisingly uncommon. The proposed research
incorporates newly developed analytical and statistical methods for identifying
dispersed volcanic ash in the sediment, which will ensure that the terrigenous
(erosional) signal is not combined with a volcanic signal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses climate sensitivity and behavior in
key time intervals of high relevance to understanding global climate
systematics. The East Asian Monsoon determines precipitation seasonality and
intensity for over 20% of the world's population. The research directly
addresses objectives of IODP Expedition 346, involves 40% of the expedition's US
scientific party, involves a high number of national and international
collaborators, leverages off of other funding resources (US and
internationally), and directly contributes to undergraduate and graduate
education at all three institutions and beyond.