* 1434786
* Highly Parallel Synthesis of Nanostructures Inside Crystalline Protein Scaffolds
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Christopher Ackerson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

A grand challenge in nanomaterials manufacturing is the reliable, scalable and
reproducible production of metallic nanostructures. The ability to program the
synthesis and position of such nanostructures will enable the development of
innovative materials for energy storage, light-harvesting or catalysis. Despite
a high degree of interest in controlling the growth and placement of
nanoparticles using biological materials as templates, it is currently difficult
to control the size, shape and position of the resulting inorganic components.
With this award, the research team will use engineered protein crystals, highly
ordered assemblies of trillions of monomers, as "molds" to direct and limit the
growth patterns of guest nanoparticles. Both the resulting nanostructures and
the hybrid crystalline assembly of nanoparticles thereof, have potential useful
applications. For example, inorganic structures formed within the solvent
channels of protein crystals could result in ultra-high surface area materials
for catalysis or battery applications. This research will provide
interdisciplinary educational training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students in cutting-edge areas of bionanotechnology, molecular
modeling, nanostructure synthesis, as well as nanostructure imaging and
analysis. Results from this research will therefore benefit both the U.S.
economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle growth is a nucleation
phenomenon, making it technically challenging to grow them with uniform size or
low symmetry. The research team will decouple nucleation from growth, using
well-established affinity interactions to "plant" seed nanoparticles at specific
sites within the protein lattice. Seeded nuclei will then be subjected to
controlled growth within the anisotropic protein matrix. The resulting hybrid
crystals will be characterized using multiple techniques including x-ray
diffraction, elemental analysis, and electron microscopy. Nanoparticles released
from the host crystals will likewise be characterized via electron microscopy.
In comparison with existing approaches for the template-directed deposition of
inorganic structures, crystalline scaffolds will provide a higher degree of
order and the unique possibility of high-resolution structure determination.