* 1434148
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Studies of the Role of Effluent Organic Matter in the Sensitized Transformation of Organic Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* William Arnold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 175,182.00

1434148&lt;br/&gt;Arnold&lt;br/&gt;1434313&lt;br/&gt;Latch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Studies of the Role of
Effluent Organic Matter in the Sensitized Transformation of Organic
Contaminants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of effluent organic matter (organic
matter contained in treated wastewater that is discharged to the environment) in
the photochemical processing of microcontaminants is relatively unexplored. The
overall objective of this project is to evaluate the photochemistry of aquatic
pollutants, specifically focusing on the measurement of photochemically produced
reactive intermediate production and quenching from effluent organic matter and
the prediction of micropollutant rate constants using computational chemistry
techniques. The innovative aspects of the proposed research are: 1) the focus on
aquatic contaminants with specific functional groups susceptible to indirect
photolysis; 2) the side-by-side comparison of photochemically produced reactive
intermediate production/quenching from effluent organic matter and from natural
organic matter; 3) the relation of photochemically produced reactive
intermediate production/quenching by organic matter properties; and 4) the use
of computational chemistry to predict reactivity with photochemically produced
reactive intermediates, evaluate specific structural details in contaminants
that influence reactivity, and distinguish which compound classes merit
attention with regards to processing via indirect photolysis. The goals will be
met through a combination of field sampling, laboratory experiments, and
computational studies via collaboration between a major research institution
(University of Minnesota; UMN) and an undergraduate institution (Seattle
University; SU). The project emphasizes research as an important component of
the undergraduate learning experience and has been designed to have a major,
substantive contribution from undergraduate researchers. The PIs will continue
to recruit female, minority, and first-generation college students into their
research groups, thus broadening their impact on the scientific community. The
relationship between SU and the UMN will establish connections between these two
institutions and between science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
impetus for this work is that effluent organic matter and micropollutants are
co-located in the waters downstream from wastewater treatment plants, and it is
hypothesized that the role of effluent organic matter exerts substantial control
over the fate of these contaminants. Photochemical half-lives for a series of
contaminants in role of effluent organic matter solutions will be measured and
related to the steady-state concentrations of photochemically produced reactive
intermediates determined from molecular probe and quenching experiments. In this
way, an understanding of the photochemical processes controlling the fate of
contaminants emanating from wastewater treatment plants and the role of role of
effluent organic matter in contaminant transformations will be developed.
Additionally, the role of effluent organic matter plays in quenching
photochemically produced reactive intermediates and its role as an antioxidant
will be elucidated. The computational chemistry studies will lead to new
predictive tools and insights into potential reaction mechanisms. Thus, the
experimental and computational findings of this work will be critical in
modeling pollutant fate and predicting contaminant reactivity in effluent-
dominated surface waters. Information regarding photochemically produced
reactive intermediates in role of effluent organic matter -impacted waters is
also relevant to pathogen inactivation and carbon/nutrient cycling, making the
results of interest to the broader scientific community.