* 1434000
* Using Ocean Tritium/Helium-3 Observations to Quantify Thermocline Circulation and Biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ivan Lima, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 759,390.00

In this study, researchers from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will
conduct the first systematic and coherent global-scale analysis of a
considerable dataset of ocean tritium/helium-3 observations, and integrate
findings into a global Earth System Model. Nuclear weapons tests in the late
1950s and early 1960s released into the atmosphere approximately 400 kilograms
of tritium, a radioactive isotope of hydrogen. A large fraction of the tritium
entered the Northern Hemisphere surface ocean via precipitation. The subsequent
movement of tritium and helium-3 (produced when tritium undergoes radioactive
decay) in the oceans has served as a powerful tracer of ocean circulation and
mixing. For the past four decades, field measurements of the tritium/helium-3
ratio in worldwide oceanic waters have been collected, amassing more than 20,000
samples in the North Atlantic alone. Results from this study will provide a
better understanding of oxygen and nutrient dynamics in the oceans, and will add
new capabilities to the Community Earth System Model (CESM) ocean model, which
is widely used for ocean physical, biogeochemical, and ecological research as
well as climate change research. The researchers will also incorporate the
results of the study into a graduate-level course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tritium
released into the oceans has been a powerful tracer of ocean subduction,
circulation, and mixing in the thermocline and newly formed deep and
intermediate waters. Tritium also acts as a chemically and biologically inert
analogue for nutrients and a unique tracer allowing the tracking and
quantification of nutrient upwelling pathways and biological new production.
This study will provide a synthesis of ocean tritium/helium-3 observations for
the North Atlantic and North Pacific, bringing together more than four decades
of field observations into a single, publicly available dataset. Oceanographic
data analysis techniques combined with diagnostic and inverse modeling then will
be used to estimate physical and biogeochemical rates. Tritium/helium-3
simulations from an advanced 3-D ocean circulation model will be used to resolve
issues involving regional/temporal data gaps, physical transport mechanisms, and
biogeochemical assumptions used in the diagnostic modeling. Overall results of
the study will be a characterization of the spatial and temporal evolution of
ocean tritium, a better understanding of oxygen utilization rates, and combined
surface tritium data with subsurface tritium:nutrient distributions.