* 1434665
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Dynamic Behaviors of Tissue Welding for High Quality Electrosurgical Tissue Joints
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Roland Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2016
* USD 159,969.00

Tissue welding, also known as electrosurgical joining of tissues, is a process
used in surgery to seal blood vessels in order to control bleeding. It uses a
combination of electro-resistive heating and mechanical clamping to elevate
tissue temperature and denature collagen, such that separate tissue can be
reconnected. Tissue welding is becoming more prevalent because of the increasing
use of minimally invasive surgical procedures, where only a few small incisions
are made to access the surgical site. In these cases, it is difficult to use the
traditional hand suturing technique to seal wounds because of limited
accessibility. There are more than 1.5 million surgical procedures done in US
annually that involve the tissue welding process. The overall market size for
electrosurgical devices is more than 1 billion dollars in US in 2011 and is
increasing by 5-6% each year. Despite its importance, the quality of tissue
welding joints is often inconsistent due to the lack of good understanding and
proper quality control of the tissue welding process. Failed joints can cause
severe bleeding, prolonged operative time, and impaired surgical outcomes. This
research will lead to more consistent and reliable tissue joints, thus improved
healthcare safety and quality. It will also lead to the advancement of
electrosurgical tools for tissue welding, and increase the competitiveness of US
medical device manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will study
the dynamic behavior of tissue's thermal and electrical impedances during the
tissue welding process and to correlate these behaviors to the joint strength.
The tissue thermal and electrical impedances will be experimentally determined
at different levels of thermal dose. The results will be used to develop a
multi-physics finite element model to predict spatial and temporal temperature
distribution of the joint site from the electrical energy input. The effect of
clamping force on the contact area between the electrosurgical tool and tissue
will be explored. A series of tissue joints using various levels of thermal dose
and mechanical clamping force will be conducted and the strength of these joints
tested to establish a weld quality prediction model. The fundamental
understanding obtained from this research on biological material responses to
heat will find many applications in other surgical processes, such as laser and
ultrasonic tumor ablation.