* 1434304
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing Perspectives on Principal-Agent Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Doug McAdam, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,272.00

This dissertation combines qualitative analysis of semi-structured interviews
with civic employees in three U.S. states with quantitative analysis of an
original survey of public policy students to explore several research questions:
How do bureaucratic agents shield themselves from political attacks? Under what
circumstances do these agents rebel? How does this principal-agent problem
affect the balance between principal and agent? The results will provide
evidence on the social-psychological and/or organizational consequences of
introducing intrusive actions into the civil service context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines what happens when civil service
principals directly attack their bureaucratic agents. By exploiting differences
across U.S. states in principal-on-agent attacks in the 2011-2014 period, this
study describes the effect of working under "attack" on the behavior of state
government bureaucrats. In particular, it examines the effect on retention,
morale and recruitment in government organizations. This research also extends
principal-agent theory to cover instances where the implicit contract between
principal and agent is breached.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will make important
contributions to both sociology and public administration. First, the
qualitative data will provide an opportunity to better understand workers within
government bureaucracies by investigating individual and organizational
behaviors and mechanisms workers employ to respond to conflict and threat.
Second, from the public administration practitioner perspective, understanding
variation in civic pressure in the state context will be important to developing
recruitment and retention programs to ensure continued competitiveness for high
quality labor.