* 1434560
* Principles of DNA-Like Self-Assembly at Macroscopic Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peng Yin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,985.00

Assembly is traditionally considered an externally-directed process, where a
person or machine assembles components according to a list of directions. An
alternative process is self-assembly, where components themselves encode
information specifying their ultimate position, and mere random mixing leads to
spontaneous assembly. The complexity of structures self-assembled at molecular-
scales has increased dramatically over the last ten years, especially in the
field of DNA nanotechnology. In contrast to molecular self-assembly, the
complexity of larger self-assembled products - i.e., of the scale routinely
manufactured using externally-directed assembly - has remained low. This award
supports fundamental research to generate the essential knowledge for the
application of molecular-scale self-assembly techniques to larger scales. Such
fundamental knowledge will eventually enable the development of a new
manufacturing paradigm where diverse products are made through unsupervised and
parallel self-assembly. Work in this project includes collaborations of
scientists, engineers, and artists, as well as support of undergraduate research
and education.

Rigid products self-assembled from flexible DNA strands now routinely consist of
hundreds of unique components. Structures have been designed in 2D or 3D, with
overall dimensions up to 100 nm. In contrast, self-assembly at larger scales
remains limited to a handful of components, in part due to the low information
content of the components and poor mixing strategies. This award supports the
development of a theory describing the minimum material requirements for DNA-
like self-assembly at any length scale. It will be demonstrated with the
construction of a cm-scale DNA-like polymer system as well as a compatible
stochastic mixing environment. Data taken from this new system will in turn
demonstrate random perturbation, sequence-specific pairing of polymers using
three and four-arm junctions, and complex product assembly using "Single
Stranded Tile" and other frameworks. Analytical comparison to chemical kinetics
will further demonstrate scale-independent phenomena and provide a theoretical
basis for predicting performance at intermediate length scales.