* 1434322
* EAGER: Bimetallic nano-structures as versatile photocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Phillip Christopher, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

EAGER: Utilizing bimetallic nanostructures as catalysts for efficient solar-
driven chemical conversion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A majority of chemical
conversion processes utilized for the production of commodity chemicals are
carried out using exclusively thermal energy, where 50% of the energy consumed
in the United States chemical industry is required for feedstocks, while the
other 50% provides thermal energy to drive chemical reactions and purification
steps. It is apparent that chemical processes operating at lower temperature and
higher selectivity must be developed to enhance energy and atomic (feed stock
conversion to product) efficiencies. This EAGER award made to Professor Phillip
Christopher at University of California Riverside will permit a new class of
materials to be explored that have the potential to overcome the inherent
limitations of thermal driven processes and allow for solar-assisted chemical
conversions at lower temperatures and with higher selectivities. These new
catalysts are hybrid materials employing very specific silver species for their
interactions with solar energy and other metal species which will improve the
selectivity for reactions. This research has potential for significant societal
impact through the introduction of new processes that begin to address
environmental concerns from burning fossil fuels to drive chemical processes.
Christopher plans to include multidisciplinary educational experiences for a
diverse audience through hands on research and in class education. Specifically,
a relationship with Riverside Community College (RCC) has been developed that
will give students from this two-year Hispanic Serving Institution internship
opportunities in the Christopher laboratories. This will be a useful experience
for RCC students to facilitate their transition from a community college style
education to a major research University and to spark their interest in basic
research, thus encouraging their enrollment in education beyond the Bachelor?s
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will undertake basic research into the
synthesis and photocatalytic properties of a new generation of materials that
have the potential to increase energy efficiency and chemical selectivity for a
wide range of industrial chemical and fuel production processes. The overarching
vision of this project is to investigate hybrid materials that exploit unique
interactions of Ag with the solar spectrum and the excellent catalytic
functionality of more versatile metals (Pt) to selectively drive important
chemical reactions using solar energy. Hetero-structured bimetallic
nanoparticles consisting of Ag nanoparticle cores and Pt shells or deposited
particles will be synthesized using a seed mediated process. Ag nanocubes will
be synthesized via the polyol process and Pt will be deposited on pre-
synthesized Ag cubes by reduction of Pt salts in an aqueous solution. Crucial
synthesis conditions including temperature, precursor injection rate and
reductant strength will be varied to control the growth mechanism, and the
resulting structures will be characterized using numerous methods.
Nanostructures will be tested for their activity in the CO oxidation reactions
as a function of temperature, reactant partial pressure, illumination intensity
and wavelength. The results will be compared to control catalysts consisting
only of Pt and Ag on insulating and semiconducting supports to demonstrate
unique properties of the bimetallic Pt/Ag nanostructures. The demonstration of
unique photocatalytic reactivity of bimetallic plasmonic nanostructures will
open avenues towards the use of solar energy to selectively drive a much wider
range of chemical reactions than executable on current classes of semiconductor-
based photocatalysts.