* 1434305
* GEOTRACES Arctic Section:   Diagnosing the unique silicon isotope composition of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2019
* USD 500,866.00

An investigator will participate in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic Ocean
expedition and measure silicon isotopes composition of silicic acid in seawater
samples, as well as diatoms and sea ice. In common with other multinational
initiatives in the International GEOTRACES program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic
expedition are to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the
distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish
the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental conditions.
Some trace elements are essential to life, others are known biological toxins,
and still others are important because they can be used as tracers of a variety
of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the sea. As silicon is a key
component of diatom shells, the measurement of their concentrations in this
study can provide an important indicator of primary productivity, both in the
present day, as well as past oceans. The project will provide training for
undergraduate students and a post-doctoral researcher in silicon chemistry, as
well as include outreach to K-12 students.

The silicon isotope proxy is increasingly being used to assess the role of
diatoms and silicic acid supply to past shifts in ocean productivity and their
role in Earth's climate. Application of the proxy requires knowledge of the
silicon isotopic composition of ventilating water masses. Uncertainty in these
values translates directly into uncertainty in the level of productivity implied
by the proxy. The growing global data set of silicon isotopes in marine waters
suggest that silicon isotopes in subsurface waters are not uniform, but vary
systematically driven by interactions between silicon isotope fractionation, the
biological pump and thermohaline circulation. In addition, significant anomalies
exist between model predictions and observations. In this study, researchers
will test hypotheses regarding the origin of this signal and the mechanisms
controlling silicon isotope distributions within the Arctic Ocean by greatly
expanding the silicon isotope data set for this region. The overarching
hypothesis to be tested is that silicon isotope distributions are controlled by
the coupling of silicon fractionation during silica production and during silica
dissolution to the biological pump and to the meridional overturning
circulation.