* 1434602
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Race, Class and Social Capital in Devastated Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Sancha Medwinter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,189.00

SES- 1434602&lt;br/&gt;Nan Lin, Nan&lt;br/&gt;Sancha Medwinter&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research is an
innovative multi-method qualitative field study of two post-disaster
neighborhoods in New York City, after Hurricane Sandy. Although these
neighborhoods are similarly impacted by a natural disaster and receive similar
types of aid through a large NGO (non-governmental organizations) and FEMA
(Federal Emergency Management Agency), the racial and economic characteristics
of these neighborhoods are quite different. The researcher will examine the
social processes through which race and class shape whether and how residents
strike close and informal connections with disaster responders. The research in
particular focuses on how the type and quality of relationships formed, affects
sharing of non-official disaster support and information. This focus on these
newly formed connections is particularly important in this environment, where
people's usual social connections were severely compromised. The research adopts
a theory of network resources, social capital, which expects that assistance in
the form of information or resources are informally and indirectly accessed
through these interpersonal connections and that social position of one's
connections and the quality of their relationship matter in this process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-PI will conduct fieldwork in disaster relief and
warming centers and surrounding devastated areas of two urban neighborhoods that
are proximate to each other. Beginning only ten days after the hurricane and
through 8 subsequent visits to the field site over the course of several months,
the researcher interviewed 120 participants, including impacted residents, local
community and out-of-town responders and volunteers. The data for this project
is collected in three ways: (1) in-depth unstructured interviews, (2) semi-
structured follow-up interviews, (3) and ethnographic participant observation.
These are substantiated with documentary evidence of material culture including
video and photographs of devastation, signs, flyers, and other print
informational materials at relief sites. Through interviews and observations,
the research will examine how cross-race and cross-class interactions, and
community racial and class dynamics, impact the extent and kind of disaster
support residents receive. Observations and inquiry will be used to first
identify, then explain the relationships among (1) the types and strength of
relationships forged among impacted-residents and disaster responders and
volunteers; (2) the types of disaster-related information and resources shared
across these connections; (3) the racial and class content of resident and
volunteer conversations, accounts and interactions and (4) the aspects of local
disaster response that structure interpersonal relations and resident
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the project contributes to four
fields of sociological research: social capital theory, race relations, poverty,
and disaster research. The unique design of the study allows for distinguishing
the mechanisms linking the entire process of social capital to pinpoint at what
stage (creation, access, activation and returns) social capital inequality
occurs in the non-routine context of disaster. This emphasis differs from
current research in this tradition, which explores one leg (e.g. activation) of
the process in routine contexts such as job-finding. The research also addresses
a key substantive debate on how urban poor Blacks and other minorities end up in
the "wrong networks" whether it is through choice or opportunity. Or as explored
here, to what extent is this phenomenon a network level
process?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Beyond its theoretical
contribution of examining social capital and social inequality outside routine
contexts, this research has tremendous social significance as it informs
practitioners of the interracial and inter-class dynamics of "networking" in
devastated neighborhoods and the consequence for accessing available resources.
This project will also enable a minority female qualitative researcher to
establish and organize a substantial qualitative dataset and launch an
independent-research agenda on racial-ethnic social capital inequalities within
diverse populations in non-routine contexts. The qualitative dataset, will be
used to train both undergraduate and graduate students in qualitative analytical
methods, race and class inequalities, and the consequence of disasters for
vulnerable populations. Findings from this project will be published in peer
reviewed journals, and presented at academic and public conferences. The
insights gained from this project, will also spur extension of similar analyses
to other environments that are racially and socioeconomically diverse.