* 1434866
* Quantifying Energy Dissipation From Breaking Waves Using Time-Varying Properties of Whitecap Foam
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Grant Deane, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 702,083.00

The goal of the proposed research is to develop a remote sensing technique to
quantify the energy lost by breaking waves. The work is motivated by the
fundamental role that wave breaking plays in enhancing the exchange of heat,
mass, momentum and energy across the air-sea interface. Furthermore, existing
remote sensing techniques remain highly uncertain due to large variations in the
breaking strength parameter, motivating the need to develop alternative remote
sensing techniques. It is anticipated that the proposed remote sensing technique
will help enhance our fundamental knowledge of wave breaking and energy
dissipation, which is important for the understanding of aerosol production and
gas exchange. Furthermore, the remote new sensing technique implicitly accounts
for both wave scale and breaking intensity on a wave-by-wave basis, which can
provide valuable information for detailed modeling of ocean waves. The impact of
the study will be further broadened by the participation of undergraduate
interns in the laboratory experiments to help with data collection and
preliminary analysis. The project team will participate in the public outreach
lecture series hosted by the Birch Aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remote
sensing technique will utilize high-speed and high resolution digital images of
the time-varying properties of whitecap foam during active wave breaking and
will be validated against a series of well-controlled laboratory experiments
using seawater and breaking wave packets. Present remote-sensing techniques rely
on measuring breaking wave speed to estimate breaking wave energy dissipation,
but, critically, there is a lack of consensus in the literature regarding the
most appropriate way to measure breaking wave speed. This has direct
implications for estimates of the breaking strength parameter, which has been
reported to vary by 4 orders of magnitude. Development of a new remote sensing
technique will offer a parallel approach to the present methodology. Answers to
the following key questions will be sought: 1) Can high-resolution and high-
speed digital photography be used to quantify energy dissipation during wave
breaking on a wave-by-wave basis? 2) Can the new remote sensing technique,
developed using breaking waves generated by linear wave superposition, be
applied to wind-driven breaking waves? 3) Using existing datasets of sea surface
images, can the new remote sensing technique be applied to breaking waves in
wind-driven seas? The proposed research will involve a combination of laboratory
experiments and analysis of an existing database of sea surface images to begin
to estimate energy dissipation for individual breaking waves. The laboratory
experiments will be based on observations of breaking waves in both the 33 meter
glass wave channel and the 40 meter wind-wave channel at the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography. Importantly, the use of these two wave channels will ensure
breaking waves are generated across a wide range of scales and with different
forcing mechanisms (wave-wave interaction and wind shear stress). Whitecap foam,
bubble plume and wave energetics will be monitored for spilling through plunging
breakers using a downward looking camera to monitor the surface whitecap
properties, a sideward looking camera to monitor bubble plume characteristics
and wave gauges to accurately characterize energy dissipation due to breaking.
This comprehensive experimental approach will provide the necessary data to
develop the remote sensing technique for use in future-planned field studies.