* 1434203
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Decentralization, Institutions, and Access to Potable Water in Peri-Urban Settlements
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ellis Adams, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2015
* USD 15,989.00

Scientists are increasingly interested in how rapid population growth and
urbanization processes affect the provision of potable water, and finding
creative strategies to ensure access to clean water, particularly in poor urban
and peri-urban areas of rapidly urbanizing developing countries. Nearly 800
million people have no access to potable water globally. This study will examine
whether decentralized community-based institutions can improve access to potable
water in peri-urban areas while also promoting related social goals of
participation, empowerment, and community development in developing countries.
Investigators will examine the role and performance of community-based Water
User Associations (WUAs) in providing water and broader social benefits. With
centralized and public water-supply infrastructure and services overstretched in
many countries, and privatization reforms often failing to enhance water access
for the poor, some have recently turned attention to WUA approaches. Such
approaches have traditionally been used in rural water supply, and little is
known about the opportunities and constraints they offer for poor peri-urban
areas. Findings from the study will inform evidence-based policies on community
approaches as viable options for improving potable water access and development
for impoverished communities in similar developing-country settings. The project
will also advance understanding of how women, children, and other
underrepresented groups are affected by poor access to water, and explore
remedial actions for negative impacts.

Through a case study in Lilongwe, the largest and fastest urbanizing city of
Malawi, the investigators will use mixed quantitative and qualitative methods
involving data from household surveys, key-informant interviews, focus groups,
and secondary data analysis informed by an urban political ecology analytical
framework, and reinforced with insights from common pool resources theory to
answer the specific questions: (1) Have the functions of WUAs and the
institutional arrangements they have adopted led to improved access to potable
water in peri-urban areas? (2) Have WUAs, their institutional arrangements and
modus operandi met social goals of local participation, empowerment, and broader
community development? By integrating urban political ecology and common pool
resources theory to examine the conditions that enable community approaches to
effectively supply water and provide social benefits, the investigators will
advance and enrich scholarly debates on the role of community-based approaches
for peri-urban water supply and social development, the tradeoffs involved, and
their policy implications.