* 1434486
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Designing Tunable Au-Based Bimetallic Nanocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Rongchao Jin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2017
* USD 287,118.00

In this project funded by the Division of Chemistry, through the Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Program, Professor
James Lewis of West Virginia University and Professor Rongchao Jin of Carnegie-
Mellon University are studying how to make new, precisely defined metal alloy
catalysts. The chemical industry relies on inexpensive and re-usable catalysts
to convert chemical feedstock into viable products. In addition, reducing
harmful byproducts in combustion processes (e.g. carbon dioxide and carbon
monoxide) also requires inexpensive and re-usable catalysts, such as those found
in a catalytic converter of an automobile. Gold-based catalysts at the size of a
few nanometers in diameter are proven to be very efficient in many chemically
converting processes; however, they are expensive particularly, as the price of
gold continues to increase over time. Mixing in other less expensive metal
constituents, such as copper, would drive down the cost and possibly increase
activity in some cases, but the scientific challenge is to determine how to add
in such metals without losing the efficiency and stability of the catalyst.
Computational searching algorithms are being developed to assist the materials
development of catalysts of gold mixed with other metals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is comprehensively advancing both
technical and conceptual understanding of the structure-function mapping in bi-
metallic catalysts. They are building a guidance framework to design and develop
bimetallic catalysts from first principles rather than trial-and-error by
decreasing the number of potential nanoparticles for tests to an experimentally
manageable number. The proposed research will continue to impact energy
technologies that are currently being pursued by experienced researchers at the
National Energy Technology Laboratory. In terms of the broader impacts of this
proposed research, the current interdisciplinary collaborations will boost
regional outreach and educational impact for students. Lewis and Jin are
continuing to engage under-represented student populations in their research
programs and they will continue to cultivate broadened participation for
student's professional preparations.