* 1434256
* Collaborative Research: Travel Support for Students to Attend the Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference (ISERC) 2014; Montreal, Canada; 31 May to 3 June 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Yongpei Guan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 01/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

The objective of this collaborative grant is to support US students to
disseminate their research results and interact with international researchers
at the Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference in Montreal,
Canada from May 31-June 3, 2014. Due to its geographical location outside the
US, it has been difficult for US students to attend the conference. The approach
to overcome this difficulty is to use this grant to partially support the travel
costs for the student attendees, plus other contributions from the departments
across the country and the Institute of Industrial Engineers, so as to increase
students' participation. This grant will help promote student research
activities and active involvements in international conferences. By attending
this conference, students can present their recent research developments, attend
tutorial sessions to learn advanced research methods, join panel discussions,
participate in student paper/simulation competitions, and socialize with
scholars and students from other universities. These activities will
significantly help and motive students to explore research frontiers and
consider joining academia as one of their career paths.

If successful, this award will help US and international students to communicate
and learn from each other the most frontier research progress. It provides an
excellent opportunity for US students to network with potential employers and to
explore collaborators for their future research. This grant will also support
underrepresented students to attend this conference.