* 1434826
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient and Effective Recycling of Post-Consumer Plastics for High-Value Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Mark Tapsak, Zzyzx Polymers LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2017
* USD 940,640.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
the first commercial-scale processing of post-consumer plastic materials for
high value applications using an innovative approach known as continuous
mechanochemical compatibilization (CMC). In 2010, only 8% of the 230 million
tons of plastic waste generated was recovered for recycling. A majority of the
remaining plastic was directed to solid waste streams or landfills, resulting in
poor use of non-renewable resources and contributing to environmental
contamination. This effort will focus on the use of CMC to recycle materials
without the need for extensive cleaning or sorting, thereby reducing processing
steps, and making the use of these materials more cost-competitive with virgin
resins. In addition to the environmental benefits, a successful Phase II
proposal will also result in significant economic implications. It has been
found that processing recycled materials alone creates nine jobs for every
15,000 tons of recovered materials. Furthermore, the increased availability of
recycled materials would spur industrial adoption, leading to an increase in
green jobs.

Commercial feasibility will be demonstrated by manufacturing several customer
specific post-consumer polymer blends via the CMC process. This process uses a
standard piece of industry equipment, the twin-screw extruder, but in an
innovative arrangement. The equipment configuration cools the mixture below the
plastic's melting and/or glass transition temperature, allowing for unique
chemistry to occur between polymers and/or fillers. Due to this chemistry,
materials that either could not be recycled or which resulted in poor physical
properties, can be redirected back to high value-applications. For this Phase II
project, three post-consumer blends will be investigated. In order to cost-
effectively manufacture these materials, this effort will focus on the study and
optimization of the CMC process by researching several key processing
parameters. These include chiller sizing and coolant flow, and screw
configuration and design for CMC. At the close of Phase II, the goal is to have
developed proven processes for production of recycled plastic pellets at a much
lower price, while at the same time retaining important physical properties.