* 1434965
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Community Factors, Negotiation Processes and Land Acquisitions
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Robert Mazur, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/2015
* USD 11,991.00

SES-1434965 Robert Mazur Juliana Nnoko-Mewanu, Iowa State University

During the past decade, there has been an exponential increase in the rate and
scale of large-scale agricultural land investments globally. These investments
are accompanied by opportunities and risks from a social and ecological point of
view. The quality of local participation in the management and decision-making
on the transfer of land rights is vital in fostering beneficial and sustainable
community impacts. This research examines key elements of decision-making
processes that represent diverse interests and involve negotiations and
compromise resulting in beneficial outcomes for all stakeholders. The central
research question asks how do variations in community structures, capabilities
and relationships shape negotiations to transfer land use rights. The main
research objectives are to: identify key social dimensions - social networks and
knowledge - associated with land negotiations, and assess how they affect
negotiation processes; determine the extent to which land negotiation processes
reflect differences in power within emerging spaces for decentralized
governance; and identify the social dimensions and power relations that are
associated with a greater degree of resource access maintenance. The research
uses basic premises in power theory as a framework to study how power mechanisms
influence decision-making within local institutions. Power theory is combined
with access analysis to map dynamic processes and relationships of access to
resources, facilitating analysis of who actually benefits and through which
processes they are able to do so.

The researcher will complete a comparative analysis of negotiation processes to
study the interests and patterns of interaction among key stakeholders in land
acquisition for export agriculture. The research will study the case of the
Herakles Farms in Ndian and Kupe-Muanenguba divisions in Southwestern Cameroon.
Primary stakeholders include government, business, farmers, non-farmers,
researchers and civil society organizations. The investigation will take place
in a forested area of southwestern Cameroon in targeted villages that are
currently negotiating a major land transaction. The methods used include
interviews, focus group discussions, participant observation, Net-Mapping and
content analysis. Interviewees in the villages will be selected using stratified
random quota sampling based on gender, age, and livelihood status. Interviews
will be complemented by transect walks and Net-Mapping to understand
livelihoods, perceived importance of the land, social networks and power
dynamics within the communities. Secondary data sources, newspaper articles from
2009-2014, documents, maps, records on inventories of approved land deals from
government agencies, will be used to build the contextual framework of the
project.

Research results have the potential to provide new insights regarding the social
context of negotiation processes for land acquisition for export agriculture as
well as contribute to a broader understanding of successful negotiation
processes. The research will contribute to a better understanding of the key
elements involved in decision-making processes that represent diverse interests,
negotiations and compromise that produce beneficial outcomes for all
stakeholders.