* 1434880
* Analytical Method to Assess Dynamic Response of Tall Buildings to Downburst Windstorm
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Luca Caracoglia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 274,297.00

Vertical structures such as tall buildings and horizontal-axis wind turbines are
prone to wind-induced vibrations and potential damage originating from complex
wind-structure interaction. The relevance of this issue has attracted
engineering researchers in recent years because of the tendency to erect taller
buildings and larger-diameter-blade wind turbines in the United States and other
parts of the World. The design of tall structures is usually based on steady and
stationary wind load conditions. However, winds are often transient, such as in
the case of a downburst storm, a meteorological phenomenon which induces an
outburst of damaging wind loads near the ground. The study of transient wind
loads is also relevant since increasing number of structures is damaged by this
type of events. This project pursues to develop a viable computational method
for the dynamic response assessment of tall structures against a downburst type
of storm. This project will pursue a novel analytical method for assessing the
stochastic dynamic response of tall structures due to transient wind loads. The
method will account for system nonlinearity and aerodynamic coupling effects.
The method will be based on the concepts of compactly supported wavelets and the
Wavelet-Galerkin transform, which enables reducing a system of differential
equations to an algebraic form by preserving time-frequency features in the
modeling. The study will advance the utilization of Wavelet-Galerkin method for
solving wind-induced coupled nonlinear stochastic dynamic problems. Moreover,
the project will investigate the dynamics, caused by transient downburst-like
winds, on a series of reduced-order models of tall structures. Examples will
include two benchmark tall buildings and one large-diameter horizontal-axis wind
turbine. The research will validate the analytical method by conducting wind
tunnel experiments on scaled models of the benchmark buildings. Integrated
outreach activities are planned to disseminate the findings of the study through
educational tools.