* 1434798
* Development and Deployment of Autonomous and Remotely Operated Chemical Sensor System: Integrated Laboratory and Field Studies of Seafloor Hydrothermal Vent Fluids
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 485,874.00

This project involves the continued development, integration, and application of
chemical sensor systems that can be used autonomously to monitor key components
in hydrothermal vent fluids at mid-ocean ridges. Hydrothermal vent fluids play a
key role in the Earth sciences in helping to maintain ocean chemistry, while
also providing chemicals essential for the origin and evolution of the
spectacular communities of organisms associated with deep sea vents- now and in
the ancient geological past. Here the investigators identify an integrated
program of technical modifications and laboratory and vent related studies that
will enhance the effectiveness of chemical sensor data for interpretation of
deep-sea hydrothermal vent systems. The investigation will contribute to the
enhancement of research infrastructure that will be available to ocean
scientists and engineers involved in research and training in a wide range of
disciplinary areas. Collaboration with colleagues in engineering at the
University of Michigan and Zhejiang University in China has broadened
participation in ocean science research and has allowed the investigators to
apply recent advances in nanotechnology, micromachining, and process control
software and hardware in developing concepts needed for the next generation of
autonomous chemical sensor systems. Development of chemical sensors with
autonomous operation capabilities is also important as progress is being made
with fiber-optic cabled ocean observatories, which will provide power for
instruments on the seafloor and ultimately at deep-sea vents, facilitating
longer term measurements and unattended operation. Moreover, the research will
benefit from the participation of undergraduate students in connection with the
NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program - Fluids in the Earth.
Graduate students at the University of Minnesota will also participate in the
research. Indeed undergraduate and graduate students have worked with the
investigators on sensor applications and participated in oceanographic research
cruises, while playing a key role in the deployment on the seafloor of chemical
sensors and vent fluid sampling systems that they helped to
create.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox and pH represent master variables in all
geochemical and biological systems. Thus, this research focuses on enhancing the
measurement of these parameters for longer times and over a greater range of
temperatures. Accordingly, the objectives are as follows: (1) Extend the
autonomous in-situ calibration module to include redox components (e.g.,
dissolved H2S); (2) Replace conventional ceramic sensor for pH measurement with
a functionally similar device composed of nano-ceramic, potentially enhancing
measurements at lower temperatures with less frequent need for calibration.
Recent advances in nanotechnology and microelectronics now make this possible;
(3) Couple electrochemical sensor systems with newly developed hydrothermal
fluid samplers for sensor triggered autonomous acquisition of hydrothermal
fluid. By coupling the sensor system with a fluid sampling system, the
investigators will achieve an instrument that combines event detection with
event response; (4) Perform network (internet, LAN) tests of refined automation
protocols; (5) Integrate lab and field calibration and verification measurements
with deployments at seafloor hydrothermal vents in the Eastern Pacific ocean.
The researchers have considerable experience at this vent system, and the data
obtained will contribute to both technical and scientific objectives; and, (6)
Conduct high-temperature lab experiments using a newly designed flow reactor
adapted with ceramic-based pH sensors. These studies permit testing of recent
predictions of elevated pH values at near critical conditions based on earlier
pH (in-situ) data measured at the seafloor.