* 1434740
* Workshop: Sequence-based Classification of Fungi; June 12-13, 2014 - East Langing, MI
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* John Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2015
* USD 40,303.00

An award to Pennsylvania State University is made to support a workshop to
discuss and develop a community plan for a DNA sequence-based classification of
fungi. A large proportion of fungal diversity is only known from DNA sequence
fragments, but these taxa cannot be incorporated within current classification
systems because their scientific names are not associated with a physical
specimen. This workshop will consider the various technical, analytical and
taxonomic/nomenclatural challenges and opportunities for implementing a DNA
sequence-based taxonomy of fungi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be two
days in length and will include a total 40 participants. Participants will
include researchers from diverse career stages and types of institution, with at
least ten students and post-doctoral researchers, including members from under-
represented groups, expected to participate. Workshop management will be handled
by a steering committee of six individuals including three women, two faculty
from Principally Undergraduate Institutions, and two people from under-
represented groups. The workshop will result in: 1) a broadly distributed
meeting report, 2) a position paper to be submitted for publication in a peer-
reviewed journal, and 3) a proposal to modify the International Code for Algae,
Fungi and Plants to allow sequence-based classification of fungi.
Recommendations from this workshop will not only provide a framework for the
classification of fungi using DNA sequence data, but will also serve as a model
for the classification of other taxa known only from DNA sequences such as
microbes.