* 1434160
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Informal and Local Economies During Mega Events
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Javier Auyero, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 10,279.00

SES-1434160&lt;br/&gt;Javier Auyero&lt;br/&gt;Jacinto Cuvi
Escobar&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The range
of cities and countries bidding for mega events (e.g., the Olympics and the
World Cup) has expanded over the last two decades to incorporate emerging
economies like South Africa, Russia and Brazil. Among the reasons put forth by
proponents of these tournaments are the possibility to fast-track development,
generate employment, and incorporate excluded sectors of society. While the
benefits of hosting such events are still debated, there is not a good
understanding of their effects on the local, informal economies from which a
majority of the population draws its income. Previous work on the social impacts
of sporting mega-events tends to treat disadvantaged groups as homogenous,
despite evidence of both success stories and increased hardship. These studies
therefore do not account for divergent outcomes and trajectories within affected
populations. Premising the study on field theory, this research will map the
divisions among street vendors and analyze the dynamics leading to their success
or demise during a mega sporting event. This project expands on existing
research about the social impact of mega events while challenging the notion
that members of marginalized groups are all victims of exclusion. The co-PI
hypothesizes that street vending is divided into three subgroups: (1) leaders
and members of street vendors unions, (2) non-unionized street vendors, and (3)
unlicensed street vendors. Each of these groups controls specific assets. Among
licensed street vendors, the research proposes that leaders and union members
will benefit from government programs because of political connections. Among
unlicensed street vendors -- where mobility is the main asset -- it is the
youngest and highly mobile street vendors who will manage to avoid security
checks and gain access to fans. Other peddlers should experience few gains and
may suffer losses due to increased repression. The study will test the foregoing
assumptions through a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods.
First, the researcher will examine the design and implementation of the program
to incorporate street vendors using key informant interviews. Concurrently, the
co-PI will observe street selling around tourist hotspots and record the
demographics of the licensed and unlicensed street vendors operating there.
Finally, the researcher will administer a questionnaire survey and analyze
existing survey data to assess the overall impact of the event on the income and
working conditions of street vendors across town. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will analyze the effects of a specific mega event, the 2014 soccer World
Cup, on the livelihoods of street vendors in Brazil's largest city, São Paulo.
In the run-up to the event, the government was faced with a wave of social
protests along with mounting criticism that organizing the tournament was too
costly and that its benefits did not reach the social groups most in need.
Street vendors, in particular, were explicitly targeted in the General Law of
the World Cup, which cracks down on informal commercial activity around the
official events where tourists are concentrated. In response to such pressures,
the city government of São Paulo designed a program to integrate a group of
street vendors by granting them the right to sell official products. Who wins
and who loses from government initiatives to integrate marginalized populations?
Are mega events an opportunity for informal entrepreneurs to improve their lot?
How can the benefits be spread more evenly among disadvantaged groups in the
future? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will provide critical input to the planning of such events so as to ensure
social inclusion and the sharing of economic benefits. To this end, the findings
will be disseminated in forums and outlets within and beyond the academic world.
The co-PI will draw on a wide network of local policymakers and civil society
actors --including NGOs (non-governmental organizations) advocating for the
rights of informal workers -- to share research results and conclusions.
Research findings have the potential to inform policymaking for disadvantaged
groups during mega events in the future.