* 1434281
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Montane Avian Elevational Range Shifts and Land Use Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Stuart Pimm, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 11/30/2015
* USD 12,774.00

Although biogeographers and conservation biologists know that deforestation,
responsible for 95% of the world's endangered species, is a serious threat to
species conservation, the impacts of this land use change is still ignored in
terms of its effects on the elevational ranges of species. Preliminary
observations suggest that lowland deforestation affects the ranges of species in
the forest above when compared to forests with intact lowlands. Understanding
the distribution of species along natural and altered altitudinal gradients is
important for the design of current conservation strategies, and could be
instrumental in predicting future distributions of species in the face of
climate change. Preliminary observations suggest that lowland deforestation
affects the ranges of species in the forest above when compared to forests with
intact lowlands. Understanding the distribution of species along natural and
altered altitudinal gradients is important for the design of current
conservation strategies, and can be instrumental in predicting future
distributions of species in the face of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biologically richest hotspot is the northern Andes of South America. Colombia
has more bird species than any other country - approximately 1900 - and a rate
of discovery of one new bird species per year. Within Colombia, the highest
concentrations of endemic and small-range birds are in the Western Andes,
peaking at 46 species. The diversity of non-endemic birds, and other taxa, is
also exceptional. The western slope of the Western Andes is mostly covered by
intact forest, but the eastern slope has suffered severe deforestation due to
road access and human settlement. To achieve the goals of understanding
elevational range changes, the investigators will sample three pairs of
altitudinal transects (2000-2900m) in which one will be completely covered by
mature forest, while the other will lack forest in the lowlands. In the Mesenia-
Paramillo Reserve in the northern part of the Western Andes, the project will
describe species richness and the variation of abundance for each species along
these transects. Employing observations and mist-netting, and aided by a team of
local staff and biologists-in-training, the investigators will identify the
effects of lowland deforestation on species ranges using statistical models.
Expected results from this project include current bird distribution information
and 3D maps, and the establishment of permanent banding stations along the
altitudinal transects which will be sampled periodically after this project
concludes. These results will inform a global understanding of how deforestation
and climate change affects species and so aid those who manage them.