* 1434325
* High resolution genome changes during evolution in a classic fisheries experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Stephen Palumbi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2018
* USD 635,579.00

One of the strongest impacts there is on ocean species is reduction in
population size due to fishing. Even for species that are not overfished,
harvest takes a large fraction of the biggest and fastest growing individuals.
As a result, fishing exerts strong natural selection on fish population,
selecting for slow growing, small individuals. Experiments in artificial fishing
have shown rapid evolution of growth rates, maturation size and other traits for
lab populations. The classic Conover-Munsch experiments ten years ago showed the
power of fishing to generate rapid evolution. However, no analysis of the
genetic impact of fishing under such controlled conditions has been done, and no
investigation of the way whole genomes respond to strong fisheries evolution has
been attempted. Luckily, the Conover-Munsch samples - from the fish used in
their classic experiment - have been preserved, and modern genomic techniques
are now available that can analyze the way fisheries-induced evolution shaped
the genetic diversity and genome architecture of these populations. Strong
selection is known in other systems to leave a legacy of deleterious changes in
the genome. The results of this study will be important components of
understanding the long-term effects of fishing because they will for the first
time allow a mechanistic understanding of how natural selection works on fish
populations. The project will also compare the changes that occur after the
relaxation of fishing pressure to estimate if there is a legacy of deleterious
genome changes in fished species that impedes their recovery. The data from this
study will show how fishing creates change at loci under selection, and also how
this strong selection generates other, non-adaptive shifts because of genetic
hitchhiking and inbreeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use next
generation DNA sequencing to sequence the protein coding regions of the Conover-
Munsch fish samples. They will discover, document and compare genetic variants
across the genome in lines selected for large size, in lines selected for small
size, and in the original populations in order to chart evolutionary changes at
the genomic level imposed by fishing. They will use outlier analyses to pinpoint
loci at which strong selection has acted to change allele frequencies. They will
compare these changes to changes in fish populations after the relaxation of
fishing in order to distinguish evolutionary changes that are easily reversible
from those that are not. In addition, they will also compare genetic changes
induced by fishing to those that occur naturally along an environmental gradient
on the US east coast. Preliminary data indicate that many of the genetic
variants selected for in the fisheries experiment are old variants - estimated
by patterns of linkage disequilibrium - already present in the original
population. Working on the genetics of the natural gradient will show which of
these variants have been selected by evolutionary forces in the native
environment, and subsequently been favored by the novel evolutionary pressure of
fishing.