* 1434455
* Collaborative Research: Structural Identification &amp; Health Monitoring using Temperature-Driven Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Branko Glisic, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 119,992.00

The deteriorating state of bridges in the United States has become a societal
issue.. The confluence of a debilitated bridge population nearing the end of its
design life with a shortfall of funding has led to an unsustainable position. A
paradigm aimed to address this issue is termed structural health monitoring,
which is the practice of identifying and tracking performance of a structure by
measured data and analytical simulation. The intended use of measured data is to
optimize maintenance activities and increase safety of the users, thus reducing
the costs of repairs and improving sustainability of the infrastructure. The
static and dynamic approaches researched thus far have yet to reliably achieve
all four levels established for successful health monitoring: detection,
localization, extent and prognosis of structural impairment. This project
pursues fundamental research for a novel approach that uses temperature related
data for monitoring health of constructed systems. The project has advantage in
its simplicity of measuring temperature. The method will target all four levels
of monitoring aiming to impact bridges as well as potentially other structures.
The project includes an outreach component for dissemination of findings to the
engineering community and incorporating concepts into engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to pursue
development, validation and dissemination of a novel temperature-driven approach
for evaluation and monitoring of health of constructed structural systems. In
current techniques temperature effects are considered undesirable; the proposed
method represents a change in paradigm - the temperature influences will be used
to assess the structure. The new concept is based on the hypothesis that
temperature variations can be treated as a forcing function and thus be used to
obtain a complete input-output relationship (or transfer function). Research and
identification of this temperature-driven transfer function is the main
scientific contribution targeted for the study. To accomplish this objective a
research plan is devised which includes framework development, laboratory/field
experimentation and validation. The key advantages of the temperature-driven
concept are applicability to non-linear systems, high signal-to-noise ratio, and
reduced data management and time synchronization needs. In addition, the
performance of many critical structural components is highly sensitive to
temperature variations allowing for accurate and reliable identification and/or
monitoring. Consequently, the temperature-driven concept has transformational
potential since it will bring new knowledge in structural health monitoring.