* 1434365
* Symposium: Animal Behavior and Disease Ecology: Past, Present, and Future - Princeton, New Jersey, August 9-14, 2014
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Vanessa Ezenwa, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Animal behavior plays a central role in the transmission of parasites and
pathogens. Likewise, parasites are crucial drivers of animal behavior. Over the
past few decades, disease ecology has been one of the fastest growing sub-
disciplines of ecology. Importantly, animal behaviorists have played a crucial
role in developing some fundamental ideas that impinge on this field. Building
on a number of theoretical and technical advances throughout the last decade, we
will host a symposium on Animal Behavior and Disease Ecology: Past, Present, and
Future at the 2014 Animal Behavior Society meeting to bring together traditional
animal behaviorists and disease ecologists interested in behavior to explore
emerging topics and points of synthesis between the two fields.

The symposium will identify important new research directions at the interface
of animal behavior and disease ecology including the ways in which behavior
affects host exposure and susceptibility to infection and parasite transmission
dynamics, as well as means by which parasites shape patterns of animal behavior
in both ecological and evolutionary time. It will provide a platform for
professional development outreach to graduate and undergraduate students
attending the meeting. Outreach activities will provide students with
information on how to get started in research that combines behavior with
disease ecology, and provide a venue for students to make connections with
experts whose work firmly integrates the two fields.