* 1434506
* Microstructure-Sensitive Investigations of Fatigue of Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Antonios Kontsos, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 407,905.00

Fatigue of materials is an important engineering science topic since it is one
of the predominant causes of mechanical failure observed in applications ranging
from aerospace to automotive, marine and industrial fields. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge to understand fatigue damage
incubation, initiation and evolution. Of particular interest in this research is
the case of magnesium since its alloys have properties that could lead to
significant advances in weight reduction and energy savings. Therefore, results
of this research are expected to benefit the U.S. economy and society as it has
the potential to improve the use of this very light metal alloys. The broader
impact of this research targets the participation of academically
underrepresented groups in STEM research and training. Specifically, students in
the Community College of Philadelphia, which is the largest public institution
in the city with a predominantly minority-based population, will be selected to
conduct research with the investigators' group leveraging a comprehensive
outreach plan focusing on the use of multiscale mechanics and simulation-based
engineering.

The research approach supported by this award is based on the use of multiscale
experimental mechanics coupled with physics-based computational modeling.
Specifically, the problem of identifying reliable precursors to fatigue damage
is addressed by performing experiments at a scale at which grain level
information is important and is linked to mechanical fields such as deformation,
as well as to microstructural parameters and their evolution including twinning-
detwinning, dislocation activity, cracking and their interactions. Experimental
measurements at the grain scale will include full field optical as well as
acoustic nondestructive datasets, which can be directly correlated with the
mechanical behavior and similar nondestructive measurements made at the
macroscale. Such experimental information could provide a microstructure-
sensitive explanation of macroscopically observed fatigue behavior effects
including plastic anisotropy, tension-compression asymmetry and deformation
banding. The experimental information will be also used to form novel
computational procedures capable to model fatigue-induced changes in the
material microstructure. Specifically, molecular dynamics will be used to study
twin nucleation and thickening at the single crystal level. Furthermore, crystal
plasticity simulations will be used to simulate spatially resolved twins and
their interactions with slip systems and grain boundaries to validate
observations made in magnesium polycrystals. Furthermore, crystal plasticity and
continuum phase field models will be used to model experimentally observed and
fatigue-induced localized strain formations which are related to damage
initiation.