* 1434012
* AGEP-KAT: Adopting Evidence Based Strategies to Improve Academic Climate and the Success of Underrepresented Doctoral Students in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Sylvanus Wosu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,584,793.00

This project is supported by the Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program and is a Knowledge Adoption and Translation (AGEP-
KAT) award. The AGEP program funds KAT projects to expand the adoption and/or
adaptation of research findings and evidence-based strategies and practices
related to the participation and success of underrepresented minorities (URMs)
in STEM graduate education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM careers at
all types of institutions of higher education. This award funds activities at
the University of Pittsburgh's Swanson School of Engineering to adopt and adapt
strategies and practices employed by the University of Maryland Baltimore
County's (UMBC) Meyerhoff Scholars Program and the NSF-funded PROMISE AGEP
Maryland project. This KAT project is designed to improve the transitions of URM
students, who are US citizens, into doctoral engineering programs at the
University of Pittsburgh and to ensure their successful completion by employing
evidence-based strategies for student and faculty engagement and fostering an
inclusive academic climate for URM doctoral students. The success of the
adoption and adaption process will directly benefit a cohort of US citizens who
are URM doctoral students majoring in engineering fields. Results from this KAT
will also inform engineering graduate programs across the nation about how to
adapt effective strategies for faculty engagement, for improving academic
climate change, and for ensuring URM doctoral student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will explore the following
faculty-specific objectives as they work to address the project goal: Improving
faculty engagement with students, advancing their awareness of the barriers and
problems the student experience, and developing a shared vision regarding the
success of URM graduate students within the school of engineering. Student-
focused objectives include: Adapting and implementing the evidence-based
strategies being adopted, enhancing professional and educational skills, and
increasing the number of students who are retained and graduated in engineering
doctoral programs. The team will consult with administrative leaders from UMBC
and The Pennsylvania State University who, as part of the project's evaluation
process, will provide feedback regarding the adoption, adaption, implementation
and assessment of the faculty and student strategies. Products are expected to
include publications in peer-reviewed journals.