* 1434149
* Collaborative Research:  Submarine Melting and Freshwater Export in Greenland's Glacial Fjords:  The Role of Subglacial Discharge, Fjord Topography and Shelf Properties
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Patrick Heimbach, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2017
* USD 471,187.00

Increased submarine melting of Greenland's glaciers has emerged as a plausible
trigger for their recent acceleration in mass loss and for quadrupling
Greenland's contribution to sea-level rise from 1992-2000 to 2001-2011.
Notwithstanding its importance, current understanding of submarine melting is
limited and it is presently absent or crudely represented in glacier, ice sheet
and climate models. Ocean models are beginning to include freshwater discharge
from Greenland, but where and when this freshwater enters the continental
shelves is largely unknown. Understanding the dynamics that govern the magnitude
and spatial distribution of both submarine melt and freshwater export to the
open ocean is a key step in projecting sea level rise and the consequences of
the Greenland-induced ocean freshening. A multifaceted approach that includes
the analysis of existing observations, a series of laboratory experiments and
high-resolution numerical simulations will seek to quantify the sensitivity of
submarine melting and freshwater export distribution to the dominant controls,
and to derive basic parameterizations that relate submarine melt rates and
freshwater export to large-scale parameters including subglacial discharge,
fjord size and topography (i.e. sill), and continental shelf hydrography and
stratification. The project involves collaborations with international experts
from complementary fields and will contribute to fostering interactions between
the multiple disciplines involved and beyond national boundaries. One student
and one post-doctoral fellow will be exposed to a cutting-edge problem and work
within a multidisciplinary team of researchers. Results from this project will
be widely disseminated to scientists across disciplines, as demonstrated by the
project team's long track record of organizing summer schools and working
groups, and to the public through different media outlets, including a blog on
polar science. Recent Greenland related work by the project team has been
featured in the New York Times, the Weather Channel and Italian National
Television, amongst other media.

The exchange of heat and freshwater between the ocean and Greenland's outlet
glaciers, typically grounded hundreds of meters below sea level, occurs at the
head of long, deep fjords that connect the ice sheet margins to the continental
shelves and the large-scale North Atlantic circulation. Recent work by the
project team, and others, has shown, for several idealized or specific cases,
that the fjord's temperature and stratification, as well as the summer discharge
of surface melt at the base of the glacier (subglacial discharge) have a first
order impact on the magnitude, distribution and timing of submarine melting.
These results will be generalized by formulating parameterizations, suitable for
large-scale ice sheet and climate models, of submarine melting and associated
freshwater export distributions as a function of large-scale controls. Two
specific tasks will be carried out: 1) Establishing dynamical links between
submarine melting, and the associated freshwater export from the glacier, and
its dominant controls, which include: the magnitude and spatial distribution of
subglacial discharge; hydrographic properties and stratification on the
continental shelf; and fjord size and topography, in particular the presence and
height of a sill. 2) Formulating two complementary parameterizations: one for
the magnitude and spatial distribution of submarine melting as a function of the
fjord's topography and size, the shelf stratification and the subglacial
discharge, to be used in glacier and ice sheet models; and one for the magnitude
and vertical distribution of the freshwater export from the fjords to be used in
large scale ocean and climate models which do not resolve the fjords. This
project involves the analysis of existing data, laboratory experiments and high-
resolution numerical simulations. It will be carried out in collaboration with
two international experts: a glacial hydrologist (Ian Hewitt at the University
of Oxford) and a fjord oceanographer (Lars Arneborg at the University of
Goteborg). The work is aimed at understanding a newly discovered "wiring" of our
climate system and is timely because of the large and unanticipated changes that
are occurring at Greenland's margins. It is complementary to the study of ice
sheet/ocean interactions around Antarctica (the more studied of the two) since
both the large-scale ocean circulation and the presence of narrow, long fjords
in Greenland contribute a unique set of relevant dynamical mechanisms.