* 1434722
* Collaborative Research:  A study of the energy dissipation of the internal tide as it reaches the continental slope of Tasmania
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Amy Waterhouse, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 561,018.00

Surface tides supply about one terawatt of power to internal tides as they
propagate up and over large topographic features. Most of the energy of these
internal tides propagates away from the generation regions in the form of low-
mode internal tides. The ultimate fate of this energy is unknown and has a large
impact on the global distribution of ocean properties. Previous studies of low-
mode internal tide propagation have observed regions where the internal tide was
diffuse and exhibited complex interference patterns, making it difficult to
close the energy budget. The Tasman Sea differs from previous sites because it
is believed to contain one of the most energetic and focused internal-tide beams
in the world. The beam is generated south of New Zealand, propagates 1,500 km
across the Tasman Sea, and strikes the Tasman continental margin. This project
called T-Beam will document the rate of decay of a focused internal tide beam,
compare the measured flux convergence with novel in situ measurements of
turbulent mixing, and investigate the dynamical processes responsible for the
observed decay. The results from T-Beam should lead to significant improvement
in parameterizations of internal-wave induced mixing in global climate models. A
major goal of the analysis is to compare in situ internal tide fluxes with those
inferred from satellite altimetry; the latter are known to be biased low in the
presence of strong mesoscale currents but the extent of the bias is not well
documented. T-Beam investigators have established collaborations with Australian
scientists who will complement the T-Beam measurements with a suite of
synergistic geological and biological analyses. During the field campaign,
T-Beam investigators will prepare press releases and publish a daily blog.
Undergraduate and graduate students in the United States and Australia will be
offered the opportunity for at-sea experience, modeling and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In T-Beam, the investigators will obtain high-
resolution estimates of internal-tide energy flux and dissipation rates in the
Tasman Sea. The study site is favorable because it has a single strong
generation region, contains a long energetic and confined internal-tide "beam",
and is sheltered from remotely generated internal tides. The proposed experiment
will be highly coordinated with the NSF-funded Tasmanian Tidal Dissipation
Experiment (T-TIDE), which will examine the dissipation of the internal tide as
it shoals on the Tasmanian continental slope. T-Beam will enhance T-TIDE by
providing synoptic measurements of incident internal-tide energy flux that will
reduce uncertainties in estimates of the fraction of energy flux that is
dissipated over the continental slope. T-TIDE will enhance T-Beam by providing
additional observations (adaptive glider sampling and shipboard surveying) to
help identify mechanisms and better constrain the open-ocean decay rates
observed during T-Beam. A decade ago, the Hawaiian Ocean Mixing Experiment
(HOME) provided a comprehensive look at the internal tide generation process.
Together, T-Beam and T-TIDE will complete that life cycle by providing the first
comprehensive observations of an internal-tide beam as it propagates through the
open ocean and dissipates on a continental slope. The Schmidt Ocean Institute is
providing 28 days of ship time coincident with T-TIDE. This project will deploy
a two-month mooring situated in the center of the observable internal-tide beam,
conduct intensive ship-based surveys of density, velocity and turbulence to
resolve the along- and across-beam spatial structure, and numerically model the
formation, variability, and dissipation of internal-tide beams in the presence
of arbitrary topography and mesoscale variability.