* 1434300
* Computational Simulation of Local Damage in Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Sashi Kunnath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 353,590.00

Computer simulations are used to predict responses of a building or a bridge to
extreme loading caused by earthquake, blast or hurricane. When subjected to
these intense loads, damage is most often concentrated into small local zones
within the structure. Computer Simulation of local damage and incorporating it
with structural system is difficult because simulations of structures operate
over large dimensions (more than 10-20 feet) whereas local damage occurs over
small dimensions (a few inches). This research project will create a new method
that will resolve this scale difference, enabling accurate simulation of
structures under extreme loads. The research involves expertise from structural
engineering as well as from computational mechanics. The results and software
products resulting from this research will improve the safety and economy of the
country's infrastructure of buildings and bridges. The involvement of
underrepresented groups and the transfer of new knowledge to students will
result in broader impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Localized damage in structural
members occurs when cross-sectional or material loss of strength (i.e.
softening) concentrates damage in a small region of the member. Accurate
modeling of local damage is critical, because extreme limit states in structures
(e.g. collapse) are highly sensitive to softening behavior that typically
accompanies local damage. Current approaches to simulate local damage in
structures are either extremely difficult in complex scenarios, or are
pathologically mesh-sensitive, leading to inaccurate simulations in either case.
This research seeks to bridge this scale gap between structural and local scales
through use of a 'nonlocal' approach, by explicitly embedding cross-sectional
and material length scales within constitutive and element formulations. The
research will include theoretical development of nonlocal approaches for beam-
column elements, to produce mesh-independent, accurate and robust simulations of
local damage in reinforced concrete and steel members. This development will be
informed by finite element simulation as well existing experimental data. This
will be followed by numerical implementation and validation.