* 1434753
* Modeling Traffic Flow in Transportation Networks During Peak-Use Hours
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Wenlong Jin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Improvements to road networks have to be planned, since drivers switch their
routes to take advantage of these improvements. Additionally, transportation
networks reach different user equilibria as a consequence of the route changes.
Therefore, in transportation planning and engineering, a basic task is to
analyze the performance of road network user equilibria, subject to different
improvement strategies, for present or future demand levels during peak periods.
Existing models of user equilibrium are either based on unrealistic estimation
of travel times or are too complicated to calculate. This research is
fundamental and provides an alternative model of user equilibrium, which is
based on a realistic estimation of travel times that can be efficiently
calculated for large-scale networks. The new model enables the development of
alternative methods for transportation planning, network design, traffic
control, and congestion pricing. These methods are important for improving the
safety, mobility, and environmental impacts of a transportation system. This
research addresses a problem that is foundational for transportation and
involves researchers, and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During peak
periods, traffic reaches a stationary state in a road network, where the
locations and sizes of queues are relatively constant for a sustained period of
time. Traditional static user equilibrium during peak periods is formulated
based on link performance functions, which fail to capture realistic traffic
characteristics on links or through junctions; while the dynamic traffic
assignment problems based on realistic traffic flow models are too complicated
to analyze and compute. This research fills the gap between network traffic flow
theory and traffic assignment in stationary road networks. The research uses
network kinematic wave theory to establish existence, stability, and numerical
methods of stationary states in a road network, derives physically meaningful
formulas for calculating travel times on stationary links in terms of both link
flow-rates and congestion levels, explores various formulations of user
equilibria and system optima.