* 1434842
* Environmental stress and signaling based on reactive oxygen species among planktonic protists
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2020
* USD 599,638.00

Traditionally marine food webs have been studied on the basis of size, assuming
that larger organisms eat smaller ones, and that they eat everything in a given
size range. This simplification has not stood the test of time, especially for
the smallest microbial plankton. Not only do smaller organisms sometimes eat
larger ones, there is growing evidence that chemical signaling and defenses are
acting at these small scales. This project addresses the central premise that
the oxidative stress response is an emergent property of phototrophic cellular
systems, with implications for nearly every aspect of a phytoplankton cell's
life in the upper ocean. Oxidative stress (OS), arising from numerous
environmental stressors, can damage cells and lead to release of compounds
suspected to be potent signals regulating protist behavior. Through chemical
signaling, OS is hypothesized to govern relationships among environmental
variability, phytoplankton condition, and protist predation. The study of these
integrated processes has three overarching objectives: 1) Use light stress to
create oxidatively stressed phytoplankton in the laboratory, and characterize
the response using an array of fluorescent probes, biochemical measurements, and
physiological assays. In addition, production and release of potential signal
molecules will be quantified. 2) Examine protist predation and behavioral
responses to oxidatively stressed phytoplankton and associated chemical signals.
Responses will be investigated by means of manipulation experiments and
resulting signal chemistry. 3) Investigate the prevalence of OS, its
environmental correlates, and the microzooplankton predation response in a local
embayment. Broader impacts will build directly on these experimental and
observational activities. The project will support several graduate students and
involve undergraduates through two programs at Shannon Point Marine Center,
including one targeting under-represented minorities. Funds will support a
significant collection of heterotrophic protists isolates. The fluorometer will
be used in developing new units for at least 3 different Western Washington
University marine-related courses. In addition, graduate students will use
protist images as the basis for outreach activities aimed at the general public
and K-12 students.

This research will help to elucidate some of the many ways in which the OS
response can affect phytoplankton fitness, characterizing the position of key
coastal species along an OS response spectrum. Findings will also inform the
relatively new and exciting field of chemical signaling in planktonic
communities. Finally, this study will help elucidate the links between
environmental stress, phytoplankton response, and predation in planktonic
ecosystems. These links relate to central issues in biological oceanography,
including the predator-prey interactions that influence bloom demise, and the
mechanisms by which protists feed selectively and thereby structure prey
communities. The research is a cross-cutting endeavor that unites subjects
usually studied in isolation through a novel conceptual framework. Outcomes have
the potential to generate broadly applicable insights into the ecological and
evolutionary regulation of this key trophic link in planktonic food webs.