* 1434248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Variability in High Elevation Soil Moisture: Integrating Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Satellites, and Field Hydrology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Oliver Wigmore, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,999.00

An unstudied aspect of regional hydrology is the role of soil moisture in
seasonal water storage, and how it is related to associated climatic,
hydrogeologic and environmental dynamics. Soil moisture storage may act as a
control on both water provision and primary production of key grazing lands,
especially during the dry season. Variability in soil moisture therefore has an
implicit role in water, food and livelihood security for downstream
stakeholders. This dissertation project will investigate the patterns, processes
and drivers of multi-scale temporal and spatial variability in soil moisture
content (SMC) through a novel integration of multispectral Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs), satellite remote sensing and field hydrology. This research
will provide a scientific contribution of both methodological and technological
advances in the ways that UAVs can be used in earth science and relatively
inaccessible (e.g., high mountain) research as well as empirical knowledge
regarding the regional hydrology of the systems under study. The findings of
this research will help answer fundamental questions about the water balance of
high mountain systems and responses to periodic or other climatic and
anthropogenic forces. The methodological and technical advances in UAV
applications will be of interest to scientists interested in new ways of mapping
and understanding the earth surface. Empirical insights of this research will be
of interest to scientists investigating future hydrologic scenarios as well as
questions of process and scale in mountain regions. Through its focus on water
availability this research has significant implications for and long-term
hydrologic, energy, and economic management and planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work takes place in the Cordillera Blanca range of
the tropical Peruvian Andes, an area of documented scientific importance in
understanding dynamic soil moisture processes and conditions. It is hypothesized
that soil moisture constitutes an important yet heterogeneous reservoir of
groundwater that couples glacier melt, atmospheric fluxes and land cover. To
investigate these processes, this project combines the analysis of Landsat
satellite imagery and high resolution (centimeter) multispectral UAV imagery
with climate and hydrology data to quantify inter-annual and seasonal
variability in soil moisture content (SMC). To identify potential drivers of
multi-scale spatial and temporal SMC variability, this research examines the
hydrogeoecological connections among SMC, groundwater storage, precipitation,
glacier recession, evapotranspiration and climate in the high alpine meadows and
wetlands. The systematic knowledge will contribute to many high elevation
mountain systems as well as the social and economic systems dependent upon them.
Lastly, this work will develop a methodology through which SMC in remote
environments can be rapidly quantified with continuous coverage at a high
spatial resolution using a UAV platform.