* 1434284
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of Transferable Quota Markets and Customary Management Areas on Fishery Sustainability and Indigenous Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Kimberly TallBear, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,999.00

Overfishing threatens ocean ecosystems and economies. To encourage marine
biodiversity protection without restricting commercial activities, governments
are creating new quota based property rights that are designed to curb
commercial fishing pressure without stifling economic exchange. Over ten percent
of the world's fisheries are currently managed by quota systems, a percentage
that increases each year. Yet, who should get quota and how quota markets should
be regulated, remains unclear. This project will examine factors shaping how
quota management systems influence the ecological and economic development of
fisheries and fishing communities. This study will provide critical information
about the management of marine fisheries for economic growth and biodiversity.
The results will be useful to fisheries experts and people involved in community
and indigenous economic development, including in the United States, where
fisheries are increasingly being managed under quota systems that stipulate
quota to be allocated to indigenous tribes. The findings from this project will
be made available publicly on the investigator's website for feedback from
community members, scientists, and policy makers. This research will contribute
to broader debates over the extent to which market-based conservation
initiatives, including quota markets for fisheries and carbon cap-and-trade
programs, incentivize sustainable environmental practices. This will be done by
looking to New Zealand, where the world's first nationally comprehensive quota
system was implemented in 1986, with legally mandated provisions for quota to be
allocated to indigenous tribes. Today, Maori own over 40 percent of the nation's
fishing quota, making New Zealand an important case through which to examine
barriers and opportunities for more equitable distribution of the ecological and
economic benefits of quota regulation. This project will enhance understanding
of market-based conservation by expanding upon the economic assumption that
quota and total allowable catch reduction limits set by government are the
driving force behind fisheries development, and that the market is the best
mechanism to encourage environmental sustainability and economic growth. By
examining how people engage with fisheries when access to commercial markets is
restricted by quota rights, this research will explore reasons why individuals
do not always act as the rational economic actor that fisheries rationalization
advocates require for their models of industry-led sustainable development.
Specifically, this project will use ethnographic methods and quantitative
analysis of fishery catch data to examine the role that colonial histories,
indigenous identities, knowledge, technology and access to markets each play in
influencing how people engage with fisheries development.