* 1434442
* Centers for Learning and Teaching:  Research to Identify Changes in Mathematics Education Doctoral Preparation and the Production of New Doctorates
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Barbara Reys, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2018
* USD 399,322.00

The quality of the mathematical education provided to teachers and ultimately to
their students depends on the quality of teacher educators at the colleges and
universities. For several decades, there has been a shortage of well-prepared
mathematics teacher educators. Doctoral programs in mathematics education are
the primary ways that these teacher educators learn the content and methods that
they need to prepare teachers, but the quality of these programs varies and the
number of qualified graduates has been insufficient to meet the demand.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will research the programmatic changes that
resulted from the NSF investment in Centers for Learning and Teaching of
Mathematics (CLT) at the 31 participating institutions. It will provide
information on the core elements of doctoral preparation in mathematics
education at the institutions and ways in which participation in the CLTs has
changed their programs. It will also gather data on the number of doctorates in
mathematics education from the CLT institutions prior to the establishment of
the CLT and after their CLT ended. A comparison group of Doctoral granting
institutions will be studied over the same time frame to determine the number of
doctoral students graduated during similar time frames as the CLTs. Follow-up
data from graduates of the CLTs will be gathered to identify programmatic
strengths and weaknesses as graduates will be asked to reflect on how their
doctoral preparation aligned with their current career path. The research
questions are: What were the effects of CLTs on the production of new doctorates
in mathematics education? What changes were made to doctoral programs in
mathematics education by the CLT institutions? How well prepared were the CLT
graduates for various career paths?