* 1434044
* Student Travel Support for the Eleventh Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 2014)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This project funds travel support for students to attend the Eleventh Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 2014) that will be held in
Seattle, WA, on April 2-4, 2014. The conference focuses on the design principles
of large-scale networks and distributed systems and, in particular, challenges
that are shared across systems as diverse as internet routing, peer-to-peer file
sharing, sensor nets, scalable web services, and distributed network
measurement. The goal of the conference is to bring together researchers from
across the networking and systems community -- including computer networking,
distributed systems, and operating systems -- to foster cross-disciplinary
approaches and to address shared research challenges. This cross-disciplinary
emphasis makes it well-suited as a target for student participation. The awards
permit a more qualified and diverse group of student attendees than would
otherwise have been possible. Students attending the conference benefit from
both the technical content of the conference and the professional interaction
with senior researchers from other universities and with industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in NSDI 2014 is a valuable and important
part of the graduate school experience. It provides students with the
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers in the field, and exposes
students to leading edge work in the field. This project will enable the
participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend NSDI. NSDI
2014 will offer many opportunities for students to meet, interact, and exchange
ideas in an informal atmosphere including members of the program committee,
speakers and organizers who are on site; a poster session; small evening birds-
of-a-feather sessions.