* 1434147
* Controlling the Behavior of Ferroelectric Materials through Strain Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nadya Mason, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 510,000.00

Society and industry are increasingly calling upon novel materials to enable new
capabilities and new applications. One example of a class of materials that is
growing in terms of its use and technological impact are ferroelectric
materials. These materials can produce a voltage or electric current when
subjected to force (i.e., when compressed or bent) or vice-versa, they can
produce movement when a voltage is applied to them. Ferroelectric materials are
already utilized in a wide array of applications ranging from positioning
systems (e.g., movement of the tips on atomic force microscopes) to energy
harvesting (e.g., producing electric current from shoes during walking). This
project will explore new ways to control the behavior and properties of
ferroelectric materials by developing new materials, referred to here as
flexoelectric materials, that are ferroelectric and that are made using modern
material deposition methods which produce materials that have varying amounts of
atomic level strain (i.e., deformation) built into them. In other words, by
depositing the materials in a very controlled way, the normal distances between
atoms in the material can be changed in a desired way and this displacement of
atoms from their normal equilibrium will result in changes in the material
properties. The project will train the next generation of scientists and
engineers who can function in a multi-disciplinary team environment and will
broadly enhance the infrastructure in the United States as it pertains to the
synthesis and fabrication of complex materials. The project will also utilize
education and outreach programs that are designed to broaden the participation
of underrepresented minorities in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop new insights into
how inhomogeneous strains (such as strain gradients) can be produced and used to
control flexoelectric materials. In particular, scientific framework will be
developed to utilize modern thin-film deposition and processing routes to expand
the fundamental understanding and utilization of flexoelectric effects (the
coupling between a strain gradient and electric polarization). The project will
explore the nature and limits of flexoelectricity in ferroelectrics by combining
design, synthesis, processing, and characterization of materials. In situ and ex
situ processing methodologies will be developed to produce large and tunable
inhomogeneous strains (i.e., strain gradients) via the fabrication of flexible
and free-standing ferroelectric films. The program will answer two central
questions: 1) how can large and deterministic strain gradients be produced, and
2) how does the presence of a large strain gradient impact the field, stress,
and temperature susceptibilities of a ferroelectric material? In situ synthesis
of large strain gradients in films via the production of compositional and
defect gradients will be explored. Ex situ fabrication and processing methods to
produce large strain gradients in substrate-supported materials will be
explored, together with released and free-standing versions of materials, and
the evolution of properties in materials with large strain gradients. This work
will impact the fields of ferroic materials, including ferroelectric-based
properties, and will have has direct impact on devices that utilize
ferroelectrics including memory and logic, sensors and actuators, thermal and
energy conversion applications.