* 1434421
* Biomechanical Investigation of Insect Leg Joints
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mustafa Akbulut, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 243,839.00

Insect leg joints endure millions of steps, jumps, and bending motions in their
lifespan; and surpass the durability and frictional efficiency of most human-
made mechanical devices. Relative to body length, insects exceed the height
jumped by many animals and accelerate their bodies at a much faster rate.
Furthermore, the exertion force of an insect joint is tens to several hundred
times their body weight as exhibited by froghoppers (414 times), fleas (135
times), and locusts (8 times), vastly exceeding that of humans (2-3 times).
However, although efficient functioning of insect joints has been recognized for
a long time, the mechanism by which insect joints operate efficiently is still
unknown. This research aims to fill this knowledge gap, and has two components
for integrating research and education. The first component strives to increase
the participation of underrepresented groups in academic research and the second
concerns curriculum development. Considering that, for any machine to operate
and move, energy must be provided to overcome friction. Minimizing the amount of
energy lost to friction is a significant issue for society and industry. The
outcomes of this project will be valuable to the development of innovative,
energy-efficient, and durable coatings through bio-inspiration. The project will
also involve an educational outreach program to the community and the
integration of students into the research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of this work is to generate a fundamental understanding of
the principles that govern the operation and efficiency of insect joints.
Specifically, this research will seek to determine what the main features of
surface morphology of insect joints are and how these features influence the
adhesion between insect joints; and also the role of their internal
nanostructure on their mechanical properties such as modulus of elasticity and
hardness. Furthermore, models relating the structural, adhesion, and mechanical
properties with friction and wear will be developed. These tasks will be
achieved using advance surface characterization techniques including atomic
force microscopy, nanoindentation, and nanotribometry. Since structure-property
relationship of biomaterials is one of the key contemporary issues in the fields
of biomechanics and materials science, this activity has potential to advance
the current state of art in this topic by determining structural and
morphological properties of insect leg joints that have never been studied
before. Furthermore, little is known about tribological properties of
hierarchical nanostructures and insect leg joints. Hence, the outcomes of this
project are bound to beneficial to the field of tribology and biotribology.