* 1434780
* Ocean eddies-topographic interactions along the Brazilian Coast
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* William Dewar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 496,752.00

Swift currents can create robust, circular structures approximately 100
kilometers in diameter, known as "rings." The ocean is filled with these rings,
which propagate according to their own dynamics. Observations and modeling
studies have revealed several formation sites and pathways known for the
prevalence of ocean rings. One of these sites is the northeast coast of Brazil.
Each year, eight or nine rings form and propagate along the Brazilian coast.
These rings trap warm water in their cores as well as nutrients and organisms,
and are thus important to all aspects of oceanography. North Brazilian Rings, in
particular, are thought to be important for climate variability by contributing
half of the northward warm water transport of the global ocean circulation in
the Atlantic Ocean. As these ocean rings circulate, they interact with the
bottom topography but the ring-topographical interaction is still not well
understood. Idealized studies have demonstrated that rings can accelerate or
slow down when entering in contact with the topography. However it is unclear if
these theories apply in realistic cases such as the North Brazilian Rings. This
study will address this question in a combined theoretical and numerical study
of the region. This research will clarify the ring-topographic interactions for
realistic topographies and lead to a better understanding of the ocean dynamics
in coastal areas. Each summer, a high school science teacher will be involved in
the conduct of the research. The project team will visit the teacher's classes
during the regular school year to give presentations on oceanography and update
the class on the work done during the summer by their
instructor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Brazil Current (NBC) rings are observed
to accelerate suddenly upon departing the South American coast at 12Â°N (often
doubling their propagation speed). This phenomenon has never been explained, but
given that these rings are responsible for roughly 50% of the Meridional
Overturning Circulation inter-hemispheric exchange, one needs to understand
their pathways and evolution. The ring-topographic interaction will be examined
in a combined modeling and analytical study. This study will proceed
systematically from simple process-oriented work to regionally embedded, fine
scale primitive equation modeling of the western tropical Atlantic. New ideas
about the nature of mean flow-topography interaction will be explored and
studied by solving a reduced equation set along with complementary process ocean
circulation models. This combination should allow the project team to assess the
validity of the theory and to test its limits of applicability. In addition, the
mechanics of cyclonic vorticity generation, which is potentially a powerful
effect on the separation of NBC rings from the coast, will be examined. Finally,
a series of aggressive embedded, downscaling modeling experiments will be
performed to provide detailed numerical statements of the regional dynamics. The
possibility that the mean flow topographic interaction can be explicitly
calculated, rather than having to rely on poorly known parameterizations and
boundary conditions, could be a significant breakthrough.