* 1434735
* Functional Materials via Crystal- and Nano-engineering of Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Wenbin Lin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2014
* USD 51,803.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have
attracted a great deal of attention over the past decade, due to the ability to
systematically engineer desired chemical and physical properties in MOFs via
modifications of the constituent building blocks. The PI will pursue two very
different objectives in this proposal?crystal engineering of highly stable and
porous MOFs for hydrogen storage and nano-engineering of MOFs for potential
applications in templated synthesis of core-shell nanostructures and in
biomedical imaging and drug delivery. In the first objective, isoreticular
families of robust and highly porous MOFs based on both 4,4-connected PtS and
4,8-connected Scu topologies will be synthesized and evaluated for hydrogen
uptake. By systematically tuning the size of the bridging ligands, ?aromatics-
rich? microporous MOFs with different degrees of interpenetration will be
obtained. Rigid guest molecules will be incorporated into MOFs to stabilize the
frameworks, to increase microporous surface areas, and to enhance the MOF-
hydrogen interactions. In the second objective, the PI proposes to continue
fundamental studies on nanoscale MOFs (NMOFs) and explore their potential
applications in a number of areas. Pioneering work from the PI?s lab has
demonstrated the ability to scale-down MOFs to the nano-regime to generate a new
class of highly tailorable hybrid nanomaterials with controllable compositions,
sizes, size distributions, and morphologies. Further refinement of the synthetic
methodologies will allow the design of novel hierarchically assembled core-shell
nanostructures for potential photocatalytic proton reduction and water oxidation
and the synthesis of novel biodegradable and biocompatible nanomaterials for
magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and drug delivery. The success
of this research will not only have important impact on a renewable and
sustainable future energy strategy, but also make positive contributions to
improved human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;
This DMR proposal aims at the rational synthesis of a new class of hybrid
materials, namely metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), at both the bulk and
nanometer scales. Systematic engineering of the bulk MOF materials will allow
for the synthesis of new hydrogen storage materials which will enable hydrogen-
based fuel cell technology for mobile power sources. Such hydrogen storage
materials are of paramount importance not only to the national energy security
but also to the reduction of environmental pollution. Scaling down of MOFs to
the nanometer regime allows the synthesis of a new class of highly tailorable
hybrid nanomaterials with controllable compositions, sizes, size distributions,
and morphologies. Such nanoscale MOFs (NMOFs) will be used to template the
synthesis of novel hierarchically assembled core-shell nanostructures for
photocatalytic proton reduction and water oxidation, as well as for the
synthesis of novel biodegradable and biocompatible nanomaterials for biological
sensing, biomedical imaging, and drug delivery. The PI will also be actively
involved in personnel training at multiple levels, including high school
students, undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral research
associates. The proposed research will thus significantly contribute to NSF?s
mission on promoting and integrating research and education in addition to its
potential impact on our nation?s future energy technologies and health
care.&lt;br/&gt;