* 1434696
* Molecularly Engineered, Targeted O2-Electrodes For Reversible, Nonaqueous Li-Air Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Eranda Nikolla, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2018
* USD 325,810.00

1434696 - Nikolla&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A shift toward environmentally friendly,
renewable energy sources such as the sun and the wind will require major
advancements in energy storage technologies especially for the transportation
sector. The utility and customer appeal of electric automobiles would be greatly
enhanced by development of lighter-weight, lower-cost, rechargeable batteries.
Lithium-air (Li-air) batteries are among the most promising energy storage
technologies because they can theoretically provide very high energy density
(amount of energy the battery can store for a given weight) at a low cost. The
theoretical energy density of Li-air batteries is comparable to that of
gasoline, and much higher than that of any other energy storage technologies.
While these systems are very promising, their performance is significantly
limited by a number of factors, including the activity and stability of the
oxygen (O2) electrode. In this proposal, we employ a systematic approach to
develop active and stable oxygen electrodes for Li-air batteries. We anticipate
that the proposed controlled experimental studies will lead to fundamental
insights that can guide the development of highly active and reversible Li-air
batteries. Development of stable, reversible Li-air batteries that operate near
the theoretical limit will provide a major breakthrough in the energy storage
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed worked is to develop
multifunctional oxygen electrodes for Li-air batteries that target two important
chemical steps that govern their activity and stability: (i) Li+ diffusion, and
(ii) the activation of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) during the charging
process. Controlled electrochemical and spectroscopy studies will be utilized to
obtain important fundamental insights on the effect of the targeted
electrochemical/chemical steps on the electrochemistry at the oxygen electrode
of Li-air batteries. We anticipate that the proposed work will have a
significant impact toward the development of stable and efficient Li-air
batteries. The systematic approach on developing molecularly engineered, target
electrodes can be extended to other electrochemical systems. In addition to the
scientific impact, the proposed research will become a learning tool for
undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities at Wayne State
University (WSU). The PI has also partnered with local K-12 schools to involve
K-12 students with the research through summer internships and inspire them to
pursue careers in science and engineering. In collaboration with the NSF-
sponsored Gaining Options-Girls Investigate Real Life program, the PI also
proposes to organize ?Energy and Environment? day camps, where middle and high
school girls will be introduced to research related to energy and environment.
The PI plans to use the fundamental electrochemical insights obtained from this
project to design a course for senior undergraduate and graduate students
focused on the Fundamentals of Electrochemistry.