* 1434668
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Citizenship, Identity, and Rural-Urban Migration
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Nitsan Chorev, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2015
* USD 11,718.00

SES-1434668 Nitsan Chorev Oi Ying I Pang Brown University

This dissertation project examines what happens to citizenship regimes when a
country undergoes transformation, triggered by capitalist market reforms. The
study contributes to the limited literature on citizenship regimes which diverge
from the model of citizenship in Western Europe. This project asks two closely-
related questions. Firstly, how is citizenship in countries undergoing
capitalist reforms described and instituted in the law, but also experienced and
practiced, especially by disadvantaged populations. Secondly, by comparing and
contrasting the trajectories of citizenship development, this project aims to
clarify and contribute to the theoretical understanding of the relationship
between capitalist development and citizenship development outside of Western
Europe. Over the past three decades, capitalist market reforms in China and
India have substantially altered socio-political landscapes, triggering the
transformation of the citizenship regime in each country. Yet the citizenship
development of China and India is difficult to explain with existing literature
on citizenship, which is still largely derived from the experiences of Western
Europe. Informed by an understanding of citizenship not as a status or as a
predetermined set of rights to be conferred on the population, but rather as
relations that arise out of everyday practices and interactions between
different societal actors, this project will study how citizenship is
understood, interpreted, practiced, and contested by citizens in China and
India. . In particular, this project will focus on the experience of low-income
internal migrants. As newcomers to the city, many internal migrant workers are
faced with the paradoxical existence of being a stranger at home, as they are
treated as "virtual foreigners within the cities of their own country". The
entry of internal migrant workers into cities therefore serves as a research
site where migrants' struggles to establish themselves as rightful members of
the city bring into relief the active and observable practices and contestations
of citizenship. More specifically, this ethnographic study will study
construction workers in Beijing and Delhi, who are mostly low-income migrant
workers from neighboring provinces.

Broader Impact

The imperative for the study of citizenship is simultaneously empirical and
normative. The implications of citizenship in most contexts are significant in
that citizenship status impacts and defines the daily lives of people. By
examining the livelihoods of low-income construction workers, this project has
the potential to contribute to a better understanding and clarity of the needs
and struggles of a vast, underprivileged population. The findings from this
project will be relevant for policy makers as in that they will generate a
greater awareness of the situation of exploited workers among the general
public.