* 1434303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigration and Social Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Tomas Jimenez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 11,999.00

SES- 1434303&lt;br/&gt;Tomas Jimenez&lt;br/&gt;Ariela
Schachter&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immigration is
dramatically changing the United States? racial makeup. According to Census
estimates, the U.S will be a majority-minority nation by 2043, and Latinos are
already the largest non-White group, surpassing Blacks. Immigration is also
increasing diversity within racial groups: about one-third of Latinos, two-
thirds of Asians, and one-tenth of Blacks in the United States are foreign-born.
Existing scholarship focuses on either the status of immigrants or the status of
racial groups, but not the interaction between them, ignoring the reality of
today's diversity. The dissertation explores how White, Black, and Latino
Americans understand this growing diversity by directly comparing their
attitudes about different racial and immigrant groups. The project will advance
the field of sociology and the broader social sciences by uniting theoretical
and empirical work on immigrant assimilation and racial politics. It will also
bring much needed data to the contentious and often acrimonious debate about
American immigration policies. Additionally, while efforts to mobilize Black and
Latino citizens have been increasing, there is a lack of information about the
political attitudes of minorities, which contributes to their under-
representation in American politics. By particularly focusing on the attitudes
of Black and Latino Americans, the project will offer data that can speak to key
issues for both communities, including inter-minority relations and attitudes
about immigration policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to answer the
following questions: Do Americans view native-born Latinos, Blacks, and Asians
differently than foreign-born Latinos, Blacks and Asians? How do views about
different groups influence political behavior? And how are views about
increasing diversity shaped by our own racial and ethnic identities? To answer
these questions, the project uses an original survey experiment designed to
capture Americans? stereotypes about twelve different racial and immigrant
groups. The experimental design minimizes social desirability bias by relying on
randomization to make comparisons across groups. By embedding the experiment in
a series of internet surveys?both nationally-representative and surveys
targeting Black and Latino Americans?the project is able to capture the
attitudes of a diverse group of several thousand Americans. This study will
contribute to scholarship on racial attitudes by developing updated measures
that can better account for the growing heterogeneity within racial groups. It
will also contribute to scholarship on immigrant assimilation by evaluating the
extent to which native-born White, Black, and Latino Americans recognize
differences between immigrants and the native-born, a central but largely
untested claim in the assimilation literature.