* 1434897
* DMREF: Search for Magneto-electronic Behavior in Complex Fluoride-based Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2021
* David Lederman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,346,351.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;There is significant interest in multifunctional
materials, such as multiferroics, which combine simultaneous responses to
electric, magnetic, and strain fields. Potential applications include new power
efficient electronics and ultra-fast information processing devices. To date,
most of the multiferroics that have been studied are complex oxide materials.
Despite the exciting fundamental discoveries emanating from research on these
materials, their multiferroic performance is not yet adequate for use in
practical applications. In this project, the investigators propose to
systematically study complex fluoride materials as alternatives to complex
oxides because the different physical origins of the multiferroic effects in
fluorides can potentially enhance the multiferroic response. The research will
consist of a synergistic collaboration between computational and experimental
researchers. The computational effort will predict the most likely materials to
have desired multiferroic properties, and the experimental portion will
synthesize and characterize the suggested materials. In turn, the experimental
results will be used to improve the accuracy of the calculations, which
ultimately will lead to an efficient optimization of the design of the new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to search for and understand the properties of fluoride-based
magnetoelectric multiferroic materials. Recent theoretical work suggests that in
ABF3 compounds, ferroelectricity results from the A-site ionic displacement, and
not from the magnetic B-site, which should enhance the magnetic response. This
is in contrast to many complex oxides, where it is the magnetic ion site that
undergoes the displacement, which at the same time tends to weaken the magnetic
properties. Moreover, the fluorine ions can lead to large canting in
antiferromagnetic structures, again enhancing the magnetoelectric response.
There are also indications that interfaces between complex fluorides and other
fluorides or oxides should have large and novel magnetoelectric responses. In
this project, the properties of complex fluoride compounds and heterostructures
will be studied using ab-initio computational techniques, and the most promising
materials will be synthesized via molecular beam epitaxy and characterized using
scanning probe and optical techniques. The experimental results will be used to
improve the approximations used in the computational models. This joint
theoretical-experimental effort will efficiently identify the most likely
interfaces and materials which have desirable magnetoelectric properties, thus
significantly reducing the time necessary for evaluating the vast number of
possible material candidates.