* 1434273
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Easily Verifiable Controller Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* John Hedrick, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 130,000.00

The verification and validation step is a major milestone in the development of
an industrial control system. Verification refers to showing that the control
software is built correctly, and validation refers to showing that the
controller meets its specified objectives. Current verification and validation
procedures are costly and time consuming. For example, verification and
validation of an automotive electronic control unit can take two man-years and
cost 5-6 million dollars. However failure to find design or implementation
errors in systems such as engine control, braking, or steering risks terrible
economic and human consequences. Large-scale deployment of complex interacting
systems, such as self-driving cars, further increases these risks. This project
will show how verification and validation costs can be greatly reduced by
bridging the gap between the disciplines of control design and software and
hardware engineering. To do this, constraints such as data sampling rates, word
length, and arithmetic processing are incorporated throughout the control design
process. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project will show that by satisfying specified robustness properties during
design, the controller can be verified and validated with a minimum of further
effort. Verification and validation is of critical importance to the automotive
industry, and engineers from Toyota Motor Engineering &amp; Manufacturing North
America are partners in this project. However the results will also benefit the
aerospace, power generation, and manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of errors detected during
verification and validation are introduced during the initial stages of
controller development. A critical gap occurs when uncertainty in controller
software/hardware implementation is not considered as part of the controller
design. This gap leads to the need for many Verification and Validation
iterations and results in costly controller design. This project intends to fill
this gap by (i) modeling and quantification of uncertainties that arise from
controller implementation imprecisions, (ii) design of robust controllers to
overcome implementation uncertainty, and (iii) development of an adaptive
control framework to update uncertainty bounds from implementation imprecisions.
The expected outcome from these three main contributions will be an uncertainty-
adaptive, easily verifiable control theory framework that industry can adapt to
controller design processes to minimize the time and cost of controller
development.