* 1434791
* Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructure Systems:  Post-Disaster Reconstruction Processes and Stakeholder Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Amy Javernick-Will, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,101.00

Sustainable infrastructure that is used and maintained by communities over time,
and resilient networks that can support infrastructure construction and repair
in times of crisis, are sorely needed. Unfortunately, conventional approaches in
post-disaster reconstruction focus primarily on rapid and recognizable results
(e.g., number of houses built), over long-term results, causing some
infrastructure to deteriorate only a few years after a disaster. The inherently
complex post-disaster environment places stress on this process, resulting in
the rapid emergence of coordination networks and the application of vastly
different reconstruction processes. If ineffective, these coordination networks
and construction processes can result in deficient, unused infrastructure, an
inefficient use of relief and recovery funds, and human development setbacks.
Given the increasing number and impacts of disasters, this research will analyze
and determine the post-disaster coordination network models and reconstruction
process strategies that facilitate the development of sustainable infrastructure
and resilient networks. These models and strategies will be disseminated broadly
to organizations and agencies involved in these efforts. In addition, the
database of results, operationalized constructs, and analysis of processes will
also be disseminated widely for future expansion and validation.

The research will develop a theory of post-disaster reconstruction process and
coordination network pathways that enable resilient and sustainable
infrastructure. Using a longitudinal, multi-method research approach that
includes network and fuzzy-set qualitative analysis, the research will identify
the processes that are employed and the networks formed to mobilize resources
and coordinate work in various rebuilding phases, including planning, design,
construction and operation and maintenance. Furthermore, it will analyze the
evolution of post-disaster coordination networks, stakeholder participation and
training processes over time. Finally, it will determine the necessity and
sufficiency of individual processes and networks, as well as the combinations of
reconstruction processes and coordination networks, that result in sustainable
and resilient systems.