* 1434242
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: High-Elevation Deciduous Forest Structure: A Test of the Slow-Seedling Hypothesis
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Alan Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 15,995.00

This doctoral dissertation research will investigate the relative contributions
and interactions of seedling environment, canopy structure, climate variation,
and the type and history of disturbance as factors contributing to dominance of
deciduous broad-leaved species as opposed to needle-leaved conifers in alpine
forests. Conventional understanding has held that alpine forests are dominated
by needle-leaved conifers, but at some locales, broad-leaf alpine forests exist.
A "slow-seedling" hypothesis articulated by William Bond posits that deciduous
broad-leaved seedlings are superior competitors, largely because of their
greater adaptability to localized changes in the availability of resources like
light and soil moisture, while needle-leaved conifers are more tolerant to
stressors like low temperatures and soil acidity. This project will increase
knowledge regarding how species respond to variability in environmental
conditions along an elevation gradient, especially at different stages of life.
The project will help advance understanding in the geographic and biological
sciences by improving basic knowledge of the controls on forest composition and
structure of sensitive high-elevation forests. More specifically, the project
will improve understanding of tree regeneration in alpine forest environments,
especially when they are subjected to changes in climate or other environmental
conditions. The project also will provide new insights regarding the ways in
which shifts in the relative dominance of either deciduous broad-leaved species
or needle-leaved conifers in the alpine environment would affect radiation
absorption, the seasonality of carbon cycling, snow melt, and the susceptibility
of forests to disturbance from fire or insect outbreaks. Data from this project
will become available to other scholars through a set of databases. The project
will provide special education and training opportunities for two undergraduate
students, and an educational module will be developed and tested in middle-
school classes. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.

The doctoral student whose dissertation research will be supported by this award
will examine the specific ecological correlates important for seedling
establishment, including light, elevation, canopy cover, soil nutrients, and
landscape curvature. She will measure how structural properties differ between
forest types across the elevation gradient, and she will examine the response of
trees to climatic and disturbances histories in each forest type using tree-ring
methods. The research will be conducted at eight sites in the forests on the
slopes of the Japanese Alps in Chubu-Sangaku National Park in central Japan in
collaboration with an experienced Japanese ecologist, Koichi Takahashi. Although
conducted in Japan, the research findings will have utility to better understand
forest dynamics around the nation, including in alpine forests of the U.S.