* 1434450
* IAI Professional Development Seminars to develop capacity building for global environmental change science and its policy application in the Americas
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2023
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This award satisfies a U.S. Government contribution identified at the Twenty-
first Meeting of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research,
Conference of the Parties, whereby signatories of the Treaty Establishing the
Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) agreed to
contributions towards a research budget supporting the activities of the IAI.
Program Budget Support, for which this proposal is submitted, allows the
Directorate of the IAI to provide support for a multidisciplinary, multinational
research and capacity building program. The funds will be used to support five
Professional Development Seminars (PDS) for global environmental challenges in
the Americas. Seminars will explore: Transdisciplinary Scientific Team
Management Skills; Managing Ecosystems Services from Tropical Forests; Ecohealth
Approach for the Andean countries; Impacts of Global Change and Variability on
Human Health in the MERCOSUR countries; and Building Resilience to Risk in Rural
Areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the
essential role of the IAI in developing research capacity in relation to the
IAI's objectives to implement regional cooperation for interdisciplinary
research on global environmental challenges; to conduct training of regional
relevance which cannot be conducted by any single country or institution; to
link research institutions of the region to global programs; to improve the
scientific and technical capabilities and research infrastructure of the
countries of the region; to foster standardization, collection, analysis and
exchange of scientific data; and to provide scientific information to government
towards public policy on global environmental
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IAI has been listed by the State Department
as an international organization within the meaning of the Federal Employees
International Organization Service Act, covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C.
3581.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the IAI Directorate is hosted by Uruguay on the
campus of the Technological Laboratory of Uruguay in Montevideo where the IAI
Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical personality,
with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the Government of
Uruguay.