* 1434309
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Intermittent Water Sources and Impacts on Fish to Design Optimal Water Conservation Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Laurel Larsen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 16,000.00

A major question in water resources is how to provide water for human uses while
maintaining streamflow that sustains riverine ecosystems and fisheries.
Intermittent streams, which provide habitat for salmonid fishes and water
resources for agriculture, dry up into a series of disconnected pools in the
late summer. To alleviate pressure on rivers and conserve habitat for juvenile
salmon on the brink of extinction, communities are increasingly examining water
conservation alternatives such as rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge.
Recent pilot projects provide a timely and unprecedented opportunity to address
interdisciplinary questions about linkages among environmental variables,
ecosystem services, and optimal management of increasingly scarce water
resources. This project is expected to produce novel contributions to
fundamental science, including understanding processes related to fish survival
and the interactions among carbon decomposition, streamflow, and sediment
transport in intermittent streams. By relating salmonid survival to predictable
environmental characteristics and creating a better understanding of these
critical variables, the research findings are likely to have applicability to
seasonally dry watersheds region-and nation-wide. The project will facilitate
mutually beneficial interactions between scientists and multiple stakeholder
groups, who will also benefit from new e-tools for managing their natural
resources. Findings will be disseminated through scholarly publications and at
regional symposia as well as through documents developed for stakeholders and a
citizen science web portal.

This project specifically addresses a fundamental knowledge gap: what habitat
conditions cause salmonids to disappear from some pools during the summer dry
period? This project builds on a two-year field study in two tributaries of
Salmon Creek (Sonoma Co., CA): Tannery Creek, which flows throughout the summer,
and Fay Creek, which tends to dry into a series of isolated pools. Through
extensive sampling in these adjacent streams, this research will test the
hypothesis that accumulation of organic material in poorly flushed pools drives
declining dissolved oxygen associated with a subsequent loss of salmonids. Fish
surveys in the two tributaries will be paired with measurements of temperature,
dissolved oxygen, water depth and velocity, pool volume, and organic carbon
concentrations and quality. More intensive studies, focused on monitoring how
these attributes change as the stream dries and determining which aquifers
sustain sanctuary pools, will be conducted in four study river segments. Using
linear mixing models, this research will quantify groundwater contributions and
flowpaths to pools that provide critical refugia for salmon, and identify
aquifers that should be targeted for enhanced infiltration. This work will also
evaluate how rainwater harvesting will impact salmonid habitat with and without
managed groundwater recharge. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this project will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish an independent research career. Increased understanding of
interactions between groundwater and streamflow will enable residents and
resource conservation districts to target water conservation and rainwater
harvesting projects where they will yield the greatest benefit to stream
ecosystems. Scientists working on salmonid recovery will benefit from increased
access to local knowledge and observations via facilitated collaborative
workshops and project-developed citizen science dissemination tools.