* 1434323
* Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS) 2014, April 11-13, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* David Eisenbud, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 03/31/2015
* USD 34,706.00

The Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium
(USTARS) will take place at the University of California, Berkeley on April
11-13, 2014. USTARS is an annual symposium designed to bring together student
researchers in algebra and topology, focusing on and showcasing research by
underrepresented students and providing mentorship for the participants through
critical educational and career transitions. In 2010, 29% of the mathematics
doctorates were awarded to women, while less than 4% were awarded to minority
students. USTARS promotes diversity in the mathematical sciences by encouraging
women and minorities to attend and give talks. USTARS exposes all participants
to the research and activities of underrepresented mathematicians, encouraging a
more inclusive and collaborative mathematics community. Graduate students who
attend USTARS are better equipped to seek academic positions and continue the
cycle of mathematical research and collaboration. Undergraduate students are
exposed to a wide variety of current research, ideas, and results, often more
comprehensive than the topics available at their home institutions. A one-day
workshop at the start of USTARS focuses on specific stages in professional
careers and the critical transitions associated with each stage. Participants
have the opportunity to network with underrepresented professors and students
who may become future collaborators, colleagues, and/or mentors. USTARS
participants continue to influence the next generation of students in positive
ways by serving as much needed mentors and encouraging students in the
mathematical sciences to advance themselves and participate in research and
conference events. More information is available at:
www.ustars.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Underrepresented Students in Topology
and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS) is a project proposed and guided by a
national group of underrepresented mathematicians. At USTARS, student
researchers convene in a structured meeting, along with professional
mathematicians. Students deliver 30-minute research talks in structured parallel
sessions. Graduate students give 75% or more of these presentations. Two
distinguished graduate students and one invited faculty member are chosen to
give 1-hour presentations. A poster session features invited undergraduate
researchers. Topics of presentations given in prior years include:
combinatorics, braid groups, graph theory, knot theory, representation theory
number theory and algebraic geometry.