* 1434598
* Support for The Large Hadron Collider Physics (LHCP) 2014 Conference held at Columbia University, New York, NY, June 2 -7, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* P. Michael Tuts, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 04/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides support for the second in a series of international
conferences on Physics coming out of, or relevant to, the Large Hadron Collider.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the premier Energy Frontier particle
accelerator operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland. The LHC
accelerates beams of protons (a type of particle known as a hadron) to the
highest energies currently attainable in the world. By colliding these beams,
the LHC can create particles that were present in the early universe, such as
the Higgs Boson which was discovered in 2012 by the two large experiments at
CERN, ATLAS and CMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHCP conference series highlights
experimental results from the LHC and Tevatron collider (at Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory) experiments along with related theoretical developments.
The conference will be held at Columbia University. The conference program will
be devoted to a review of the latest experimental and theoretical results on
hadron collider physics and a discussion on the outlook for the coming years.
The conference intends to provide a forum for lively discussions between
experimenters and theorists on topics such as the Standard Model Physics and
Beyond, the Higgs Boson, Supersymmetry and Heavy Ion Physics. Planning for the
LHC high luminosity upgrades is also included. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides partial support for the attendance of 100 students to the LHC Physics
Conference and this support will enable young U.S. scientists to present their
own research in an international setting. It will also allow them to exchange
ideas on the latest research directions at the Large Hadron Collider.