* 1434819
* Analysis and Design of Robust Control Schemes for Networks of Non-Uniform Infrastructure Responding to Aggregated User Demand
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Sonia Martinez, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 10/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

As sensing and communication technologies become faster, smaller and cheaper,
they become ever more integrated with common infrastructure and utilities in our
world. Widely available to the public, the new technology can be leveraged to
create more advanced systems where smart devices are linked with users and
operators by real-time communication networks. Modern examples include traffic
systems, the power grid, smart buildings, and automated factory environments.
The coordination between users and operators can dramatically expand the
efficiency of these networked infrastructure systems, while reducing problems of
congestion and high demand. This award supports fundamental research to provide
needed knowledge and techniques for the development of automatic control
algorithms that can meet these goals with guaranteed performance. The
coordination of multiple users and operators is very challenging as interactions
occur only locally, user/operator needs can quickly change due to unpredicted
events, the potential limitations of service over periods of high demand, and
the unreliability of the smart device operation. This research will bridge
existing theoretical tools and develop new ones that can be used to guide the
design of novel robust algorithms. Therefore, results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines
including control theory, distributed computation, optimization, and robotics.
The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research objectives are the
design of distributed coordination and re-routing algorithms for the control
networked systems subject to constraints in a wide variety of scenarios. The
research plan is articulated along the following thrusts: (i) The design of
aggregation-based robust demand-response algorithms for load shifting: While
aggregation can help achieve load-shifting objectives, it is key to understand
its robustness properties with respect to noise, time-varying interactions, and
delays. (ii) The design of distributed load re-balancing and re-routing
algorithms: Heterogeneous constraints can have a dramatic impact on distributed
algorithm behavior, breaking the natural multi-agent interaction flow and
leading to congestion. We aim to study how re-distribution can help alleviate
congestion. (iii) The integration of demand-response algorithms with distributed
routing and balancing algorithms. Nonlinear stability tools will be used to
analyze the robustness of the algorithms by bridging existing gaps between the
smooth theory of height Lyapunov functions, set-valued map theory, and
contractive analysis.