* 1434656
* Developing a tephra database to document the evolution of explosive volcanism along the Gulf of Alaska margin for the past six million years
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Jeff Benowitz, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 214,498.00

Explosive volcanism can be influenced by a range of geologic and climatic
processes. In areas like the Gulf of Alaska, both the rate and angle of
convergence of tectonic plates are understood to influence the rate of explosive
volcanism. Less well understood is the influence of glaciers and whether climate
fluctuations resulting in the ebb and flow of glaciers indirectly impact
eruption frequency through increased erosion rates. Gaining a better
understanding of how these factors contribute to explosive volcanic frequency
can inform us on the nature of particular tectonic subduction zones like the
Gulf of Alaska, helping mitigate the impact of potential volcanic hazards on
vulnerable populations. The Gulf of Alaska margin is one of the most
volcanically active regions in the world, making it a good area for study.
However, continuous records of past volcanism in this region are rare due to
extensive glaciation and erosion during over the past 2.5 million years. The
high-quality deep-sea cores collected during the Integrated Ocean Drilling
Program (IODP) Expedition 341 to the southern Alaskan margin provide new and
rare material to examine volcanism in this region during key tectonic and
climatic events. The proposed work seeks to develop a database of volcanic
material from these cores to quantify the development and evolution of Gulf of
Alaska volcanism during key tectonic and climate events over the past six
million years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will identify and develop a geochemical and geochronological
database for tephras from IODP sites U1417 &amp; U1418. A combination of data
will be collected to (i) determine tephra sources from the region?s three major
volcanic provinces; (ii) reconstruct the late Miocene-to-present evolution of
eruptive volcanism along the Gulf of Alaska Margin; (iii) design a marine tephra
database for use in terrestrial paleoclimatic studies. Methods will include
microscope and magnetic susceptibility identification of tephra, grain-specific
major and trace element geochemical fingerprinting, and 40Ar/39Ar radiometric
dating of glass, hornblende, biotite, and/or sanidine. Results will be
integrated with paleomagnetic, oxygen-18 isotope and microfossil
chronostratigraphies of Sites U1417 &amp; U1418, as well as with existing
terrestrial Alaskan and Canadian Yukon tephra data. The overall results of this
research will provide new constraints on (i) the effect of different tectonic-
climate boundary forces on eruptive volcanic frequency, (ii) the genetic
relationships between variations in eruption rate and the initiation of the
Northern Hemisphere glaciations, and (iii) create a public database of well-
dated geochemically fingerprinted marine tephras to provide an improved
framework for reconstructing the paleoclimatic history of Alaska and the Yukon.