* 1434202
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate-Health Vulnerability: Identifying Climate Thresholds for Heat-Related Illness
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Margaret Kovach, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,634.00

Heat is the leading cause of weather-related death in the United States. General
circulation models of climate change project heat waves to increase in severity,
duration, and intensity, placing future populations at greater risk for both
heat-related illnesses and deaths. This project focuses on identifying the local
to regional scale patterns of heat-related illness and the temperature
thresholds that control these patterns. Temperature thresholds represent climate
values (e.g., temperature, heat index, and humidity) beyond which heat-related
illness emergency department admissions increase significantly. Identifying a
temperature threshold allows for the activation of an early heat warning system
or emergency response plan. Heat-related illness can be easily preventable
through hydration or relocation to a cooler environment; therefore,
interventions are a key component in reducing heat-related illness. This study
will also identify high-risk populations that experience a disproportionate
number of heat-related illness emergency department admissions. Previous
research has investigated heat-related mortality and morbidity in urban cities.
However, it has relatively neglected adverse health effects of heat in rural US
locations. This study identifies high-risk populations and risk factors in both
urban and rural locations (including those with at-risk agricultural and farm
workers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This objective of this study is to understand the
spatiotemporal patterns of heat-related illness and how they correspond to the
spatial patterns of temperature thresholds. This research employs a
multidisciplinary approach to understanding the climatic, environmental, and
population factors that affect patterns of heat-related illness. It draws from
the human - ecological approach of vulnerability theory, spatial statistics from
geography, and climate threshold identification from climatology to determine
the locations and factors by which climate impacts heat-related illness. The
explicit spatiotemporal integration of available fine-grained morbidity data,
census, and weather data in the methodology will be a novel contribution to
climate-public health research and provide new findings about the environmental
and socioeconomic factors that influence high rates of heat-related illness. A
wide array of spatiotemporal relationships is identified for different time
periods, ages, genders, and spatial locations. These relationships are
established through a geographic information system (GIS) framework, an
automated freeware (python) program to identify temperature thresholds, and
several regression techniques, including as geographically weighted regression,
spatial regression, and multi-level modelling. Though set in North Carolina and
centered on heat-related illness, the methodology utilized in this study will
also be applicable to other climate-related diseases (e.g. waterborne or
respiratory diseases) and can also be used as a model to assess climate-health
vulnerability in other geographic locations. In addition to academic
dissemination, the results will be distributed to the NC Division of Public
Health, Carolina's Integrated Science Assessments, the National Weather Service,
NC Farmworker Ministry Committee and the North Carolina Farmworker Institute.