* 1434550
* Developing Methods for Detection and Analysis of Repeating Earthquakes and Low Frequency Earthquakes Using Cascadia Initiative Amphibious Network Data
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Susan Bilek, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 156,753.00

The Pacific Northwest is subject to earthquake and tsunami hazard associated
with the Cascadia subduction zone, due to recurring slip on the plate boundary
fault that separates the North America plate and the downgoing Pacific plate.
Slip varies in time and space along the fault and understanding the slip
patterns can lead to new insights about which fault sections are most likely to
produce damaging 'megathrust' events (greater than magnitude 8). By studying
smaller events that occur throughout a seismic cycle (loading, rupture, post
seismic, reloading etc) this study can provide context for updated regional
hazard assessment. An undergraduate intern and a PhD student will receive
seismology training using both onshore and offshore data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A portion of the spectrum of slip behaviors along the
Cascadia megathrust fault will be studied using seismic data from the Amphibious
Array- reoccupied EarthScope Transportable Array sites and OBSIP ocean bottom
seismometers. Small repeating earthquakes will be documented for the 4-yr
duration of Cascadia Initiative (CI) and their distribution will be interpreted
in terms of fault character and possible along-strike variation in structure
within the subducting plate. The offshore coverage is expected to eliminate a
current bias in observations where onshore-only results suggest that low
frequency events (LFE) only occur in the down-dip part of the seismogenic zone.
A pilot study confirms that the planned automated spectral detection method can
succeed on CI ocean bottom seismometer data. There is potential for shallow
repeating events to occur in the up-dip portion of the megathrust zone and there
may be variations in level and type of source signature, including possibly new
LFE, along the Cascadia subduction zone. A lesson designed for an undergraduate
course will be developed and archived on the IRIS InClass and SERC servers. The
event catalog and source parameter results will be made available via
publication supplements and at least one NSF-supported open database (IEDA).