* 1434834
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Reliable Prediction of Endurance Life of Ultra-High-Strength Aerospace Rolling-Element Bearings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Leon Keer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2019
* USD 204,999.00

Rolling-element bearings are key precision components used for rotor support in
nearly all machinery. The annual revenue associated with bearings is a
substantial $50.5 billion worldwide. Future demands on high performance rotor
support for advanced aircraft engines, wind turbines and high-speed rail require
bearings to survive thousands of hours and consequently billions of Rolling
Contact Fatigue (RCF) cycles under severe operating conditions. A new generation
of high strength bearing steels with graded material properties has been
designed to meet these challenges. Existing life prediction methodologies rely
on empirical models dating back to the 1940s, resulting in a large discrepancy
between observed and predicted life, for the new generation of materials. This
Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) collaborative
researh project aims to predict reliable service life and structural integrity
of new generation bearing materials based on novel experimental and
computational procedures for understanding material degradation due to RCF at
the micro and nanometer scale. The results will translate to the design of other
components with large economic impact such as transmission gears, cams, railway
wheels and tracks, and manufacturing tooling. This research is an effort to
bring back an academic focus to manufacturing-related research to campuses and
to better assist US industries. The project will contribute to the education and
training of future manufacturing research workforce and
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative GOALI project involves
developing a novel physics-based material-specific life prediction model rooted
in fundamental understanding of local material properties of as-manufactured and
RCF-affected materials from sub-micrometer/nanometer to macroscopic length
scales. The project will develop: 1) quantifiable measures for subsurface graded
material response as a function of load, temperature and RCF cycles; 2)
computational approaches for understanding the influence of microstructural
features on the material cyclic response, resultant stress and strain fields,
and fatigue damage; and 3) a material-specific RCF life prediction methodology
based on enhancements to the existing Lundberg-Palmgren empirical approach by
the evolving elastic-plastic subsurface stress and strain fields. Methodologies
for tracking RCF material damage in the giga-cycle regime will become available
for reliable life prediction, which are of considerable importance with
applications to broader areas of tribology and heterogeneous materials for
future component design. Intellectual significance of the project comprises of
two novel contributions: 1) it will aid development of a new material-specific
RCF life prediction model, particularly beneficial to accelerated design of new
bearing materials, and 2) it will result in a methodology to model cycle-
specific material property evolution in rolling contacts, with direct relevance
to design of gears, cams, railway wheels and tooling.