* 1434067
* PFI:AIR - RA:  Commercializing a Chem Sensitive FET(CS-FET) Wireless Gas Detection Platform in an Industry/University Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Kristofer Pister, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 683,332.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of multi-gas sensing technologies derived from the Berkeley Sensor &amp;
Actuator Center expertise and discoveries in microfabricated chemical-sensitive
field effect transistors (CS-FETs). The CS-FET is important because it enables
new miniature, low power, low cost devices for much broader deployments of
wireless emergency leak detection &amp; alarm systems to make the oil &amp; gas
industry more safe, and eventual integration into mobile consumer devices to
allow rapid detection of environmental hazards for the mass market. The
technology provides ultra-miniaturization and power reduction sufficient for
microbattery-powered wireless gas monitoring. Sensing capabilities will
facilitate industrial and consumer safety and health applications. The features
will provide compelling commercial advantages in mobility, multiple gas
targeting, and suitability for wireless sensor network integration when compared
to the leading competing handheld gas sensors available in this market space.
Educational benefits will accrue to university of California Graduate student
researchers who gain entrepreneurial and technology translation experience
through close collaboration with industrial sponsors in more phases of research
commercialization than are currently observed in arms-length industry sponsored
university research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
several technology gaps in translation from research discovery to commercial
application. The batch fabricated gas sensor itself utilizes economic
semiconductor processes to create a novel low cost, low power transistor that
can be chemically functionalized to multiple gas species on a single substrate.
The program will additionally support aggressive miniaturization of ultra low-
power wireless communications platforms built on new wireless network standards
(such as Wireless HART) established for applications such as this. The boundary
spanning marriage of university research-driven sensing and communications
technology with industry technologists targeting real world problems will
validate the innovation ecosystem that is the subject of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation ecosystem that will be created
includes oil &amp; gas industry leader Chevron Corporation who provides
application &amp; operations knowledge and brings unmet product needs to the
ecosystem as eventual customer/end user; Murata Manufacturing Corporation, a
multinational leader in electronic &amp; wireless components and subsystems;
Rosemount, a business unit of Emerson, a market leader in industrial automation
and major supplier to Oil &amp; Gas and other targeted industries; and
NanoShift, a microfabrication contracting and consulting company with presence
inside the University recharge laboratories where the CS-FET is being developed.
The economic impact is expected to be development and manufacturing jobs as well
as employment of high technology systems and field service personnel. Some of
these impacts will begin to be realized in the 5-year timeframe because of the
active collaborative co-development ecosystem that will reduce discovery-to-
commercial timeframes. The scale of investment in clean air technologies is
illustrated in current Chevron forecasts of up to 1,000 jobs to implement a
single facility technology modernization project at their Richmond, California
refinery (just one of 143 U.S. commercial oil &amp; gas refineries) some of
which is undertaken for emissions reduction.