* 1434669
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigration Law and Civic Embeddedness
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Cynthia Feliciano, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,897.00

SES-1434669&lt;br/&gt;Cynthia Feliciano&lt;br/&gt;Edelina
Burciaga&lt;br/&gt;University of California Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research addresses a central topic in American public and
intellectual discourse: the immigrant experience. This study specifically
examines the integration experiences of the undocumented 1.5-generation. These
are immigrants who came to the United States as children and yet remain without
legal authorization. Current estimates suggest that approximately 1.8 million
undocumented young people live in the United States. Distinct from the 1st
generation who immigrated as adults and the 2nd generation who are similarly
children of immigrants but are U.S. citizens, the undocumented 1.5-generation
have developed values, identities, and aspirations that are influenced by
growing up American, but are also impacted by the practical reality of living
"illegally" in the United States. This dissertation study seeks to explain how
the undocumented 1.5-generation manage and negotiate this legal and social
paradox. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the absence of comprehensive immigration
reform, state laws and policies have become increasingly salient in shaping the
immigrant experience and immigrant integration. Employing a direct comparative
research design of Latino undocumented young adults (24-34 years old) in Los
Angeles, California (an established immigrant destination) and Atlanta, Georgia
(a new immigrant destination), the dissertation examines if and how state policy
contexts shape the incorporation pathways of the Latino undocumented
1.5-generation. It specifically asks how the experiences of undocumented young
adults in Los Angeles compare to those who grow up in the Atlanta area? In-depth
interviews and ethnographic fieldwork will be used to trace and compare four key
aspects of social and economic incorporation; (1) educational pathways, (2)
participation in the labor market, (3) participation in civics and activism
(civic embeddedness), and (4) sense of belonging and identity
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a critical question to understand
precisely because members of the undocumented 1.5-generation face narrowing
opportunities as they transition to adulthood. The research hypothesizes that
these opportunities are profoundly shaped by restrictive or expansive state
policy climates. To date, Georgia has been one of the most aggressive states to
limit the legal rights of undocumented immigrants while California has expanded
legal rights. The positive theoretical impact of this project is to explain the
mechanisms by which these divergent state law and policy contexts influence the
social and economic mobility of the undocumented 1.5-generation, a group who for
all intents and purposes are "American" but for their legal status. The results
of this study will directly contribute to previous studies about immigrant
incorporation in the field of sociology and law and social science studies. By
comparing California and Georgia this project will contribute to public and
legal understandings about the role and responsibilities of states to enforce
and enact immigration law, and the implications of these laws for the social and
economic mobility of the undocumented 1.5-generation.