* 1434964
* EAGER: COMPUTER AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN (CAMD) FOR NEW ADSORBENTS FOR NORM REMOVAL FROM NATURAL GAS FRACKING PRODUCED WATER
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Urmila Diwekar, Vishwamitra Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2015
* USD 135,275.00

1434964 Diwekar Vishwamitra Reserach Institute

To produce large volumes of newly discovered unconventional gas, hydraulic
fracturing of wells is commonly practiced in basins where shale gas and coal bed
methane are extracted. Hydraulic fracturing of wells during oil and gas (O&G)
exploration consumes large volumes of fresh water and generates larger volumes
of contaminated wastewater. About 15-25% of this water returns to the surface as
flowback water within 30 days of hydraulic fracturing. Produced water continues
to flow for the life of the well. In addition to high salinity and hardness, the
water may also contain significant levels of natural occurring radioactive
materials (NORM). It is very difficult to selectively remove NORM from these
waters.

New and novel model adsorbents will be researched in this work. The reserachers
will collaborate of the Gas Tecnology Institute (GTI)to identify a simplified
list of functions expected from high performance adsorbents and to correlate
that list with the adsorbents commonly found. The PI will use computer aided
molecular design (CAMD) methods for developing new environmentally benign
adsorbents for NORM removal. CAMD is generally the reverse use of the group
contribution method (GCM) that is used to generate molecules having desirable
properties. GCM has been used to predict state properties like selectivity,
relative volatility, surface tension, density, viscosity, and reactivity. The PI
will develop new group contribution methods for important properties of
adsorbents based on thermodynamics. Preliminary results have been obtained using
GCM for physical adsorption. The PI proposes to study chemical adsorption and
the Langmuir isotherm. GCM will identify the groups for environmentally benign
adsorbents. These groups will be uniquely designed to generate all possible
molecules by exploring all possible combinations. The properties of each group
and/or the interaction parameters between groups can be theoretically
calculated, experimentally obtained, or statistically regressed. From this set
of groups, desired molecules can be generated by group combinations. Constraints
from physical and chemical properties, as well as those from regulatory
restrictions, may be imposed, and hence the number of combinations can be
reduced.

However, this is the first time such an approach is proposed for generation of
adsorbents for NORM separation. The PI will select top 30 from the list of new
adsorbents obtained by CAMD for further study. In order to identify potentially
desirable chemicals various solution algorithms are used. These include
heuristic numeration, knowledge-base approaches, molecular property clusters
with algebraic equations and optimization-based methods. The PI will use
optimization approach for this work. CAMD methods have been applied to many
areas, such as extraction solvents, polymer designs, degreasing solvents,
blanket wash solvents, absorption solvents, refrigerant design, distillation
solvents, reaction solvents, catalysts, value added products, crystallization
solvents and foaming agents.

The proposed research is of considerable fundamental and practical significance
to natural gas fracking industries. Proposed investigations concern the
development of novel and powerfultools for identifying novel adsorbents for NORM
removal in natural gas fracking. Adsorbents are used in numerous applications
apart from hydraulic fracturing. Therefore, the framework developed in this work
has a broader commercial and societal impact. The team is planning to
collaborate with researchers from industries and national laboratories, building
upon their prior interactions on other previous programs.