* 1434019
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Urban Policy Implementation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Patrick Heller, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,950.00

SES-1434019 Patrick Heller Jamie L. McPike

India has recently entered a fundamentally new era of urban policymaking. For
approximately 50 years the federal urban policy approach was largely hands-off
until 2005 when the central government unveiled its most comprehensive urban
policy to date, the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (NURM).
Responding to pressures to address worsening urban problems while also promoting
economic growth in cities, the central government designed NURM as a reform-
based policy that proposes the restructuring of political and economic
institutions at state and local levels. In exchange for funds from the federal
government, states and cities must adopt a series of reforms for liberalizing
urban economies, decentralizing authority to municipalities, and expanding
services to the urban poor. For the first time in India's history, federal urban
grants are tied to reforms, signaling that the central government is keen to
transform historical forms of urban governance, which have been defined by the
strong control of state governments over urban affairs. Through analysis of
official documents, in-depth interviews with governmental and societal actors
working on NURM, and observation of NURM project meetings in Bangalore and
Chennai, this research will examine and seek to answer three main questions.
First, how does the Indian government construct and attempt to implement its
largest urban policy in history? Second, how do competing interests,
jurisdictions, and political relations between governmental actors and agencies'
at the local, state, and federal level?shape urban policy processes found both
within and between Indian cities? Third, how do non-governmental actors work
with governmental actors (at all levels of government) during policy development
and implementation and how do these multi-level interactions structure urban
policy processes found under NURM?

The data collected from this dissertation research will contribute a number of
empirical and practical insights to our understanding of urban governance in
India and, more broadly, to our understanding of urban governance under
contemporary globalization. First, this research will illuminate the processes
behind federal policy implementation in Indian cities. Existing studies in India
have examined policy processes and state capacity in sectors like education,
health, and poverty reduction, but to date there has been no systematic analysis
of federal urban policies and the complexities involved in their implementation.
As cities become increasingly central to India?s economic growth and
development, it is critical to understand the ways in which control of urban
governance is structured and the opportunities for and limitations to change
within Indian cities. Second, while control over urban affairs has traditionally
been the responsibility of the state governments, NURM has created space for
urban citizens and civil society groups to press for more locally accountable
forms of governance. In this sense, India represents a fascinating case to
explore how cities meet the diverse needs of their citizens while also
attempting to build institutional capacity at the municipal level. Third, it is
a common claim that urban governance becomes less accountable and democratic
under contemporary globalization. A deeper understanding of the role of
governmental and non-governmental actors in determining specific forms of urban
policy outcomes is a critical step toward improving our understanding the local
logics of urban governance under contemporary globalization and the ways in
which cities can still be sites for inclusive politics.