* 1434528
* Community Effects of Competition and Predation across Latitude and Implications for Species Invasions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mark Torchin, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 850,000.00

Global patterns of biodiversity demonstrate that most of the species on earth
occur in the tropics, with strikingly fewer species occurring in higher-latitude
regions. Biologists predict that this global pattern of species diversity is
likely shaped by thee ecological interactions between species. Yet few detailed
experimental data exist that demonstrate how species interactions influence
natural communities from the tropics to the arctic. Therefore, a significant
opportunity exists to transform our understanding of how these fundamental
species interactions shape patterns of biodiversity across the globe.
Furthermore, these species interactions have the strong potential to limit
potentially harmful biological invasions by non-native species, which are often
transported by human activities that can breach historical dispersal barriers,
such as ocean basins and continents. Biological invasions can cause undesired
ecological and economic effects and are considered one of the primary drivers of
global change. Through extensive field research on marine ecosystems along the
Pacific Coast of North and Central America, from the tropics to the subarctic,
this project will study ecological factors that shape global patterns of
diversity and limit biological invasions. Undergraduate and graduate students
and a postdoctoral fellow will be fully-integrated members of the research team.
The objective of mentoring these early-career scientists will be to integrate
scientific, professional, and cross-cultural training into a comprehensive
professional development framework that will prepare them for a successful
scientific career in an international forum. The research team will further
promote awareness of marine and invasion ecology through a suite of activities,
including outreach and educational activities for school children and young
adults in Philadelphia, Alaska and Panama. Information that can be applied to
the management of non-native species will be disseminated to a wide diversity of
U.S. and international stakeholders.

Biologists have long theorized that the latitudinal diversity gradient may be
shaped by stronger species interactions, such as competition and predation,
occurring in the tropics than at higher latitudes. Prior research suggests that
predation pressure is indeed stronger at lower latitudes, but it is unclear how
interactive effects of predation and competition structure communities to
maintain these diversity patterns in ecological time. This project represents an
international research program to expand ecological understanding of species
interactions across latitude. The objectives are to determine the relative
influences of two primary species interactions, competition and predation, on
patterns of species diversity, community assembly and sensitivity to species
invasion. Field research will employ a large-scale experimental approach that
focuses on sessile marine invertebrate communities across 47 degrees of latitude
(over 7000 km). Experiments will manipulate levels of predation and competition
for one year and will be conducted in four regions, ranging from the subarctic
to the tropics: Alaska, California, Mexico, and Panama. Communities of sessile
marine invertebrates, composed of both native and non-native species, will be
examined iteratively under different predation and competition regimes to
evaluate community dynamics. The relative importance of a suite of factors,
including environmental conditions and recruitment rates, to interaction
outcomes will be evaluated.