* 1434401
* Statistics-based Optimization Methods for Adaptive Interdisciplinary Pain Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Victoria Chen, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 374,998.00

Chronic pain is a multidimensional problem that affects nearly 40 percent of the
United States population and is estimated to incur $560-$635 billion in
incremental healthcare costs and costs related to rehabilitation and lost
productivity annually. With a growing number of treatment options and new
medications, formulating an evidence-based, individually-tailored treatment plan
has become increasingly complex. This research project develops new statistics-
based optimization methods for adaptive interdisciplinary pain management that
use patient data to recommend an interdisciplinary treatment regime for
controlling pain outcomes. The research involves an interdisciplinary research
team from the University of Texas (UT) at Arlington and uses data from the UT
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas. Because UT Southwestern uses a prevalent
and standardized dataset, the research will be applicable to approximately 100
pain centers across the nation and will influence how interdisciplinary pain
management is implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses four
major topics in statistical optimization. One, the research studies how to
coordinate the development of statistical meta-models and optimization
algorithms. Specifically, several meta-models will be developed, which are
accurate representations of the underlying system and can be globally optimized.
The second major topic involves using a learning method to impute missing values
in which the missing locations are in a block-wise structure. Three, the
research develops an inverse-probability-of-treatment weighted estimators method
for complex data. Finally, the research evaluates treatment solutions found from
optimizing one prediction model with the other prediction models using
simulation. Although this research is on pain management, the developed
methodologies of this project can potentially be generalized to create complex
adaptive treatment regimes for ailments other than pain.