* 1434119
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration and Participation in Civic Movements
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Suzanne Staggenborg, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 8,736.00

SES-143119&lt;br/&gt;Suzanne Staggenborg &lt;br/&gt;Sharon M. Quinsaat
&lt;br/&gt;University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;News reports and
academic scholarship suggest that migrants continue to maintain ties to their
homelands, from the traditional practice of remittance transfers to overthrow of
non-democratic governments and participation in elections. While much is known
about why migrants have a homeland orientation, information on how they become
engaged in civic movements working for political and social change remains
scant. This study analyzes why and how some political organizations of migrants
established in their host societies become involved in actions to institute
democracy in the homeland. Using the case of Filipinos in the United States and
Netherlands, the study examines the process of migrant mobilization in homeland
democracy struggles and identifies the structural and cultural factors that
facilitate and inhibit such action. The researcher will study eight political
organizations comprised mostly of Filipinos in the two countries. The researcher
will use process tracing and qualitative comparative analysis approaches to
analyze data from archival resources and semi-structured interviews. The
researcher will examine differences in outcomes and causal mechanisms and
processes that led to these variations. Comparison will be made based on
national context, organizational resources, and time period. This research
contributes to social movement theory, which has offered cogent explanations and
comparisons of national movements but has failed to address patterns of
homeland-oriented migrant mobilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research findings
will contribute to a broader understanding of the ways in which migrants
organize and engage across borders and how migrants promote democratization in
their countries of origin. Findings will potentially provide useful insights to
organizations involved in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and the
promotion of democracy. Research results will also be of possible use to
activists, scholars, and policy makers who want to understand (1) how diaspora
mobilization are located within the broad patterns of global economic and civic
transformation, (2) how it affects the resolution of conflicts, and (3) how it
encourages or hinders democratization. With the increased movement of people,
this research will contribute to an increased understanding of whether and to
what extent diasporas consolidate or fragment state-society relations and become
agents of democratization in post-authoritarian homeland states, given their
socialization with values in Western societies.