* 1434315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Development of a Spatially Explicit Resilience and Vulnerability Model Through Integration of Modeling and Stakeholder Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Raymond Dezzani, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,829.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will enhance existing and develop
new vulnerability and resilience assessment methods to assist stakeholders in
increasing their resilience in coastal areas by targeting hazard mitigation to
areas identified as most critical. The project will advance vulnerability and
resilience science by incorporating theoretical perspectives from political
economy, political ecology, social theory, and resilience theory into what has
predominately been an applied science field. The project will provide new
understanding regarding how social conditions, such as poverty, influence or
predispose individuals to being more or less vulnerable or resilient to
hazardous events. The project also will seek to identify the most effective
scale for conducting vulnerability assessments for use in community-level hazard
mitigation and planning. The hazard exposure outputs generated during the
conduct of this project will be used as inputs in a spatially explicit
resilience and vulnerability model to measure community resilience and
vulnerability at the sub-county level. The results from this model will be
distributed to communities within the study county as a resource for the
development and implementation of mitigation and adaptation strategies that
communities can feasibly implement to facilitate resilient development. Although
the project will be conducted in Sarasota County, Florida, project results will
have utility in a much broader range of coastal settings. The theoretical
framework, models, and methods developed during the conduct of this project will
provide communities with higher-resolution modeling methods and outputs for
community-level hazard, vulnerability, and resilience assessment. This project
also has the potential to identify mitigation strategies that more specifically
assist the marginalized population through development and targeting of non-
structural mitigation policies that historically have been underutilized even
though they more directly benefit many areas of communities where vulnerability
is highest. These adaptive strategies could facilitate recovery, especially in
communities where hazard exposure is difficult to mitigate. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will draw on a theoretical framework
that integrates physical hazards models with social science models to improve
existing vulnerability and resilience science methods. The doctoral student will
use geophysical hazard exposure modeling and social science measures to estimate
community vulnerability and to identify areas of potential for enhancing
resilience. She will develop measures of the extent of higher-resolution
hazards, which will be incorporated into the spatially explicit resilience and
vulnerability model to better determine where hazards impacts are more likely to
occur within a community. In addition to conducting measurements of conditions
that affect the threat of hazards in different locales and their incorporation
with her data into the spatially explicit resilience and vulnerability model,
the student will engages in meetings with stakeholders to determine external
indicators that occur outside of the county, such as federal relief funding and
state programs, as well as risk-perception indicators that influence overall
vulnerability.