* 1434077
* Multiscale Structure-Mechanical Property Investigation of Additive Manufactured Components for Development of a Reliable Qualification Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ming King Chyu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2018
* USD 319,200.00

Additive manufacturing (also called 3D printing) is now capable of
producing/building complex-shaped metal components strong enough for structural
applications. However, standard qualification methods for traditional
manufacturing are not suitable for additive manufactured parts because the
mechanical behavior of these parts is fundamentally different from those made by
traditional means. Hence, the goal of this research is to develop a highly
reliable, low-cost, and efficient qualification method for additive manufactured
components based on a combined approach of validated computer simulations and
non-destructive evaluation techniques. This qualification method will
potentially lead to much wider adoption of additive manufacturing and will
impact applications requiring complex, high value, time-sensitive, and
customized products and prototypes such as automobile and aerospace parts (i.e.,
complex designs), broken part replacement (i.e. time-sensitive), and medical
implants (i.e., highly customized). The skills and knowledge the students gain
in this project will prepare them for active roles in securing the the United
States' leadership in manufacturing engineering for future generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goal, this project has the following
objectives: 1) Characterize key microstructure features and mechanical
properties across multiple length scales; 2) Develop a probabilistic
constitutive model to capture sub-micron mechanical behavior; 3) Develop a
macroscopic model based on microstructure data from various non-destructive
evaluation techniques; and 4) Test the qualification method on a complex part.
This research tackles a challenging problem in the reliable qualification of
additive manufactured structural components whose local microstructure and
mechanical behavior may vary widely among different builds of the same
component. The utilization of X-ray micro computed tomography guarantees that
any microscale flaws in the materials being scanned can be detected so that
direct simulation of their mechanical behavior in the design component is
possible. Through the multiscale investigation, a constitutive model will be
developed to capture the mechanical effects of flaws, grain size, and residual
stress. The integration of various nondestructive evaluation techniques with
physics-based modeling will thus enable a rapid, reliable, and low-cost
qualification method for additive manufactured components.