* 1434025
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-Spatial Geographies of Youth Accessing the Urban Labor Market
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Heather Smith, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 10,312.00

The ability of immigrant youth to transfer their education, skills, and
potential into a job with a fair and stable wage affects not only their families
and communities, but the economic and social development of the U.S. as a whole.
This study investigates the process of how youth enter into the labor market.
The focus is on Hispanic immigrant youth, aged 16-21 who arrived in the U.S.
with their parents before turning 13 but were not born here, the 1.5 generation.
Studies suggest that children of immigrants are mostly doing well; however,
certain ethnicities and racial groups lag behind. The extent to which this
applies to Hispanic immigrant youth will be investigated in this research. The
researchers will explore how documentation status affects the way youth view
their chances and navigate their job opportunities. Factors including
educational attainment, gender, residential neighborhood, and socioeconomic
status are also considered. How youth navigate the labor market is spatially
contingent and particular attention will be paid to how youth perceive and
negotiate local geographies in the process of accessing work.

Segmented assimilation and social-spatial exclusion/inclusion form the basis of
this study's conceptual framework. Segmented assimilation is a theoretical
framework for understanding the process in which the children of immigrants
become incorporated into the system of stratification in the host country.
Socio-spatial exclusion can be: physical (residential segregation), functional
(denied access to opportunities), relational (indifference), and symbolic
(construction of otherness). These dimensions will be used to identify ways in
which Hispanic youth are excluded from or included in the labor market. In
addition, this study draws from and adds to research on labor market
segmentation, social capital and networks, and youth geographies. It also
contributes to our understanding of the trajectories of the children of
immigrants in the US context in general, but also more narrowly within the New
South. Charlotte, North Carolina, lends itself well as a case study site because
of its status as an emerging immigrant gateway city, with Latino growth rates
over 800 percent between 1980 and 2000. The researchers employ a Participatory
Action Research (PAR) approach and a multi-tiered qualitative methodology
(questionnaire, interview, observational, and participatory action modes of
research, such as mental mapping and journaling) to learn about, involve, and
empower an understudied and marginalized population. By involving youth as co-
researchers, they craft strategies to improve job access for themselves and
their peers, and gain relevant skills in the process. Results will inform
ongoing public debates about immigration policy, and suggest programs and public
policies that can improve immigrant youth positionality in the labor force.