* 1434824
* DMREF: Engineering Strong, Highly Conductive Nanotube Fibers Via Fusion
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Yung Joon Jung, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,267,461.00

In this NSF-Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
project funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Civil, Mechanical,
Manufacturing and Innovation Division, Professors Yung Joon Jung, Carol
Livermore-Clifford, Moneesh Upmanyu, and David Kaeli of Northeastern University
are studying how to create high-performance carbon fibers that could be used for
applications in aerospace, high power density energy storage, and lightweight
cabling/wiring. The main challenge of creating such fibers is that they need to
be mechanically strong while also being exceptional conductors of heat and
electricity. To accomplish this goal, the researchers are studying how to fuse
networks that contain many nanometer-sized carbon tubes ("carbon nanotubes")
into a larger, more seamless structure. The variables being studied include ways
to organize the carbon nanotubes into the network and to use electric voltage to
fuse the carbon nanotubes together. Experimental studies, computational
simulations, and data mining techniques are being applied to understand the
complex relationships between the structure of the fused networks and how they
perform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of superior electronic, thermal,
and mechanical properties makes carbon nanotube networks an ideal building block
for high-performance multifunctional materials, but these advantages are eroded
in van der Waals connected networks. If van der Waals interactions were replaced
with covalent bonds to create macroscopic seamless carbon nanostructures,
performance should increase significantly. This research project is focusing on
a novel carbon nanostructure engineering process called nanotube fusion. The
method controls input voltages across the network to create covalently bonded
molecular junctions (cross-links) between carbon nanotubes, transforming them
into larger diameter single-walled carbon nanotubes, multi-walled carbon
nanotubes, or multi-layered graphene nanoribbons with measurable property
improvement. The research is engaging interdependent experimental, simulation,
and data mining efforts to enable scalable multifunctional fibers. The
experimental parameters include fusion polarity, frequency, voltage, source-on-
time, and external temperature, as well as carbon nanotube structure, assembly
process and initial fiber architecture. Characterization data and coarse-grained
atomistic simulation of fused fibers relate physical properties to structure and
structure to processing. These efforts are complemented by statistical data
mining efforts to extract the complex relationship between fiber processing and
their properties. The team is working to involve high school students directly
in the research; to enable research opportunities for undergraduates from a
diversity of backgrounds; and to create symposia on materials science and on
multifunctional nanostructured networks.