* 1434938
* Development of an active layer seafloor sampler as an add-on unit for portable free-fall penetrometers
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Nina Stark, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2019
* USD 360,467.00

Subaqueous sediment dynamics impact on a large number of issues in the coastal
zone and the marine environment, such as coastal erosion and evolution, marine
slope stability, navigable water depth, stability of offshore structures, as
well as the seafloor as a habitat. One of the unsolved questions with regard to
subaqueous sediment dynamics is the thickness, density and particle distribution
within the mobile seafloor surface layer. The project aims to develop a mobile
seafloor sediment sampler as an add-on unit for portable free-fall
penetrometers. The capability of sampling the density, thickness and
sedimentological composition of the mobile seabed sediments would pave the way
for new studies and insights in the field of subaqueous geomorphology and
morphodynamics, sediment dynamics, marine geology, as well as coastal and
offshore engineering and seafloor geotechnical engineering. It would contribute
directly to the site-specific and systematic understanding of subaqueous
sediment transport and scour, and would fill gaps in current knowledge regarding
bedload transport. Thus, the resulting instrument will potentially initiate new
interdisciplinary collaborations, and address a variety of modern environmental
and societal issues. The development will also impact significantly on the
career and following research path of the principal investigator whose work is
aiming to bridge the gap between subaqueous sediment dynamics and geotechnical
engineering. A graduate research assistant working on the development will be
educated and trained in detail in sediment transport theories and practice, in-
situ marine geotechnics, and coastal and offshore surveying. The fact that a
major part of the testing will be conducted on Virginia Tech's campus will allow
insight to other students, possibly full classes, and an easy transfer of the
gained knowledge and procedures into the class room. Particularly, female
students will benefit from the principal investigator as a role model for female
researchers in the still male-dominated field of ocean technology and offshore
surveying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mobile seafloor surface layer sampler will
be developed as an add-on unit for portable free-fall penetrometers which have
been applied for the investigation of sediment mobilization processes for
several years. A sampling tube with sealing mechanism will be integrated in the
steel tip of the free-fall penetrometer, building a sampling unit that will
allow collection of small sediment samples while geotechnical profiling. The
project will include the development, manufacture and detailed testing of the
add-on unit. Test procedures will feature controlled laboratory tests in a soil
test chamber, tests of the effects of impact velocity, and proof-of-concept in
the field.