* 1434222
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Workers' Perceptions of Health-Risk Exposure in an Extractive Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Brian King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 03/31/2017
* USD 11,012.00

Scientists have shown that hydraulic fracturing to extract shale oil and gas in
the United States can expose workers to unsafe levels of respirable crystalline
silica, a dust that can cause debilitating and deadly lung diseases, raising
questions about workers' health and the labor process in this expanding
industry. This project examines factors shaping workers' perceptions of their
silica exposure as regulatory change unfolds. The study analyzes the ways shale
energy workers perceive this occupational health hazard in the context of the
gendered social relations and spatio-temporal flexibility that characterizes
their work to examine how it intersects with proposed federal regulation that
would limit exposure to silica. This study contributes a new perspective to the
growing shale gas scholarship, which to date has emphasized perceptions of
community economic and environmental impacts. Further, it advances efforts
within health geography to examine gendered and geographic processes mediating
perceptions of health. Proposed regulations to limit occupational exposure to
crystalline silica will impact companies and workers engaged in hydraulic
fracturing; thus, this study will provide timely analysis derived
collaboratively with stakeholders in government, industry, community
organizations, and organized labor and will result in reports, and training and
awareness materials related to crystalline silica in hydraulic fracturing
operations.

This project analyzes processes that shape workers' health perception of silica
exposure in the shale gas industry using theoretical tools developed in feminist
and health geography to evaluate current regulatory proposals. It aims to
understand how regulatory and industry discourses about workers' silica exposure
affect how workers perceive silica exposure and practice mitigation, how the
labor process affects how workers perceive silica exposure and practice
mitigation and finally, how social relations outside of work, in particular
those of the family, affect how workers perceive silica exposure and practice
mitigation. Conducted primarily from Williamsport, Pennsylvania, a hub of
drilling activity in the Marcellus Shale region, this research will be completed
through semi-structured interviews with workers, family members, and government
and industry representatives, in addition to institutional analysis, and
participant observation. These methods will build upon preliminary research that
has identified contradictions among regulatory efforts to establish safe and
healthy workplace practices, normalized cultural attitudes about workplace
health and safety, and the pressures and obligations felt by workers engaged in
extractive work. The feminist methodological approach taken by this project
advances qualitative, and specifically ethnographic research, as its focus on
everyday experience makes it poised to examine contradictions between structural
norms and individuals' identities that, in some instances, produce greater risk
to individuals.