* 1434392
* Fundamental Investigations on System-Level Cost Evaluation for Economic Viability of Cellulosic Biofuel Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Lin Li, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 267,738.00

This research can enable expanded production of ethanol from wood and other
cellulose-based feedstocks by lowering the cost of production. This will
contribute to resolving two major issues: energy shortage and global warming.
Consequently, the success of this research will help improve the economic
viability of the U.S. ethanol manufacturing industry, reduce oil dependence, and
benefit the environment and society in terms of greenhouse gas emissions
reduction. In a carbon-constrained world, this research will serve to green the
U.S. transportation sector, and provide a competitive advantage to the U.S.
renewable energy industry. This project will closely integrate with the training
of graduate as well as undergraduate students, especially female and
underrepresented minority students. The ideas and results will be broadly
disseminated through classroom teachings, conference presentations, and journal
publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this grant is to
generate new knowledge to build a system-level cost model for cellulosic biofuel
manufacturing utilizing the interrelations among major individual manufacturing
processes and to establish the methodology for system-level cost-effective
decision making to improve the economic viability of cellulosic biofuel
manufacturing under the constraint of ethanol yield. First, existing
experimental results will be analyzed to obtain the interrelations among
individual cellulosic biofuel manufacturing processes. Then these obtained
interrelations will be used to construct a system-level cost model for
cellulosic biofuel manufacturing. Based on this model, a cost-effective decision
making tool will be established to reduce the overall cost while maintaining the
ethanol yield target of cellulosic biofuel manufacturing. Finally, experimental
validations and scalability investigations of research results will be
performed.