* 1434419
* New Approaches for Simulation-Based Optimal Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Michael Fu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2019
* USD 228,000.00

Simulation is widely used in many industrial settings, from manufacturing and
supply chain management to service systems, including health care,
transportation, and financial services. Due to the complexity of many of these
systems, however, computation has often been a limiting factor in solving large-
scale problems based on simulation models, even with the continuing advances in
computing power. This award supports fundamental research leading to new
algorithms that would improve the efficiency of finding optimal decisions for
many problems in the manufacturing and service industries mentioned above, and
thus lead to direct benefits to the U.S. economy and society. The research
involves mathematical models, computing, applied probability, and statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct gradient estimation techniques such as perturbation
analysis and the likelihood ratio method provide computationally efficient
methods for obtaining unbiased gradient estimators without the need for
resimulation. Such estimators are the basis for gradient-based search procedures
used in many simulation optimization algorithms. However, the resulting
algorithms use only the gradients, consistent with their application in the
deterministic optimization setting, where the gradients are exact so there is no
value gained in using the objective function (or performance measure) values
themselves for performing gradient search. On the other hand, in the stochastic
setting, the gradient estimates are noisy, which means that using the function
values to provide additional information on estimating the gradient may be
beneficial. The proposed research explores new methods for incorporating direct
gradient estimates from stochastic simulation into existing simulation
optimization techniques, specifically response surface methodology and
stochastic approximation. The goals of the research include: (i) developing new
more effective algorithms, (ii) proving convergence of the resulting algorithms,
(iii) analyzing finite-time properties of the algorithms, and (iv) providing
practical implementation guidelines based on both theory and empirical numerical
testing. Thus, in addition to algorithmic advances, new theory will likely be
needed to provide guidance as to the settings in which the new algorithms are
likely to provide additional benefit.