* 1434716
* Collaborative Research: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Modeling Multiple Stakeholder Decision-Making to Reduce Regional Natural Disaster Risk
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Linda Nozick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,380.00

Natural disasters create enormous costs for the United States. Despite many
private sector and public policy efforts over decades, the current system of
managing natural disaster risk is not working well for the government, the
insurance industry, or homeowners. Previous research has resulted in a lot of
knowledge about how individuals and organizations make risk-related decisions,
the strategic behavior of individual insurers and the insurance market as a
whole, as well as natural disaster risk itself and ways to physically reduce it.
Nevertheless, efforts to understand how the choices of the different
participating groups or stakeholders interact as a ?system? have been limited.
The proposed project will result in a new framework of interacting mathematical
models that can be used to better understand, design, and evaluate government
natural disaster risk management policies, such as providing funds to help
homeowners strengthen their homes, requiring homeowners to buy natural disaster
insurance, or offering to buy high-risk homes. By supporting improved design and
evaluation of public policies, the project will help the country better manage
its risk. By considering the individual, sometimes competing stakeholder points-
of-view up front, as an integral part of the analysis, the new framework will
make it easier to identify those win-win system-wide solutions that are most
likely to be put into action and to be effective. The framework is designed to
be consistent with the ?whole community? approach promoted by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which encourages involving all parts of the
community in helping to address the challenge. Engaging representatives of the
relevant government agencies and insurance and home building industries as
partners at the beginning of the project will help ensure that the research
offers usable results that can be put into practice as quickly and effectively
as possible. Graduate and undergraduate research assistants, including women and
underrepresented minorities, will participate in the research, and the
researchers will incorporate the results into their courses and new Ph.D.
programs at their universities. The project will result in a leap forward in
understanding the overall behavior of the natural disaster risk management
system in the U.S., thus helping provide the knowledge needed to improve
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these benefits, we propose to develop a new
framework that will include five interacting mathematical models?models of (1)
government decisions about what regulations to introduce and/or incentives to
offer, and (2) insurer decisions about what to charge for insurance policies and
what reinsurance to buy, (3) competition among insurers, (4) individual
homeowner decisions about whether to buy insurance and/or strengthen their
homes, and (5) regional natural disaster losses. It will make use of an existing
first version of the framework that includes interacting insurer-homeowner and
loss models but will improve on that effort substantially through five tasks:
(1) identifying categories of homeowner decision types and a homeowner decision
model that is based on data describing how homeowners actually make these
decisions in real life, (2) extending the framework to include the way decisions
and information change over time, (3) including situations in which the
stakeholders do not have perfect or the same information, (4) developing and
incorporating a model of government decisions, and (5) demonstrating the
framework in a full-scale case study applied to residential hurricane risk in
North Carolina.