* 1434069
* Completing the Global Seafloor Fabric and Magnetic Lineation Project
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Dietmar Muller, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 35,503.00

The detailed description and distribution of seafloor lineated fabric and
magnetic isochron picks are fundamental to plate kinematics. A complete and
global characterization of these data will represent a major milestone in marine
geophysical research. Self-consistent data may reveal subtle patterns and will
reduce uncertainties in model parameters deduced from them. Plate tectonic
reconstructions form the basis for much geologic research. The improvements that
this framework will make possible will be felt over a wide cross-section of the
Earth sciences. In addition, the availability of global, self-consistent
seafloor fabric traces will impact numerous lines of marine research. As with
most infrastructure projects, this project will by its nature have wide impact.
All software developed will be made available and compatible with GMT5. The
Generic Mapping Tools, GMT, are an open source collection of tools for
manipulating geographic and Cartesian data sets and producing PostScript
illustrations. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this
project and learn valuable skills pertaining to marine geophysical research and
data analysis. The public will obtain access to the results of this work via
data repositories and the project web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a follow-up to a two-year previously funded NSF pilot project ("The Global
Fracture Zone and Magnetic Lineation Project"). The previous project sought to
(a) initiate an online database of global fracture zones (FZs), (b) develop
Matlab software to digitize and refine FZs based on available grids, and (c)
provide an online collection of published magnetic lineation picks. Progress has
been made on all fronts with access to preliminary data presently available on
the project website. The scope of the project has expanded in that the
digitization of fracture zones had to be extended to include other types of
related lineated seafloor fabric (such as propagating rifts, discordant zones,
and V-anomalies-linear gravity lows that trace out a 'V' shape at present-day
mid-ocean ridges). The software the Principle Investigator is developing is not
yet fully complete, partly due to a dependency on GMT5, which has just recently
been released. Google Earth is being used to digitize and write two C programs:
one cross-profile analyzer (fzanalyzer) and one filtering tool (fzblender). This
project will extend the initially funded work an additional year to complete the
software testing, documentation, and packaging into a supplement and to finalize
scripting for the website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-year follow-on project
aims to accomplish these specific goals: &lt;br/&gt;1. Complete the development
of fzanalyzer and fzblender, with support scripts, into a regular GMT5
supplement, including a technical report to document tools, their purpose and
operation, with examples for others to emulate. &lt;br/&gt;2. Publish a G3
technical brief on the project, thereby announcing its availability to the
broader community of potential users. &lt;br/&gt;3. Continue the compilation of
magnetic lineation picks via the EarthByte collaboration and document/automate
the upkeep of the web site. &lt;br/&gt;4. Add David Sandwell's divergent plate
boundaries to the database. &lt;br/&gt;5. Ensure all data can easily be imported
into Google Earth, GeoMapApp and GPlates and seek a permanent repository with
the Marine Geoscience Data System (MGDS) and NOAA's National Geophysical Data
Center (NGDC).