* 1434440
* Dynamics of Protistan Grazers: Diversity, Abundance and Prey Relations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 999,445.00

Some of the most important primary producers and consumers in aquatic ecosystems
are protists, or single-celled eukaryotes. It is well established that protistan
predation can be a significant source of mortality for bacteria and
phytoplankton. Grazing protists in turn serve as prey for zooplankton
(copepods), and through the excretion of nitrogen and phosphorus compounds, they
play a major role in the release of regenerated nutrients. Despite decades of
studies on protistan grazing, knowledge gaps still exist with respect to their
abundance, distribution, seasonality, prey selectivity, and co-occurrence
patterns. The results from this project will advance the understanding of
grazing communities in situ and how they respond to environmental conditions and
prey communities. This will be one of very few studies of grazers that is
unbiased by artificial prey and containment, and will yield both morphologic and
genetic information about the organisms present and the distribution patterns of
particular grazer populations. A graduate student will be performing her thesis
work as part of this project, and selected undergraduates will be involved in
the research. In partnership with the Zephyr Education Foundation's marine
science literacy and education program, teachers will develop an educational
unit based on the microbial food web that is tailored to grade levels 6-8.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines whether the persistence of a group
of protistan grazers is determined by its feeding strategy (grazers with
specialist feeding strategies are more ephemeral than generalists), and whether
certain morphotypes exhibiting generalist feeding strategies have underlying
genotypic diversity that maps to specialist feeding strategies. It builds upon
an ongoing time series (with hourly resolution since 2006) of automated, high-
resolution, measurements of the phytoplankton community by the Imaging
FlowCytobot at the Martha's Vineyard Coastal Observatory. These measurements
have led to the observation that, in addition to shifts from pico- and small
nanoplankton during the summer to larger microplankton in the fall and winter,
particular species (especially among the diatoms) exhibit distinct and recurring
seasonal patterns. The instrument will be modified to also conduct automated
measurements of grazer communities in situ. Links between selected grazer taxa
(chosen based on the image time series) and phytoplankton prey will be provided
through genetic analyses of individual cells (with their ingested prey). These
cells will be obtained by use of a recently developed cell sorter that also
captures an image of each sorted cell. In addition to providing predator/prey
links, the genetic information will allow the investigators to determine whether
a grazer morphotype represents multiple species. A third approach, high
throughput sequencing and quantitative PCR analysis of whole water samples, will
be applied to investigate abundance patterns of species whose morphology does
not reliably map to genotype.