* 1434452
* Tectonic &amp; Petrologic Evolution of the Atlantis Bank Oceanic Core Complex
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 378,073.00

The interplay between rifting, magmatism, and circulation of seawater within the
crust is complex in the zone where oceanic plates form. This study aims to map
the distribution of each of these components of the system at an advantageous
site in the Indian Ocean- the Atlantis Bank. Long-lived faulting and uplift has
exposed a cross section of the plate and data from several past research cruises
are available but had not previously been systematically analyzed and compiled.
Curation and ingest of the data into the Integrated Earth Data Applications
database will make the results openly available, and an undergraduate intern
will receive training in this work. The completed geologic map and
interpretations will serve as Site characterization for new, deep International
Ocean Discovery Program scientific drilling that is scheduled to begin in 2016,
as well as incorporating results of prior drilling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
geologic map of Atlantis Bank will be made and used to address questions about
the 3-D structure and development of the Atlantis Bank oceanic core complex.
Analysis of existing dive and dredge samples will build on recent recognition of
the importance of strain localization and ways that magma and hydrothermal
fluids may play a role in its evolution. Relations between dike and gabbro
injection will be systematically explored, taking advantage of the few Myr
window of time accessible in the Atlantis Bank seafloor exposures. In addition
to new mapping based on existing sample and seafloor video, the project will
combine prior results in a more comprehensive 3-D geologic interpretation. The
dike/gabbro analysis is envisioned as a test of the lithospheric 'rollover'
model of ocean crust formation.