* 1434863
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Work-Family Policies and Working Mothers: A Cross-National Comparative Study
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Caitlyn Collins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,785.00

SES-1434863&lt;br/&gt;Jennifer Glass&lt;br/&gt;Caitlyn Collins&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all industrialized
countries, women have entered the paid labor force in unprecedented numbers over
the past half-century while still maintaining primary responsibility for
childrearing. Today, the majority of mothers with children are in the paid labor
force. This study investigates how working mothers in the western world balance
their work and family obligations. The investigators will conduct 100 in-depth
interviews with working mothers from four countries: Germany, Sweden, Italy, and
the United States¬. They will examine how different ideals of motherhood and
gender equality are embedded in the work-family policy regimes of these four
countries. Given their different policy regimes, the research examines how
working mothers negotiate the constraints and opportunities facing them daily as
they balance motherhood and employment. Interview topics include: workplace
interactions with supervisors and colleagues, employment history and future
plans, the transition to parenthood, use and perceptions of various work-family
policies, conflict between work and home responsibilities, dividing family care
with a partner, opinions about parenting, interpretations and understandings of
their careers and families, personal successes and regrets, and general views on
the status of working mothers in their respective countries. This research is
potentially the first comparative study to incorporate mothers' voices into the
scholarly debates about work-family policy around the world. Understanding
women's perspectives about what works (and what hinders) their achievement of
work-family balance should be central to any scholarly endeavor to craft,
advocate for, and implement work-family policy as a force for social change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this project will contribute to policy
debates about improving mothers' work and family lives in 21st century Western
industrialized countries. With many countries spending a sizeable portion of
their GDP on work-family policies, this study will provide crucial insight into
the most effective targets for these expenditures, benefitting both mothers and
governments. This project will provide vital knowledge for policy debates about
how to better support mothers in their careers and families given that the vast
majority of mothers participate in the globalized economy while raising children
today.