* 1434957
* Structures of Long-Term Disaster Recovery: Organizational Roles and Collaboration in Six Cities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Walter Peacock, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2014
* USD 221,076.00

Long-term recovery is the least theorized and studied stage of disasters. Yet,
in the past decade, large disasters such as Hurricanes Katrina (2005), Rita
(2005), Ike (2008), and Sandy (2012), and smaller but still destructive
disasters such as wildfires in Texas (2011) and Colorado (2013), flooding of the
Mississippi River (2011), and even technological disasters (West, TX 2013) have
left numerous communities struggling with post-disaster planning, unequal and
partial recovery outcomes, and recovery efforts that fail to reduce pre-disaster
vulnerabilities. Increasing disaster frequencies and impacts mean more
communities will struggle, often with little local experience in managing the
difficult processes of achieving sustainable and resilient recovery. This
research focuses on disaster recovery across different communities to build the
knowledge-base and best practices that will help other communities prepare for
and plan for disaster recovery. The results of this research will support
efforts by local governments and nongovernmental organizations to develop
recovery frameworks and plans that will speed disaster recovery and improve
fiscal efficiency.

To accomplish these goals, this research project involves in-depth study and
extensive comparative analysis of the structures and networks of groups and
organizations involved in disaster recovery efforts across six different
communities that recently experienced disasters: Granbury, Texas (2013,
tornado), West, Texas (2013, industrial facility explosion), Marion County,
Texas (2011, wildfire), Bastrop County, Texas (2011, wildfire), Galveston, Texas
(2008, Hurricane Ike), Brownsville, Texas (2008, Hurricane Dolly). Governmental
and nongovernmental collaboration during recovery is important, yet which types
of collaboration work best for recovery are little understood. Most disaster-
related studies on organizational collaboration focus on response and emergency
management agencies not on charities and community organizations that work on
long-term recovery for two to ten years following a disaster. For each of the
case locations, the researchers will conduct in-person interviews with
organizational leaders, observe recovery committee and community meetings,
document recovery events, and analyze community reconstruction and
rehabilitation. This approach will provide rich information that will enable the
team to compare and contrast the practices used in the different cases and
develop a model of disaster recovery organizational networks. This data will
allow the researchers to evaluate the organizational coordination in disaster
recovery and describe interactions between various levels of government (local,
regional, state, and national). Based on the project outcomes, the researchers
will identify promising practices and lessons learned which can be utilized by
other communities that are engaged in pre-disaster or post-disaster recovery
planning.