* 1434260
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Affecting Forest Development and Stand Dynamics in Oak Forests in the Eastern U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Kurt Kipfmueller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,992.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the factors
contributing to the observed decline in oak (Quercus) species regeneration
across the deciduous forests of the eastern United States. Using a variety of
field-based and analytical methods, this project will investigate the multiple
factors that may be contributing to decline rates in oak regeneration, including
disturbance regime modifications, climatic change, land-use history legacies,
and abiotic environmental conditions. Project results will provide much-needed
insights into the complex dynamics occurring in oak forests across the eastern
U.S., and they will increase theoretical knowledge regarding the ecosystem
effects of land-use legacies and multiple, interacting forest drivers, such as
canopy disturbances and drought events. Because oak forests offer important
ecological, economic, and social benefits to society by producing food and
habitat for wildlife, supporting associated vegetative communities, providing
valuable timber, and offering scenic opportunities for recreation, this project
will assist in the conservation of these benefits by providing information and
insights regarding the mechanisms that are reducing the range of oak-dominated
forests. The project also should suggest possible forest-management plans to
prevent the loss of this important genus. The project will offer special
education and training opportunities for undergraduate students who will assist
with both field data collection and laboratory analysis. Results from this
project will be disseminated broadly through scholarly publications and
presentations and through educational outreach activities at land-management
offices in the study area. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having
dominated eastern deciduous forests for the past 5,000 years, the ecological,
commercial, and societal importance of oak forests represents a distinctive
long-term legacy across the eastern U.S., but oak species throughout the region
are failing to regenerate due to the increased abundance of understory shade-
tolerant species that prohibit light from reaching oak seedlings and saplings on
the forest floor. The goal of this project is to elucidate the relative
importance and the site-specific nature of the multiple forest drivers and to
identify interactions among different drivers. The doctoral student will use
forest-inventory, dendrochronological, and land-survey analysis methods to
investigate multiple drivers of this compositional shift across the Driftless
Area in southwestern Wisconsin, an area undergoing significant decreases in oak
regeneration. She will examine land surveys from the 1840s and 1940s alongside
modern forest inventory data to identify the forest development trajectories
occurring throughout the study area. She will employ dendroecological methods to
document canopy disturbance histories and to quantify the relationship between
climate and radial tree growth. She will use structural equation modeling to
analyze the relative influence of land-use legacies, canopy-disturbance history,
climate, and site-specific abiotic factors on oak regeneration.