* 1434277
* EAGER: Fundamental Study on Hierarchical Control of Sustainable Development of Complex Industrial Systems under Uncertainty
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 192,995.00

1434277&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this exploratory project, the PI
proposes to develop a novel methodology for strategic-tactical control of
industrial sustainability by building on sustainability fundamentals, system
control science, uncertainty theory, and engineering science. The study aims at
providing scientific answers to three questions: (i) why and what kind of
industrial problems should be tackled as a sustainability control theory
problem, (ii) what kind of sustainability control system should be synthesized
and how to do so, and (iii) how to derive decisions for sustainable development
(SD) of industrial systems under uncertainty? The study includes: (i) a
predictive input-output modeling method, (ii) an interval-parameter-based system
and technology assessment method,(iii) a multistage, hierarchical decision-
making method, and (iv) a method for designing a hierarchical sustainability
control system. These methods will be tested through studying a complex
manufacturing sustainability problem. The proposed research is radically
different from traditional studies on engineering sustainability. If successful,
this exploratory research could be transformative as this study will introduce
the new concept of "sustainability control," and may result in the creation of a
new paradigm for sustainability study and introduce a new branch in engineering,
which could be called "sustainability control science." This may be the first
attempt to formulate complex sustainability problems as a hierarchical control
problem, which may improve significantly our understanding of SD concept and
practice. This study may be also the earliest to introduce an integrated SD
methodology encompassing system modeling, assessment, and decision making for
strategic-tactical control under uncertainty. The research is aimed at
contributing greatly to the field through improving scientific understanding of
industrial sustainability and providing a holistic methodology for tackling
complex sustainability problems. The project will generate educational materials
(i.e., lecture materials and open-ended team projects) for enhancing an chemical
engineering senior design course and an introductory course on sustainable
engineering open to all engineering students. The methodology will be
disseminated through publication and the AIChE Sustainable Engineering Forum.
Short courses will be arranged with chemical industries.