* 1434923
* Flood Induced Bridge Scour Prediction Using Bio-Inspired Smart Sensor Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Duan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2018
* USD 326,000.00

The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) has given our national
infrastructure, especially instream structures (e.g., bridges), a "D" grade
because of the declining state of aging infrastructure and lack of appropriate
maintenance. Although bridges are critical in transportation network, their
real-time behavior during extreme and hazardous flood events is largely unknown,
particularly, because bridge scour prediction is based on steady flow
experiments in laboratory. This contributes to the difficulties to acquire
comprehensive full-scale scour data during inaccessible flood flows and
inability to simulate rapidly varied unsteady flow and local scour processes
around and over those in-stream structures. This project aims to develop a bio-
inspired scour monitoring network consisting of low-cost wireless smart sonar
sensors to mimic the electric fish's adaptive skin sensing methods for
comprehensive scour topography monitoring around bridge piers, and enhance an
unsteady flow hydrodynamic and sediment transport model for predicting local
scour due to highly convective flood waves around structures. The results will
supplement field data for the state and local flood control agencies to evaluate
current bridge design principles and revise/modify the design criteria to
improve its safety. The field sites will be used for faculty and students to
develop innovative research ideas. The project will also provide students
enrolled in the University of Arizona Civil Engineering an opportunity to study
bridge scour using real-time data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
objectives will be achieved through the development of an innovative scour
monitoring network, computational simulations, large-scale physical experiments,
and field monitoring. The project will develop an algorithm to deploy low cost
high-density sonar sensor array for monitoring bridge scour. The sensing network
will be tested and installed in the field to collect real-time bridge scour data
during flood events. Additionally, an advanced computational model will be
developed to simulate the local scour processes. The project expects to advance
the scour monitoring technologies for bridge piers in flood flow, provide
valuable data to examine the feasibility of existing design criteria, and
recommend new design considerations for bridges prone to extreme flood flows.
The unique laboratory and real-time field data will better the understanding of
bridge scour during unsteady flow.