* 1434590
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Constraint-Based Generation of Database States for Testing Database Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Tao Xie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,603.00

Testing is essential for database applications to function correctly and with
acceptable performance when deployed. In practice, it is often necessary for
vendors of database application software to test their software adequately
before selling or integrating their software to the database owner. However,
testing database applications is very costly. In particular, it is time-
consuming and challenging to generate desirable database states, an important
portion of test inputs for testing database applications. However, little
research has been conducted to provide scalable, effective tool support for
generating database states to achieve various testing objectives.

This research aims to adequately generate database states for database
applications by developing novel techniques for (1) generating desirable
database states to satisfy the given constraints on result sets from the given
query, (2) applying this preceding technique on a variety of testing tasks, and
(3) exploring more complicated situations such as constraints in multiple
interacting queries. The research advances understanding of fundamental issues
related to testing database applications and the design and implementation of
practical techniques to carry out such testing. Among the broader impacts of the
project includes integration of the research into education programs and
enhancement of teaching and research infrastructure.