* 1434317
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Implications of Changes in Fisheries on the Diets and Well-Being of Regional Residents
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Justin Brashares, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,989.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will explore issues of resilience
and adaptability in the face of changing natural resources by examining how
environmental changes impact household diets and livelihoods. The doctoral
student will analyze the complex human and natural system dynamics around the
Lake Victoria fishery in eastern Africa and will create a model that traces the
effects of environmental change on fish access, local fish consumption, and
nutritional consequences associated with health, livelihood, and resource
changes of the people dependent on and involved in the Lake Victoria fishery.
This project will enhance basic understanding of connections among the Earth's
biotic and human systems. The project also will provide new insights into the
resilience and adaptability in socioecological systems as people and communities
seek to maintain or improve their diets and well-being in the face of changing
natural conditions associated with the resources on which they depend. The model
and findings resulting from this project will be adaptable for use by a range of
agencies like the U.S. Agency for International Development as well as other
organizations, groups, and communities concerned about with the environment,
livelihoods, resource security and health in this and other locales in many
different nations. The collaborative relationships developed by the student and
her advisors will facilitate her work with resource managers, government
agencies, healthcare organizations, and community-based organizations. These
organizations will use project findings to facilitate their refinement of
programs designed to improve economic productivity of fisheries while also
maintaining environmental quality and the wellbeing of local people. The
collaborations also will help educate and train graduate and undergraduate
students in the U.S. and development of an educational initiative that will
reach middle school students in the U.S. and Kenya. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

This research project will bring theories and approaches from political ecology
together with perspectives and methods from ecology and public health. The
doctoral student will use a set of methods from different disciplines to examine
this complex socioecological system. She will link existing data on fish catch
and household fish consumption with analyses of the nutrient composition
analyses of local fish species. Analysis of the macro and micronutrients in fish
will extend the understanding of consequences of changes in the fishery, and she
will help assess the implications of the changing composition and stocks of
various fish species for the diets of regional residents.