* 1434914
* Role of variable picoplankton cellular phosphorus turnover and allocation in marine phosphorus cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Solange Duhamel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 234,419.00

Phosphorus is a key element for life, often present in low amounts in the vast
central regions of the ocean and sometimes reaching limiting concentrations for
biological productivity. Microbial uptake of dissolved phosphorus is an
important lever in controlling both microbial production and the fate and
cycling of marine phosphorus. This project will investigate the hypothesis that
in oligotrophic environments, microbial cellular turnover of phosphorus occurs
more rapidly than cellular biomass turnover, leading to a significant return of
phosphorus to the dissolved pool. This rapid return of phosphorus could resupply
the pool of bioavailable phosphorus, impacting microbial dynamics and fueling
significant recycling of phosphorus in the surface ocean. In particular, this
research will use field samples to determine the rates of cellular phosphorus
and biomass turnover in the dominant groups of very small algae and bacteria
inhabiting the phosphorus-depleted, surface waters of the Sargasso Sea (the
region of the central North Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda). The project will be
co-directed by two early-career women scientists. Their educational efforts will
include training of an undergraduate student assistant as well as public
educational outreach to K-12 students.

A primary objective in the study of biogeochemical cycles is linking chemical
fluxes to the activity of organisms. This work will make fundamental
contributions to the understanding of the biogeochemical cycling of phosphorus
by linking phosphorus fluxes in the surface ocean to the activity of specific
groups of microbes, and providing a mechanistic framework for the factors that
control these fluxes. A significant, novel product of this research will be the
determination of cellular phosphorus turnover rates relative to biomass turnover
rates for individual picoplankton groups in the open ocean. To build a
mechanistic understanding of the processes controlling these rates, this project
will also determine the variation in picoplankton allocation of phosphorus into
intracellular biochemicals. Field measurements will be augmented with
experiments on axenic cultures, representative of the cell-sorted groups from
the Sargasso Sea, to conduct more detailed biochemical analyses. The research
team will utilize a unique suite of tools to make novel measurements from
environmental samples: flow cytometry and fluorescence activated cell sorting
will be combined with radioisotope labeling and biochemical analyses to quantify
cell-specific phosphorus fluxes and characterize the chemical speciation of
these fluxes. The significance of a high ratio of cellular phosphorus turnover
rate to biomass turnover rate would be two-fold: (1) the amount of phosphorus in
microbial biomass would underestimate the total phosphorus demand necessary to
support microbial growth, and (2) significant recycling of dissolved phosphorus
may occur in the surface ocean through microbial uptake and rapid return to the
dissolved pool. By measuring these rates in field samples, the team expects to
answer crucial questions about the relative impact of different microbial groups
on surface ocean phosphorus fluxes and the cellular dynamics that drive these
fluxes.