* 1434211
* IF: Student Travel Support for the 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Venugopal Veeravalli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

The IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) is the largest
annual conference of the information theory society, and has been held
continuously since 1954. It covers a variety of topics related to the studies on
information theory, including coding, communications and communications
networks, complexity and cryptography, detection and estimation, learning,
Shannon Theory, stochastic processes, and emerging applications of information
theory. It is considered one of the premier IEEE conferences.

ISIT is the primary meeting venue of the leading researchers in the field, many
of whom are supported by grants from the National Science Foundation. It is the
ideal venue for researchers to share their latest ideas and results, and to
discuss the impact of these results on practical applications. It is also where
the more application oriented researchers gain an appreciation for the key
theoretical results in the field. The information theory field provides an
excellent example of theoretical research working in close synergy with system
design and applications. ISIT has also traditionally attracted a large number of
students, comprising around 40 per cent of the participant population. ISIT is
an excellent learning opportunity for students as well as a means to establish
useful research collaborations for the future. Support for student in the US to
travel to ISIT is crucial to ensuring a vibrant student participation.