* 1434022
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Environmental Outcomes in Multiple Spatial Scales
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* John Logan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,944.00

SES-1434022 John Logan Juyoung Lee Brown University

This dissertation investigates how a spatialized political economy shapes the
distribution of environmental hazards across neighborhoods. Specifically, it
examines toxic chemicals released by chemical manufacturing facilities. Previous
quantitative studies have focused on the racial and socioeconomic
characteristics of neighborhoods to understand environmental inequality.
However, one cannot fully understand neighborhood-level variation in
environmental hazards without also taking into account social processes and
decisions at the city, state, and national levels. This dissertation will
analyze information for 2000-2010 from the Toxic Release Inventory Program, U.S.
Census, and other data sources, and it will examine how corporations,
governments, and environmental movement groups influenced local environmental
outcomes in this period. This dissertation will contribute to understanding
environmental inequality, and it will enhance the literatures on neighborhood
effects, social movements, and organizational behavior.

Broader Impact

Environmental inequalities reflect underlying social inequities that are
typically tied to race and class. At the same time, environmental inequalities
generate other types of inequality, such as health disparities, and in this way
they reinforce preexisting racial and class differences. The multilevel
perspective taken by this dissertation will identify the conditions under which
disadvantaged neighborhoods are likely to suffer from environmental hazards. It
will have policy implications for governments, environmental organizations, and
corporations at the local, regional and national scale, with the goal of
improving the quality of life of marginalized social groups in the United
States.