* 1434785
* Fingerprinting and Calibrating Low Oxygen Conditions Using Vanadium Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Jeremy Owens, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2016
* USD 369,520.00

Discovering, testing, and developing chemical proxies (relic materials) in
marine sediments that reveal how strongly or weakly oxidizing near-surface
environmental conditions were in the Earth's geological past are immensely
important for understanding interactions between ocean chemistry, biological
evolution and extinctions, and climate. To date scientists do not have a proxy
for low but non-zero oxygen conditions -- the sort of conditions that are likely
to have dominated in biologically important periods of Earth history. In this
project, researchers will study the relationship between bottom water oxygen
concentration and the isotopes of the trace metal vanadium (V) in a range of
oxygen conditions in the modern ocean. Based on pilot data, theoretical
calculations and dissolved seawater V concentrations they believe that stable V
isotope ratios of core top sediments will correlate systematically over a range
of bottom water oxygen conditions. By analyzing these materials, the research
team expects to establish the relationship between V isotopes and bottom water
oxygen concentrations. Given the importance of chemical proxies to quantify past
climate change, the results of this study will be of great importance to the
modern and paleoceanographic community, as well as for modelers to better
understand a broad range of oxygen variability in Earth
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although recent investigations have provided a
wealth of information about the redox conditions of the ancient oceans, there is
a significant gap in understanding low oxygen conditions throughout Earth
history. Therefore, it is important to develop new paleoredox proxies that can
provide additional and complementary knowledge about ocean redox conditions
during these important periods of Earth history. In this study, scientists will
analyze bulk sediments and their organic and ferromanganese mineral fractions to
investigate the V isotopic variability within the various sedimentary
components. (These samples comprise organic rich to ferromanganese rich
sediments due to a range in bottom water oxygen concentrations.) Reconstructing
marine low oxygen conditions using vanadium isotopes would fill a void in the
paleoredox proxy toolbox. Developing, calibrating, and fingerprinting the V
isotopic variability in modern sediments is required to be able to apply
vanadium isotopes as an accurate paleoredox proxy.