* 1434435
* A Direct Experimental Link Between Atomic-Scale and Macroscale Friction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Burris, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 334,553.00

Friction governs the operating limitations, durability, energy consumption, and
control of virtually every machine including those with important implications
for healthcare, economic prosperity, and national security. Although we sense
friction at the macroscale, it is known to originate at the atomic-scale.
Despite having scientific roots dating back to da Vinci, our understanding of
how these fundamental atomic-scale interactions contribute to everyday friction
remains poor. This award will support a controlled study of interfacial friction
from the atomic-scale to the practical-scale to elucidate this relationship. The
results will be used to develop a testable model of frictional scaling. Such a
model is needed to inform materials design and surface engineering efforts for
friction control applications. The results will translate to practice through
our existing collaborations with industrial partners whose products all make
extensive use of the model solid lubricant material studied here. Lastly, the
project funds an educational effort that reaches 6-12th grade populations,
university students and faculty, and the broader scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic force microscopy enables fundamental studies of
atomic-scale friction phenomena whereas traditional tribometry measures friction
at the more practical macro-scale. A lack of the tools needed to study the
length, force, and speed scales in between has prevented the community from
linking machine friction to its fundamental origins. The team on this project
has developed two key technologies to enable this project: 1) a method to
reliably calibrate and quantitatively measure atomic-scale friction and 2) a
microtribometer capable of bridging measurements from the atomic-scale to those
from the macroscale. The objective of this project is to stitch these length-
scales together by carefully controlling material, load, probe radius and speed
in the gap between the atomic and macro size-scales. The results will be used to
develop a testable scaling model for interfacial friction that will enable our
materials scientist collaborators to design materials and engineer interfaces
for improved frictional control. To promote translation of the science to
broader audiences, the team will: 1) publish in the most visible journals; 2)
present at high impact conferences; 3) educate collaborators; 4) inject
practices and outcomes into instruction; 5) mentor graduate and undergraduate
students in research; and 6) engage 7-12th grade populations by conducting
outreach activities on campus and at tribology conferences.