* 1434723
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Recommendation Letters in Selective College Admissions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* William Carbonaro, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation builds on research regarding school effects, status
attainment, and stratification by examining the role of teacher recommendations
in selective college admissions. Through the process of effectively maintained
inequality, parents may attempt to secure advantages for their children by
sending them to well-resourced schools that are believed to provide an advantage
in learning and life-outcomes. According to school effects research, though,
school characteristics account for a relatively small proportion of the
variation in student outcomes. Using a mixed-methods approach, this dissertation
tests whether letters of recommendation written by teachers at well-resourced
schools provide an advantage in highly selective college admissions relative to
equally qualified applicants from less privileged schools.

Letters of recommendation are posited to provide an advantage to students from
privileged high schools in selective college admissions. These letters are a
mechanism through which school characteristics directly affect the likelihood of
college admission that is not mediated by student achievement. This project
introduces new methods and data to sociological inquiry: computational
linguistic analysis, which lies at the intersection of computer and social
sciences. Key concepts and methods will be translated and applied in a way that
is accessible and useful to sociologists. Data generated by this project will
eventually be made available to other scholars and substantive findings will be
shared with practitioners.

Qualitative interviews with 15-30 admissions officers at highly selective
colleges and universities will establish the role of teacher evaluations in the
admissions process. The core of the project is a collection of nearly 25,000
teacher evaluations that were submitted to a top research university which are
linked to limited biographical information and achievement indicators of
applicants. A sample of these letters is analyzed using traditional qualitative
methods and the entire corpus will be quantitatively examined using
computational linguistic analysis. Finally, an experiment will test the findings
of the qualitative interviews and measure how differences in letters of
recommendation associated with high school characteristics impact admissions
decisions at highly selective universities.