* 1434613
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Multiscale Theory and Experiment in Search for and Synthesis of Novel Nanostructured Phases in BCN Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 333,333.00

Non-technical Description: Superhard materials, such as diamond, cubic boron
nitride, and boron carbide (B4C) can exhibit high melting temperatures, large
compression strengths, chemical inertness, and high thermal conductivity, making
them of practical importance for science and engineering applications. However,
they are brittle, breaking easily, a serious flaw that prevents many engineering
applications. Computational approaches will be combined to develop ductile
superhard materials for extended engineering applications. Initially, quantum
mechanics will be used to predict the best candidates for new ductile superhard
materials by analyzing a large number of cases in silico. For the best predicted
materials novel experimental methods will be employed in which diamond anvil
cells are twisted while applying high pressure to form the predicted phases. The
properties of these materials will then be tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The goal is to advance multiscale
theory, modeling, and experiment sufficiently to enable a revolutionary new
approach to search for and synthesize novel nanostructured phases in the BCN
system. Large plastic shear deformation will be combined with high pressure in a
unique rotational diamond anvil cell (RDAC), to (a) search for new
nanostructured superhard phases that cannot be obtained under pressure without
plastic shear straining, (b) dramatically reduce pressure required for phase
transformation pathways to new and/or known phases, and (c) stabilize these new
phases for processing at ambient pressure. The focus will be on some of the most
promising materials within the BCN system: superhard phases of carbon (diamond,
fullerene, high-density amorphous C, nanotubes, and long-range ordered amorphous
clusters), boron, cubic cBN and wurtzitic wBN, cubic cBC2N, cBC4N, high density
cC3N4 (predicted to be harder than diamond but never synthesized),
nanostructured composites within BCN system, and other new phases in these
systems, all of which will be predicted by the atomistic simulations.