* 1434916
* Photoheterotrophy in unicellular cyanobacteria: ecological drivers and significance for marine biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Solange Duhamel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2018
* USD 334,185.00

Title: Photoheterotrophy in Unicellular Cyanobacteria: Ecological Drivers and
Significance for Marine Biogeochemistry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unicellular
cyanobacteria are major contributors to primary production and carbon export in
the open ocean. They also play an important role in the control of nutrient
availability. The ability of these microbes to harvest light energy benefits a
range of physiological functions, but the effect of light on their metabolism
(other than for photosynthesis) is poorly known and controversial. This project
will investigate the role of light in uptake of organic substrates (carbon and
nutrients) by unicellular cyanobacteria and elucidate the importance of
photoheterotrophy. The ability of these organisms to assimilate organic
compounds and its modulation by light and nutrients will provide additional
hints about the ecological success of unicellular cyanobacteria in the ocean.
The proposed work will involve field experiments in the southwest Pacific Ocean,
complemented by laboratory experiments in controlled cultures of ecologically
relevant cyanobacteria. The study will employ innovative methods, including
single cell assays and molecular tools that target individual cyanobacteria and
evaluate their response to light for the assimilation of organic substrates.
This research project will lead to an increased understanding of the microbial
adaptations to light and nutrient gradients and the role these adaptations play
in elemental cycling in oceanic habitats. This project will support an early
career female investigator. Both undergraduate students and local high school
students will be trained in research techniques and mentored by the
investigator. Findings resulting from this project will be communicated to
scientists through open-access publications. A video documenting the scientific
cruise and summarizing the major discoveries of the proposed research will be
produced and be widely accessible to the public. These activities will thus
reach a broad audience including a significant fraction of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unicellular cyanobacteria inhabit the
surface ocean (generally &lt;150 m deep), and use solar energy to compete for a
limited supply of available nutrients. Therefore, they are expected to utilize
light energy not only for photosynthesis but also to enhance their metabolism of
dissolved organic compounds. Yet, the role of light in the uptake of organic
compounds (both carbon and nutrients) and the importance of photoheterotrophy
are still poorly understood. This proposal seeks to investigate the ecological
drivers and significance of photoheterotrophy in the unicellular cyanobacteria
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, the most abundant groups of primary producers
in the ocean, and Crocosphaera an important nitrogen fixing organism. This
proposal argues that adaptations to specific light regimes must shape
spatiotemporal partitioning of resources among microbial groups in the ocean.
Field experiments along a west-east transect in the southwest Pacific Ocean will
cover a range of nutrient conditions and cyanobacterial abundances. Radioactive
substrate incubations combined with flow cytometry cell sorting and
microautoradiography paired to catalyzed reporter deposition fluorescence in
situ hybridization (MICRO-CARD-FISH) will allow the separation of unicellular
cyanobacteria from non-pigmented bacterioplankton and evaluation of their
response to light for the uptake of different organic substrates. These
experiments will be complemented by laboratory tests in controlled cultures of
axenic strains representative of different ecologically relevant functional
groups of cyanobacteria. Lastly, the capacity of the important nitrogen fixer
Crocosphaera watsonii to feed on glucose will be tested, taking advantage of the
sequenced genome of the representative strain WH8501 in targeting the expression
of genes involved in glucose metabolism in situ.