* 1434089
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Novel Weather Insurance on Livelihood Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* James McCarthy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,998.00

The creation of weather index insurance (WII) as a low-cost commodity has the
potential to change the way that over a billion, hitherto uninsured, low-income
individuals in the developing world engage with risk. This project will
investigate the possible outcomes for the purchasers of this novel insurance,
both those that are stated by its proponents -- vulnerability reduction and
livelihood protection -- and those unstated, such as increased risk-taking.
Given that research on WII is in its early stages, with few in-depth, long-term
case studies, this project will allow the researchers to not only shape the way
that social scientists understand WII, but also impact the way that such
insurance is designed and deployed. This project adds to the debate on the role
of insurance within global capitalism. While this is difficult to address on the
large scale of cities or corporations, this project's focus on individuals
allows the intents and outcomes of newly introduced financialized risk
management to be analyzed. The researchers will answer two broad questions: 1)
What are the motivations and ideas that have informed both non-profit and for-
profit groups in creating WII? 2) What are the impacts of WII on the livelihood
choices, risk-sharing mechanisms, and vulnerabilities of low-income individuals?
Given the large expansion in WII enrolment that will take place across the
developing world, the research design will focus on one WII product in a
specific place -- the Livelihood Protection Policy in St. Lucia -- but the
research conclusions will be applicable to other countries that are adopting new
financial products to manage climate change effects. This project will bridge
two key literatures on finance and vulnerability: in the economics literature on
WII there is little critical engagement with the way that space is treated as
uniform for all policyholders. In contrast, the literature on how
vulnerabilities vary across individuals has not engaged deeply with finance as a
form of adaptive capacity. In order to answer the research questions, the
investigators will conduct interviews with individuals from four livelihood
groups including both purchasers and non-purchasers of WII. Interviews with the
participants will occur twice, so that change over time due to WII adoption may
be assessed. The researchers will also interview financial experts who have
contributed to the design or sale of WII in order to understand the motivations
behind WII's creation. The findings will be shared with livelihoods groups in
St. Lucia, where the research will take place, who will be interested in
understanding the complex effects of WII on their members' vulnerability, and
shared with government ministries, which will need to understand how the
adoption of WII interacts with existing risk management strategies administered
by the state.