* 1434412
* The Role of Suppressed Bone Turnover in Cortical Bone Material Composition, Organization, and Fracture Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ani Ural, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 324,259.00

Bisphosphonates are the most commonly used osteoporosis treatment that has been
effective in preventing osteoporotic fractures by suppressing bone turnover.
Turnover refers to the resorption and replacement of tissue. Despite the
beneficial effects of bisphosphonates, there is accumulating evidence of a
potential complication in the form of atypical femoral fracture. The recent
reports of possible association of atypical femoral fracture with prolonged
bisphosphonate use brought into attention the possibility of adverse mechanical
modifications in bone due to extensive suppression of bone turnover. The overall
goal of this award is to advance the understanding of the changes in material
composition, organization, and fracture resistance of bone due to suppressed
bone turnover via multiscale computational modeling. This project will have a
broad and major impact on the society as it will provide timely information on a
significant potential public health problem associated with the most commonly
used drug therapy for osteoporosis. The results of the project will provide new
knowledge that will establish a better understanding of the effects of
osteoporosis treatments on bone quality and will help determine patients under
risk of atypical femoral fracture. In addition, the research plan will integrate
an active educational and outreach component that will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in engineering. This research project will
significantly improve the current understanding of the changes in fundamental
fracture mechanisms in bone as a result of alterations in material composition
and organization due to suppressed bone turnover. The project will utilize a new
fracture mechanics-based finite element modeling approach and will perform
systematic and controlled evaluations at multiple scales to quantify the
critical levels of material property changes that will impair the fracture
resistance of bone. Specifically, the study will determine the effect of bone
mineral and matrix heterogeneity on crack growth, quantify the influence of
increased mineralization and accumulation of advanced glycation end products on
crack propagation, and identify the critical level of microcrack accumulation in
bone that will adversely affect the fracture toughening mechanisms in bone. The
novel and innovative computational evaluation approach in this research project
will provide unique information that cannot be measured by experiments.