* 1434016
* Dynamic Wetting Failure and Air Entrainment in Surfactant Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Satish Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,993.00

Kumar &lt;br/&gt;1434016&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on exploring dynamic wetting, which is the displacement of some fluid
(for example, air) initially in contact with a solid surface by a liquid that
advances over the surface. In coating processes the receding fluid is air, and
its entrainment into the liquid can be catastrophic since stringent control of
coating uniformity is required to ensure product integrity. Indeed, the onset of
dynamic wetting failure remains one of the primary obstacles to improving upon
current manufacturing speeds for products that require liquid-applied coatings.
This is a proposal with a clear path for fundamental understanding to practical
applications with economic impact. Understanding wetting failure, a process that
is quite common in manufacturing materials with coatings, can have an impact in
the coating industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to study the
failure of the wetting process when surfactant molecules are present in the
liquid. While recent work considers Newtonian liquids without any surfactants,
in practice most coating liquids do contain surfactants. However, despite the
importance of surfactants in coating processes, there is little fundamental
understanding of how surfactants influence dynamic wetting failure and air
entrainment. The objective of this proposal is to advance this understanding
using a combination of theory and experiment.