* 1434672
* Workshop: National and International Contexts for Worker Organizations - University of Iowa; August, 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* E. Paul Durrenberger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2016
* USD 75,000.00

The Cultural Anthropology Program's funding priorities include investigations
into the resilience and robustness of sociocultural systems, including research
on adaptation, conflict resolution, and cooperation and altruism. This award
supports an international workshop on labor unions, which are one mechanism
through which the American economy has traditionally promoted conflict
resolution and cooperation in the workplace. However, the prevalence of unions
has declined over the past few decades. Studies suggest several different
explanations, including economic change, government policy, and a national
culture of individualism. However, anthropology is empirical and comparative and
we have little equivalent empirical evidence from other countries for comparison
that would help researchers determine which factor is more important or how they
might work together. While anthropologists in Greece, Israel, Argentina, Sweden,
China, Brazil, Turkey, Switzerland, Post-Soviet Eastern Europe, Mexico and Spain
have been doing field studies of labor unions in their countries, they have not
necessarily addressed the same questions. A comparative perspective will help
researchers determine the dynamics of the processes
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together an
international group of anthropologists at the University of Iowa to discuss and
compare their findings. The goal is to develop a new, comparative understanding
of labor unions and the factors that affect them in contemporary national and
international economies. Each workshop participant will write a chapter-length
contribution to an edited volume that will be the major product of the workshop.
The book will provide cross-cultural and cross-national empirical ethnographic
evidence for understanding the role of organized labor in the process of
globalization and the effects of culture and policy. The workshop will include
graduate students and so will also launch a multi-generational network of
anthropologists to carry on this work with an international perspective.