* 1434561
* Collaborative Research: Linking climate-driven changes in erosion to tectonic processes along the southern Alaska Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Ridgway, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 124,905.00

One of the most challenging questions in active mountain building is how climate
might drive tectonic processes, in the form of mass redistribution. In other
words, do climate-driven changes in erosion lead to increased exposure of
mountainous belts, and perhaps influence tectonic processes, like uplift and
faulting, as predicted by numerical models? The study of this question, by means
of observational and analytical data is challenging because most areas where
active mountain building is occurring are covered by remnant glaciers and
glaciated landscapes from the end of the Neogene period (23 ? 2.5 million years
ago). The St. Elias mountain belt, in southeast Alaska, is a prime location to
address this question due to its extensive glaciation. The recent erosional
record of this active mountain range is stored in the Gulf of Alaska and was
recovered during Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expedition 341.
Integrated analysis of deep-sea core material obtained from drilling at the
continental shelf, slope, and the deep-sea Surveyor Fan will provide means to
quantify the effect of global and local climate changes on the erosional and
structural evolution of a mountain range. The youthfulness of the St. Elias
belt, along with high rates of tectonic and erosional processes, and its close
proximity of the Gulf of Alaska provide an ideal natural setting to study
climate-tectonic interactions.

Long-standing debates exist in the Earth sciences on whether Neogene climate
change affects rates of surface processes, such as erosion, and consequently
influences tectonic processes, such as faulting, through redistribution of mass.
The proposed study will test the hypothesis that an increase in glacial erosion
has led to focused exhumation in the core of the St. Elias orogeny as proposed
by numerical and analytical data. Two possible target regions have been
suggested where a tectonic-climate feedback may have developed: in the fold-
thrust belt and at the indenting Yakutat plate corner. The wealth of existing
onshore geo- and thermochronological data provide a comprehensive picture of the
current spatial pattern of exhumation rates, but the quantification of changes
in rates and patterns through time has been challenging. The research team?s
approach is to investigate the offshore sedimentary record of the St. Elias
orogeny deposited in the Gulf of Alaska. This orogeny developed during a period
of significant global climate change, including the intensification of Northern
Hemisphere glaciation (iNHG) at the Plio-Pleistogene transition (PPT), ~2.6 Ma,
and the mid-Pleistocene transition (MPT) from 1.2 to 0.7 Ma, but also a change
of local climate resulting in alpine glaciers, perhaps as early as the Late
Miocene/Pliocene (6.5 Ma). The high-resolution magnetostratigraphic and
biostratigraphic age control from the IODP Expedition 341 cores allow close
linking of changes in sedimentary lithofacies and textures, provenanace,
exhumation, and sediment routing and distribution, to test the record of
climate-tectonic interactions along the southern Alaska margin. The integration
of Gulf of Alaska seismic reflection data with the age and provenance control
from the 341 cores allow examination of sediment mass flux in the regional
offshore depositional system, the Surveyor Fan, from a 3-D perspective through
time.