* 1434864
* Stokes drift fluctuations and upper ocean diffusion
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Tim Janssen, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2017
* USD 434,286.00

The Lagrangian drift associated with ocean surface waves, known as Stokes Drift,
plays an important role in the ocean surface boundary layer dynamics and in
particular the small-scale (nominally a few kilometers) diffusion of passive
tracers. Thus it is important for the break-up and dispersion of oil spills or
sewage outflow, and transport of material in the upper ocean and near the coast
in general. Considerable theoretical advances have been made over the last few
decades, but the lack of direct observations hampers progress on the role of
Stokes Drift in material transport in the upper ocean. The collection of new
observations and development of theoretical and numerical models will advance
the current understanding of these dynamics in realistic wave conditions in both
the open ocean and the coastal environment. The nonlinear Lagrangian theory and
sea surface kinematics simulations developed in this project will provide a
general framework for the analysis and interpretation of measurements of
surface-following moored buoys, drifters, and remote sensing systems. The
findings from this study will provide a framework towards understanding and
predicting wave-driven material transport processes, including the break-up of
surface slicks and transport of larvae, and will contribute to more effective
disaster mitigation and coastal ecology protection programs. The development of
small, low-power, inexpensive drifters with satellite communication and
sustainable energy sources, which can resolve both surface waves and surface
drift fluctuations, is an important step toward more ambitious, global
applications. Large arrays of these types of instruments can be used to monitor
ocean waves, surf zone motions, mean surface currents, and surface temperature
and salinity. A post-doctoral fellow will be trained in both observational and
modeling techniques in the upper ocean and summer undergraduate interns will be
exposed to the research process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lagrangian near-
surface drift of ocean surface waves (Stokes Drift) is still poorly understood
and no direct measurements have been reported. In particular, very little is
known about random fluctuations in the Stokes Drift that are believed to be
important to upper ocean diffusion processes. Detailed observations of the
fluctuating surface drift in the upper ocean due to surface waves will be
obtained, building on the investigators' recent development of small, wave-
resolving drifters. Approximately 25 drifters will be deployed in homogeneous,
open ocean conditions and in a more complex coastal environment with variable
depth and currents, to observe the near surface kinematics and particle
dispersion. To interpret the drifter data and develop a better understanding of
the effects of nonlinearity and directional spreading on the surface drift and
diffusion statistics, a Lagrangian theory for the surface kinematics in a random
wave field will be developed. The theory will be extended to include random,
small-scale medium variations (e.g. bottom topography and ambient currents), and
augmented with direct numerical integration of the surface momentum balance to
simulate more complex conditions with strong nonlinearity and/or rapid medium
variations. Then, observations will be compared to theory and numerical
simulations, and the relative contribution of Stokes Drift fluctuations to the
observed particle diffusion will be evaluated to gain a better understanding of
the role of waves in material transport and diffusion, both offshore and near
the coast.