* 1434854
* DMREF: Design and Fabrication of Wide-Band-Gap Nitride-Based Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* James Speck, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 983,803.00

Title: Novel alloys based on nitride semiconductors for ultraviolet light
emitters and high-efficiency power electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The nitride semiconductors, including gallium
nitride (GaN), aluminum nitride (AlN), and indium nitride (InN) are the enabling
materials for solid-state lighting based on light-emitting diodes. These
materials are also used in power electronics, particularly for achieving power
conversion (between alternating and direct current) with much higher
efficiencies. In both areas, fabrication of high-quality nitride alloys with
larger energy band gaps is desirable. In optoelectronics this will enable
ultraviolet light emitters; in power electronics, higher voltage transistors.
Computational theory, in tight collaboration with materials growth and
characterization, will be used to accelerate these developments by exploring
suitable alloy compositions and novel layer structures based on an atomistic,
quantum-mechanical description of the materials. The results will have a strong
impact on technologies ranging from optical data storage to water purification.
Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the tight collaboration
between theory and experiment. Outreach will take advantage of the Allosphere
facility at the California Nanosystems Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;Computational and experimental efforts will be tightly
coupled to address the development of materials and heterostructures based on
wide-band-gap nitride semiconductors. First-principles calculations based on
cutting-edge theoretical techniques will be performed, yielding the most
accurate description currently available at the system sizes needed for modeling
defects and heterostructures. Topics to be addressed include alignment of band
structures at interfaces, polarization properties, identification of suitable
dopants, the role of unintentional impurities, and devising strategies for
avoiding detrimental defects. The growth will be carried out by plasma-assisted
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) or ammonia MBE. The materials to be explored
include AlN and Al-rich AlGaN and InAlN alloys, as well as a largely unexplored
novel alloy system, namely BAlN. Closing the loop between theory and experiment
will provide deep understanding of fundamental atomic-level mechanisms and
phenomena associated with synthesis and processing, benefiting the research
training of graduate and undergraduate students.