* 1434020
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forced Migration and Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Leah VanWey, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 10,792.00

Forced migration due to development projects and environmental change is a
growing source of social upheaval in much of the world. Economic development is
tied to the expansion of hydroelectric dams, highways, mines, and urban
infrastructure, and an estimated 15 million people per year are forced from
their homes to make way for such growth. Past research indicates that forced
migrants displaced permanently by development projects are rarely able to regain
their livelihoods, risking impoverishment due to landlessness, joblessness, food
insecurity, and the loss of social networks. In addition, a number of scholars
have called for a greater theoretical knowledge of the social processes
surrounding forced migration. By understanding the decision-making process among
those forced to migrate as well as the factors associated with the ability for
displaced families to rebuild livelihoods, we will be better prepared to address
displacement from future dams, large-scale infrastructure projects, and
environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will study the
case of forced migration due to the Belo Monte Dam, which is currently under
construction in the Brazilian Amazon. By drawing from literature on the social
impacts of development in the Amazon, demographic research on migration, and
sociological and anthropological work on development-induced displacement, this
research seeks to expand understandings of both the process and socioeconomic
outcomes of dam-induced forced migration. A unique strength of this project is
that it draws on prospective data, which enables following the migration process
as it unfolds rather than relying on retrospective accounts. She uses pre- and
post-displacement household survey and semi-structured interview data to answer
the following questions: (1) How do households navigate the process of forced
migration and adapt livelihood strategies to their new land and resources? (2)
What factors are associated with changes in household-level income, assets, and
subjective well-being after forced migration? and (3) What characteristics of
Belo Monte?s rural resettlement program might mitigate the negative
socioeconomic impacts often associated with forced
migration?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the field of
migration and development by focusing on both pre- and post-displacement
observations of forced migrants. In addition, this project offers insights that
can be used by stakeholders to improve resettlement policies.