* 1434879
* Mesoscale Plasticity: Dislocation Patterns, Stochastic and Size Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Pui Ching Wo, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,008.00

Advancing and accelerating materials discovery depends on our ability to develop
models that can allow rapid investigation of large materials spaces to optimize
properties, and to design manufacturing processes that yield the desired
mechanical behavior on the basis of verifiable simulations. Of particular
interest are the material properties of systems which consist of multiscale
structural components whose dimensions lie in the range of a few nanometers to a
few hundred micrometers. This includes micro-electro-mechanical systems, micro
implants and microelectronic devices. At small length scales the measured
mechanical properties vary significantly with decreasing dimensions. While
existing models can predict deterministic values, analytical models often
implicitly assume that noise in the data is due to difficulties inherent in
microscale testing techniques. However, experiments show a significant amount of
stochastic behavior no matter how elegantly the experiments are performed. This
award supports fundamental research to develop predictive models that account
for stochastic phenomena to ensure that validation techniques and simulation
tools are well paired. Further broader impact will be the creation of a diverse
environment in our laboratories in terms of race, gender, and national origin.
This project offers students and junior researchers opportunities to participate
in a research and education experience in an interdisciplinary environment,
tackling their thesis problems with co-advisement from faculty drawn from both
mechanics and materials science.

The research activities will develop mechanics and materials science theories
and testing schemes as metrics for material modeling and experimental
validation. Our hypothesis is that plastic deformation in small volume is
stochastic, serrated and heterogeneous. Such effects would arise from the
stochastic nature of the underlying microstructure such as dislocations, grain
size, interfaces and grain boundaries, from stress gradients arising from
loading conditions and morphological defects, and the formation of localized and
dislocation patterns. We will develop models that account for such phenomena so
that validation techniques and simulation tools are well paired. Towards this
end, this project will address the following five questions. 1) What are the
underlying causes of the observed stochastic phenomena: onset of plasticity,
localization, patterning, and serrated flow? 2) How do deformation mechanisms
and defect-surface interactions contribute to strength, toughness, and damage in
small volumes? 3) Under what morphological and microstructural conditions does
the deformation behavior transition from deterministic to stochastic? 4) How can
we quantify and model stochastic behavior across length scale? 5) How can we
translate this understanding into a mesoscale stochastic size-dependent
plasticity model?