* 1434212
* Conference Proposal: Thirteenth International Conference on Continuum Models and Discrete Systems, July 21-25, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 35,000.00

This project is to partially support the Thirteenth International Conference on
Continuum Models and Discrete Systems (CMDS13) which is being held at the
University of Utah in Salt Lake City, Utah, between July 21st and 25th, 2014.
The CMDS meeting series has been running for about 40 years, and this is the
first time it is being held in the U.S.A. Having become quite influential over
the years, these meetings attract leading experts and introduce young
researchers to cutting edge developments. The meetings provide a unique forum
for mathematicians and scientists, experimentalists and theorists, to get
together and exchange ideas and results on a wide range of materials-related
problems. The main focus of the CMDS13 meeting is the interplay between discrete
and continuum descriptions of physical phenomena. This interplay is of
fundamental importance to a range of interdisciplinary problems throughout
physics, biology, materials science and engineering. These methods are crucial
for the study of complex media, including composites, polycrystals such as
metals and ice, biomaterials, nano-structures, and metamaterials, as well as
smart (shape memory) alloys, optimally designed composite microstructures, and
many other related systems. The conference website is
www.math.utah.edu/~cherk/CMDS13/cmds13-home.html &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference topics encompass methods for the dual discrete-continuous description
of complex materials as well as several active new areas such as composites
(metamaterials) with extreme or unusual properties, the dynamics of failure of
complex structures, the design and optimization of structured materials, the
dynamics of metastable structures with multiple equilibria, complex fluids,
models for sea ice, and multiscale computational methods. The format of the
conference will consist of 11 plenary talks and about 40 invited lectures
together with some contributed presentations. The meeting will foster
interdisciplinary and international contacts among scientists, engineers, and
applied mathematicians who would not normally interact, thus increasing the
potential for future ground breaking collaborations. The organizers will try to
maximize the participation of younger researchers,from postdoctoral associates
to graduate and undergraduate students, which provides career development
opportunities for them. Much of the NSF support will be allocated to students,
postdocs, junior researchers and participants from underrepresented groups,
including women.