* 1434919
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Symposium at the Eighth International Conference on the Theory and Application of Diagrams (DIAGRAMS 2014)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Stephanie Schwartz, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2015
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 15
graduate students, along with a panel of 4 distinguished research faculty
mentors (but only those students enrolled in U.S. educational institutions,
about 8, will be eligible for funding through this grant). The event will take
place in conjunction with (and on the first day of) the Eighth International
Conference on the Theory and Application of Diagrams (DIAGRAMS 2014), to be held
July 28-August 1, 2014, in Melbourne, Australia, and co-located with the IEEE
Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing, as was the case in
2008. Diagrams are wide-ranging and open-ended representations that include
sketches, drawings, charts, pictures, 2D and 3D geometric models, and maps. They
are a vital tool in human communication in areas such as art and science, as
well as commerce and industry. A better understanding of how effective diagrams
can be generated and used has the potential to produce transformative advances
in these areas. DIAGRAMS is the only conference series that provides a united
forum for all aspects of research on the theory and application of diagrams. It
is a bi-annual, international and interdisciplinary event whose goals are to
present and discuss (a) state-of-the-art research on computational, cognitive
and socio-cultural theories, models and techniques of reasoning with
diagrammatic representations, and (b) cutting-edge intelligent and interactive
information technologies for using diagrammatic representations in supporting
human reasoning. Research topics include understanding diagrammatic reasoning in
humans, understanding the use of diagrammatic representation for communication,
developing techniques for automated diagrammatic reasoning, and designing tools
for use of diagrammatic representations. The conference series is overseen by
the DIAGRAMS Steering Committee with a rotating membership; more information is
available at the conference website http://www.diagrams-conference.org/2014.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the DIAGRAMS 2014 Doctoral Consortium
is to increase the exposure and visibility of young graduate student researchers
in these areas. The workshop will be a research-focused day-long meeting that
affords participants an opportunity to present their work and get feedback from
established researchers in the field, who will be present to comment on the
young researchers' presentations in an informal and constructive environment.
Each invited participant will be asked to give a short talk, which will be
followed by discussion and critiquing. For some students, this may be their
first opportunity to give a research talk outside their home institutions, which
will help prepare them for future scholarly discussions. The Doctoral Consortium
is open for attendance to all conference registrants, and summaries of the
presentations will be available on the conference
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: DIAGRAMS 2014 will significantly
increase our understanding of diagrammatic reasoning in humans and machines, and
will add momentum to the development of new information technologies for the use
of diagrammatic representations in support of human reasoning. The conference
will help develop human research capital by enabling interactions between senior
and junior researchers and by catalyzing new collaborations. The Doctoral
Consortium will increase the exposure and visibility of young graduate student
researchers in these areas, and help train them by providing early input from
senior researchers in the field in an interactive and constructive environment.
The social network among this next generation of researchers, and the
relationships with senior researchers, created by the workshop will play a
critical role in their enculturation into the profession. Diversity of the
selected students is a goal of the organizers, who will be proactive in an
effort to ensure that both students and faculty are a diverse group across
multiple dimensions including nationality, scientific discipline and gender. To
further assure diversity, only one student will be selected from each
educational institution, with preference given to students from underrepresented
populations.