* 1434978
* Targeted Infusion Project: Expanding Educational Cyber-Infrastructure at Delaware State University
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Leonard Davis, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 399,908.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Delaware State University will implement
a project entitled: Expanding Educational Cyber-Infrastructure at Delaware State
University. The project aims to integrate cyberlearning strategies into the
biology curriculum to improve instruction and increase student achievement,
retention and graduation in STEM fields. Project objectives include expanding
the institution's distance learning infrastructure; adapting cyberlearning
approaches to enhance biology instruction; and adapting the technology-supported
inverted classroom student-centered approach to teaching. In an inverted
classroom, learning activities that are normally carried out inside the
classroom, such as lecturing, take place outside of class, and learning
activities that are normally completed at home, such as solving problems and
applying the course concepts in homework assignments, become the focus of in-
class work. This approach has been shown to be a powerful and empowering mode of
instruction for all types of learners.

Redesigned biology classes will have students doing the lower levels of
cognitive work such as gaining knowledge and comprehension outside of class, and
focusing on the higher forms of cognitive work such as application, analysis,
synthesis, and/or evaluation in class, where they have the support of their
peers and instructor. A teaching approach that allows students to access course
content in the same way that they access content related to their personal
interests has the potential to increase their engagement with the material,
while being able to control the pace and timing of their access can give them
ownership of their learning. Educational literature has demonstrated that
students learn best when they are active, engaged and learning for a purpose.
The project will assess the efficacy of this course delivery model for
supporting student learning and course performance over a wide variety of
courses and instructors. If the project yields positive outcomes in student
learning and course success with inverted versions of the biology courses from
the introductory to the advanced level, it will provide a powerful model for
STEM departments on campus and at other HBCUs.