* 1434503
* Carbon nanomaterial-induced malignant transformation and lung carcinogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Yon Rojanasakul, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,999.00

PI: Rojanasakul, Yon &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1434503&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
West Virginia University Research Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Title: Carbon
nanomaterial-induced malignant transformation and lung carcinogenesis
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanomaterials, including carbon nanotubes
(CNTs), have increasingly been used for a variety of applications. However, the
risk of adverse health effects, such as from the potential carcinogenicity of
CNTs are not understood. The PI, and Co-PI, have developed a chronic exposure
model in which human lung epithelial cells, a major cellular target of CNT
carcinogenesis, are exposed, over long-term, to low-dose physiologically
relevant concentrations of CNTs. The PI and Co-PI will examine how the
physicochemical properties (length, metal impurity, surface charge, surface
chemical modifications, etc) may induce malignant transformations in cells, look
for potential biomarkers, and investigate the role of those biomarkers in
induced transformations and tumors. If successful, this approach can provide
experimental models and assay methods that reliably predict CNT carcinogenicity,
while also establishing specific biomarkers for CNT-induced carcinogenesis.
This, in turn will advance both safer-by-design strategies and worker protection
issues. Public presentations and summary reports, revealing the fundamental
findings from this project in nontechnical terms, will be posted on the West
Virginia University, NanoSAFE, and NIOSH websites, while the intended outreach
efforts include underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal,
the PIs hypothesize that CNT carcinogenicity is dependent on their
physicochemical properties and ability to induce malignant transformation of
target lung cells through mesothelin (MSLN, a known biomarker for asbestos
induced cancer) and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-2) dependent mechanisms. To
verify this hypothesis, the PIs will break down the investigations into 3 aims:
1) Develop in vitro models to predict CNT carcinogenicity, and determine if the
induction of malignant transformation and tumor formation is predictive of in
vivo tumorigenic responses; 2) Determine the role of MSLN in CNT-induced
transformations and tumors, and elucidate the underlying mechanisms; and 3)
Evaluate the use of MSLN and MMP-2 as combination biomarkers to predict CNT
carcinogenicity and determine the effect of CNT on MSLN and MMP-2 induction to
see if such induction is predictive of in vivo tumorigenic responses. This is an
innovative proposal that addresses an important question, the relationship of
nanomaterial properties to long-term human disease. Additional strengths include
the use of archived reference materials and realistic doses that can be compared
to in vivo exposures. In addition, the use of shared particle samples is
essential for both replication and for follow-up studies.