* 1434437
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Public Altruism and Bureaucratic Routinization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Nitsan Chorev, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,932.00

SES-1434437 Nitsan Chorev Meghan Elizabeth Kallman Brown University

Existing studies have produced significant knowledge about what sustains workers
in private organizations, such as how ideas are diffused, how mimicry operates,
and how unethical behavior spreads. That literature, however, is primarily
focused on private organizations in profitmaking situations; though idealism may
be present for some actors, the incentive structure for wage-earning workers and
volunteers is meaningfully different. This study proposes a new way of thinking
about volunteering that combines the insights from organizational sociology with
a nuanced appreciation for the motives of these volunteers. The research uses a
social movements perspective to analyze Peace Corps volunteers' experience, to
gage volunteers' motives, and the trajectories of their altruistic commitment
throughout and after their service. This project focuses on the organizational
mechanisms that transform volunteers' altruistic identities, and the political
consequences of those transformations. The research seeks to understand:

1. How volunteers come to understand themselves as volunteers, activists, and
professionals; 2. Volunteers' understanding of themselves as Americans, and vis-
à-vis host community members; 3. The sources and political consequences of
burnout and disillusionment among volunteers; and 4. The incentive structure
that retains volunteers in social and helping professions despite this burnout.

The research will be completed using a mixed-methods research design that
combines the benefits of qualitative and quantitative approaches, including
field observations at three Peace Corps sites, an online survey of returned
Peace Corps volunteers tracing their professional and political trajectories,
document analysis, and interviews with Peace Corps volunteers and staff.

Research findings can be of potential used to not-for-profit organizations that
rely on altruistically minded volunteers to complete their mission.
Specifically, recommendations will be generated that can be used to improve
Peace Corps programs, in particular empirical information on patterns of
volunteer trajectories. Further, results may possibly be generalizable to some
degree to other helping organizations (such as AmeriCorps, Vista, professional
activist organizations and NGOs, charitable foundations, and houses of worship).
This project has the potential to contribute to a comprehensive theory about the
effects of formal organization on the idealism and altruism of the
organization's participants. Nurturing altruism has meaningful consequences in
the United States, whose democracy turns in large part on the health of its
civil society. Would-be volunteers must have faith in the organizations they are
joining; this project will provide insights on how to ferment and maintain that
faith. Understanding the long-term effects of bureaucracies on idealism is a
critical component of managing a successful voluntary, third-sector, and
charitable organizations, positive peace, and participatory democracy.