* 1434789
* Collaborative Research: Proactive Recovery of Electric Power Assets for Resiliency Enhancement (PREPARE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 12/31/2017
* USD 244,999.00

This project aims at developing a comprehensive framework and the supporting
theory for increasing resiliency of the critical electric power grid
infrastructure in response to hurricanes and accordingly expediting recovery
process for minimizing the associated economic, social, and physical
disruptions. This research has profound impacts on local and national energy
security, reliability, and sustainability by promoting the sound development of
advanced techniques related to extreme weather events and natural disasters
which are identified as the second cause of the largest blackouts in the United
States. The project results will directly impact the society through helping
electric power grid operators better manage available resources, reducing
aftermath of hurricanes and other natural disasters, and accordingly saving
billions of dollars in electric power grid outage and recovery related costs.
This research will increase public awareness and facilitate the understanding of
the complexity of hurricanes and the required recovery plans among stakeholders,
ratepayers, regulators, utility executives, and market participants.
Furthermore, this research will enable a rapid and wide-spread deployment of new
technologies in smart grid, which will create substantial job opportunities in
this area. In a broader scope, the project will promote teaching and training of
future workforce, broaden participation of underrepresented groups, enhance
research and education, and improve scientific and technological understanding
via planned education and outreach activities as well as dissemination of
findings to academia, industry, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to fulfill research objectives and present a significant change in current
electric power grid response and recovery schemes, a framework for Proactive
Recovery of Electric Power Assets for Resiliency Enhancement (PREPARE) will be
developed. Within this framework, which will present the next generation
decision making tool for proactive recovery, several coordinated models will be
developed including (1) outage models to indicate the impact of hurricanes on
power system components, (2) a stochastic pre-hurricane crew mobilization model
for managing resources before the event, (3) a deterministic post-hurricane
recovery model for managing resources after the event, and (4) outage and repair
models to be incorporated in crew mobilization and recovery models. The models
will be extended to ensure applicability to a variety of electric power grids
with different technologies and regulatory issues. The stochastic pre-hurricane
crew mobilization model will be developed using latest advances in mathematical
optimization, which includes Monte Carlo Sampling, Recourse Modeling, and Chance
Constraint Modeling, to find the best suited approach. The framework will be
validated and its applicability to large-scale practical electric power grids
will be verified by leveraging the data obtained from the electric utility
collaborator of the project. The theoretical and practical implications of the
developed results will push the research frontier of proactive response and
recovery schemes in electric power grids. The transformative nature of this
research supports application to a variety of infrastructures, and in response
to a wide range of extreme weather events and natural disasters.