* 1434142
* WORKSHOP ON UNDERGROUND SCIENCE APPLICATIONS  OF GERMANIUM-BASED DETECTORS AND TECHNOLOGIES
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Dongming Mei, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 10/31/2017
* USD 99,629.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: IIA - 1434142&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Dongming Mei&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South Dakota
Main Campus&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Workshop on Underground Science
Applications for Germanium-Based Detectors and Technologies
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Science investigations
in undergound research facilities have enabled pivotal discoveries about the
dark matter that comprises over 80% of the total matter in the universe. This
project will provide support for an interdisciplinary workshop to examine the
status of detectors and technologies that can be used in characterizing dark
matter. The workshop will be held in South Dakota, the home of the deepest
underground research facility in US. The workshop participants will explore
challenges, critical measures, and research and development opportunities
related to detector technology development and experimental design. The national
and international experts, faculty, researchers, students, and industrial
partners who participate in the workshop will identify critical research needs
and define a path forward. The workshop will serve to foster broader inclusion
of women and underrepresented minorities (URMs) in the emerging directions of
particle physics, research using underground facilities, and dark matter
exploration. The workshop outcomes can lead to novel training programs for young
researchers, undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers. Economic drivers for the workshop include potential commercial
opportunities for manufacturing detectors and sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Germanium-based detectors
and technologies are proving to be key enablers for detecting dark matter and
neutrino-less double beta decays. This workshop brings together experts,
practitioners, faculty, and students to share ideas on the status of crystal-
growth techniques and low-threshold detectors. The workshop participants will
learn about current and planned activities at the Sanford Underground Research
Facility (SURF) in Lead, South Dakota including ton-scale dark matter, neutrino-
less double beta decay, long baseline neutrino, and other large-scale
experiments. Workshop activities will leverage the capabilities of SURF;
catalyze the commercial fabrication of Germanium crystals, detectors, and
wafers; and provide a forum for engaging and inspiring next-generation
researchers. Workshop products include: a plan for formalizing a research
consortium, white papers that identify critical research and development needs,
and a road map for future experiments. It is also anticipated that the workshop
will foster stronger ties between academia and industry.