* 1434059
* PFI:AIR - RA:  Enabling Low-cost, Real-time Monitoring of Heavy Metal Ions in Drinking Water
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 645,333.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of a low-cost and real-time heavy metal ion detection technology, derived from
Water Equipment and Policy (WEP) I/UCRC expertise and discoveries in graphene-
based water sensing. The technology has the following market-valued features:
rapid response and high sensitivity to heavy metal ions in water, and capable of
inline continuous detection to provide early-warning for heavy metal
contamination in public and private water supplies. When compared to the leading
competing methods, spectroscopic and electrochemical, in this market space,
these features provide the following advantages: in-situ and real-time detection
(an unmet need), low cost, and miniaturization. The real-time electronic heavy
metal ion detection technology is important because it enables the continuous
water quality monitoring for heavy metal ion contamination, mitigates health
risks, and ensures a clean and safe water supply. Students and postdoctoral
fellows will gain entrepreneurial and technology translation experience through
hands-on training on the sensor prototyping innovation platform and a number of
existing entrepreneurship resources such as Student Startup Challenge and Design
Entrepreneur Showcase programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. There is a strong need for accurate and accessible
detection technologies to ensure continuous water quality control and early
warning capabilities to avoid public safety catastrophes. Current detection
methods for aqueous heavy metal ions are often too expensive or unsuitable for
in-situ and real-time detection. The proposed novel, inline micro-sized
electronic sensor outperforms existing water testing methods and is simple to
implement, eliminating many of the disadvantages associated with current
practices. The project aims to demonstrate fully-functioning prototypes of water
meters, water purifiers, and handheld devices integrated with real-time sensors
for heavy metal ions in water using a graphene-based platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation ecosystem that will be created includes A.
O. Smith, Badger Meter, and NanoAffix Science LLC. These research partners and
third-party investors will help integrate the new sensor into their existing
products (water purifiers and water meters) and new handheld devices, and
explore sensor manufacturing issues to bring the technology to the market place.
The potential economic impact is expected to be more commercial competitiveness,
expanded market space, increased market share, more profits for partner
companies, new job creation, and enhanced economic growth in the next three to
five years.