* 1434762
* APECS Nordic:  Bridging Early Career Researchers and Indigenous Peoples in Nordic Countries
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2014,08/31/2014
* Russell Fielding, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2014
* USD 32,500.00

This award will support 13 US participants, both indigenous and non-indigenous
early career researchers, to attend the "Connecting Early Career Researchers and
Community-driven Research in the North" workshop organized during the Arctic
Science Summit Week and the Arctic Observing Summit (AOS) from 5 - 11 April 2014
in Helsinki, Finland (www.assw2014.fi), with the workshop scheduled for April
7th and 8th. The workshop is listed as a line item on the ASSW registration form
and the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) has set up a
workshop webpage containing information on the workshop itself
<http://www.apecs.is/research/apecs-norden/apecs-norden-workshop>.

The Helsinki workshop is part of a larger research project APECS is currently
conducting, "Bridging Early Career Researchers and Indigenous Peoples in Nordic
Countries," which is partially sponsored by the Nordic Council of Ministers
Nordic Council (NORDEN). The research project is designed to "leverage the
research, education, and outreach experience of the APECS network to identify
ways to enhance the engagement between Early Career Researchers and Indigenous
peoples in Nordic regions." As noted during the Indigenous Peoples' Global
Summit on Climate Change in Anchorage (2009), the knowledge and contributions of
indigenous peoples in addressing climate change have largely been ignored. One
of the outcomes of the Summit was the recognition that incorporation of
indigenous knowledge into Arctic research, as well as efforts to better connect
and facilitate communication between Northern residents and researcher, are
crucial to help develop climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies. The
research project was in part a response to the Summit and this proposed workshop
is one part of the larger project to better engage early career researchers
(ECRs), Indigenous communities, and Arctic residents in dialogues that foster
active working relationships where knowledge and experience can be shared and
contributed to shaping the future of Arctic research.

The workshop is planned for 60 participants including indigenous and non-
indigenous early career researchers, mentors and experts. APECS has strong
experience in organizing career development and thematic workshops and believes
that connecting the "Bridging" workshop to ASSW and the AOS will increase
attendance as well as provide an excellent platform to bring together ECRs,
senior scientists, Indigenous Peoples, representatives of International
organizations, and media in order to educate and train participants about the
interaction between the scientific community and indigenous communities. Among
others, experts attending ASSW 2014 will serve as mentors for the workshop, and
together with representatives from Indigenous peoples organizations will provide
advice and help to thoroughly develop the program.