* 1434788
* Collaborative Research:  Role of Mixed Layer Eddies on Phytoplankton Productivity in Seasonally Variable Regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Amala Mahadevan, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 782,055.00

This study contributes to the understanding of a biologically highly relevant
region of the ocean, the subpolar North Atlantic, which acts as a persistent
sink for atmospheric carbon. It assesses the biological importance of
submesoscale processes, which are not represented in global carbon cycle models.
Mixed layer eddies, along with the turbulence induced by air-sea fluxes,
modulate both light and nutrients for phytoplankton productivity. This study
explores the role of mixed layer eddies on phytoplankton productivity in the
subpolar gyres during three distinct phases of the annual cycle - winter,
spring, and summer. By modeling the interaction of mixed layer eddies with
mesoscale eddies, the study will provide insight on how their coupling affects
vertical exchange between the pycnocline and the mixed layer. The project will
support a postdoctoral scientist at University of Massachusetts Dartmouth and a
Ph.D. student in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology/Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution Joint Program for four years. The investigators will
contribute to outreach efforts including teacher training, and ocean literacy
workshops through the Ocean Academy at the Ocean Explorium at New Bedford
Seaport by demonstrating ocean dynamics using numerical and tabletop
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be amongst the first to
include vertical and lateral processes (namely turbulent mixing and 1-10 km
scale mixed layer eddies) in understanding the upper ocean's response to
temporally varying air-sea fluxes on short time scales (hours-days). By studying
the mechanisms generating stratification of deep winter mixed layers, the
researchers will assess the effect of eddies and air-sea fluxes on phytoplankton
primary productivity during times when a scarcity of light limits photosynthesis
(in winter and early spring). By studying the coupling between subsurface
mesoscale eddies and the surface submesoscale field subject to intermittent air-
sea fluxes, they will examine the advective vertical nutrient supply during
periods of strong surface stratification (summer). These process studies will
help to address the following important questions about phytoplankton
productivity in the subpolar oceans: (i) How is a seed phytoplankton population
sustained over the winter? (ii) Is the mechanism for spring stratification, be
it eddies or thermal effects, relevant to the net primary productivity over the
season? (iii) How are nutrients supplied to the surface layer during times of
strong stratification in the summer? This investigation will extend current
understanding of mixed layer eddies, which is based on studies in idealized
mixed layer settings, by considering their interaction with mesoscale eddies in
the pycnocline beneath, and with surface turbulence in response to temporally
fluctuating air-sea fluxes.