* 1434228
* Development of a Submersible Ammonium Fluorescence Analyzer for In-Situ and Underwater Application with a View Towards Application on an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Peter Ortner, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 488,009.00

This is a proposal to develop an autonomous submersible analyzer to measure
ammonium. Ammonium is the most rapidly cycled nitrogen compound in coastal and
marine environments. In oceanic waters, ammonium concentrations are normally
below 1 mole, but exhibit considerable temporal and spatial variability. An
automated, in-situ, and submersible analyzer is the only way to assess the
actual environmental variability of ammonium. Not only will the proposed
analyzer significantly contribute to biogeochemical and oceanographic research
but the novel technical approach used can be applied to other wet chemistry
analyses. Moreover the system will have immediate non-research applications
given environmental concerns about the effects of ammonium discharge from
wastewater-treatment facilities as well as agricultural and industrial inputs in
tidal inlets, coastal rivers and estuaries. Such ammonium discharge has become
an issue of major significance to both state and federal environmental
regulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system is based on a novel fluidic
technique called Autonomous Batch Analysis (ABA) in conjunction with a LED
photodiode-based fluorescence detector (LPFD) for in-situ underwater measurement
of ammonium in natural waters. The analyzer the investigators propose to
construct will be mechanically simple (only two moving parts), highly precise,
submersible, require only modest power, and have the capability of measuring
ammonium at nanomolar levels with a sampling frequency of 15 minutes for periods
of a month (or more frequently for shorter deployments). Where necessary, the
analyzer can be equipped with back flushed passive filters to enable
measurements in turbid, sediment-laden waters. The parts required to assemble
such an analyzer will cost under $9000. The proposed instrument will be
immediately deployable on moorings or fixed stations but applicability to
lowered or towed systems and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV) will also be
explored.