* 1434689
* Smart Nanofabrication via Rational Assembly of Two-Dimensional Heterosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bin Yu, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Since the discovery of graphene about ten years ago, atomically-thin nanosheets
of different electronic nature have become the focal point for the research
community. These nanosheets could be semiconducting, insulating, or semi-
metallic, and potentially useful as the basic building-blocks for the next-
generation nano-scale manufacturing. This award will address several known
challenges in today's semiconductor microfabrication. Research will involve
studies of super thin-film implementation, atomic-scale control, self-limiting
assembly, and heterogeneous integration. The concept of layer-based smart
nanomanufacturing allows for flexible integration of different nanomaterials.
The research work will close the gap between science-driven research in
nanomaterials and commercial applications. In a broader view, the fabrication
strategy could be extended to a large family of two-dimensional and three-
dimensional nanostructures. The resulting material systems will potentially
impact a variety of areas, including flexible electronics, solar cells,
optoelectronics, sensors, and multifunctional integration via innovative
engineering. This work will open unique opportunities for students to acquire
interdisciplinary research experience in material science, physics, devices, and
nanofabrication, creating great synergy in research and learning. The
dissemination of scientific discoveries and its inclusion in curriculum
development in undergraduate, graduate, and professional education would ensure
broad impacts to scientific, educational, and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research explores two-dimensional van der Waals
functional heterostructures and nano-device technology via a layer-by-layer
assembly-based material processing strategy, aimed at establishing a versatile,
leap-forward nanofabrication platform that circumvents the well-known issues in
the traditional thin-film based fabrication. The research is composed of two
tasks: (i) Exploring fundamental behavior of two-dimensional heterostructures
made by nanosheets of different nature and discovering key guidelines and
pathway towards atomic layer based nanofabrication. (ii) Demonstrating two-
dimensional heterostructure field-effect transistor on the material platform and
studying the critical design issues including scalability, manufacturability,
and reliability. The research aims to acquire in-depth understanding from both
scientific and engineering perspective towards developing layer-by-layer
assembly-enabled, smart manufacturing strategy potentially applicable to a broad
range of nanoscale devices and components, supported by the state-of-the-art
nanofab facilities at the University.