* 1434132
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Class and Motherhood in Families and the Labor Market
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sara McLanahan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 11,939.00

This dissertation uses experimental methods to investigate how social class
shapes the experience of motherhood. The dissertation assesses whether - and if
so, why - employers discriminate against low- and high-skilled mothers in the
labor market. The investigators perform a large-scale field experiment, an audit
study, by studying low- and high-skilled job openings. The dissertation then
investigates why employers might discriminate against mothers, experimentally
manipulating motherhood status and indicators of applicant quality. Obtaining an
understanding of discrimination in low- and high-skilled jobs advances our
understanding of when and how motherhood disadvantages women. Findings can aid
understanding of and suggest directions of inquiry to address discrimination at
this stage of the employment process. Additionally, the study evaluates whether
low-skilled mothers face significant barriers in finding jobs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next, the dissertation examines how ideas about good
parenting differ by social class, and whether parents hold mothers to higher
parenting standards than fathers. A survey experiment is performed in which
respondents evaluate descriptions of parent-child interactions, with the gender
of the parent presented being experimentally manipulated. By examining how
parents evaluate different childrearing approaches, this research can strengthen
stakeholders' efforts to promote family involvement in children's education, and
help to design more effective parenting interventions. The dissertation aims to
illuminate the role of social class in producing distinct disadvantages for
mothers with different resources.