* 1434876
* GOALI: Strength Loss in Clays During Earthquake and Other Cyclic Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 467,922.00

Slope failures caused by earthquakes have had a significant impact on the design
of slopes and earth retention systems in areas of strong seismicity. For
example, several massive landslides occurred within natural clay soil formations
during the 1964 Alaskan earthquake that caused loss of life and significant
financial loss to infrastructure and private property in Anchorage.
Consequently, design methods for seismic stability developed after this event
take an overly conservative approach by assuming small values of strength that
are appropriate for fully disturbed clay, resulting in designs that
systematically ignore the substantial differences the behavior of the disturbed
and the natural clay soil. This over conservatism results in designs that are
significantly more expensive than one which accounts for actual behavior of the
natural clays. Designs based on the results of this research will be more
economical yet result in adequate margins of safety for the public. Therefore,
this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society. The societal and
educational impacts of the proposed research are broad, because its results will
impact the basic science needed for predicting the occurrence of natural hazards
and for developing a sustainable geotechnical design. This research involves
aspects of engineering mechanics, geotechnical engineering, earthquake
engineering and engineering geology. The multi-disciplinary facets of the
research will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research is a collaboration between industry and
academe, which has the benefit of rapid application of research results to
practice. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a new approach for
quantifying the strength degradation and destructuration of natural clays
exposed to cyclic loading. It will combine experimental and theoretical findings
to predict the onset of seismically-induced failure in natural clay deposits.
The experiments will be conducted on high quality samples of Bootlegger Cove
Formation of varying degrees of sensitivity. Very sensitive clays in this
formation triggered the catastrophic slides that took place in Anchorage during
the 1964 earthquake. Northwestern University will collaborate in this research
with GeoEngineers, Inc., who will coordinate drilling and sampling of BCF
specimens. The experimental program will include monotonic and cyclic tests on
intact and reconstituted samples. The experiments will elucidate the role of
incremental nonlinearity, stress-paths, consolidation history and cyclic
loading. The modeling activities will use this evidence to formulate an
incrementally non-linear constitutive model reproducing the effect of
destructuration in pore pressure build-up and cyclically generated failure.
Although several models have been proposed to cope with the complex mechanics of
natural clays, such models often ignore the rich variety of possible failure
modes. Engineering mechanics theories for fluid-saturated soils provide
insights, but to capture the complex processes taking place during seismic
shaking, these theories must be enhanced to accommodate cyclically-decaying
stiffness and strength processes. The approach will include the development of
specific bifurcation criteria for assessing the cyclic strength degradation as a
function of stress conditions and number of cycles. The model will be
numerically implemented in computer programs for coupled dynamic analysis of
geotechnical problems.