* 1434732
* Collaborative Research:   Climate Change and Upwelling -- Comparative Analysis of Current &amp; Future Responses of the California and Benguela Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Bryan Black, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2016
* USD 492,760.00

Along the west coasts of North and South America, Africa, and Iberia, alongshore
equatorward winds bring nutrient-rich waters to the sunlit surface of the ocean,
stimulating phytoplankton blooms that support robust, rich and diverse
ecosystems. This process is known as "upwelling". Because upwelling is driven by
winds, and winds are related to atmospheric conditions, upwelling is highly
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. However, the potential impacts of
climate change on upwelling and biology remain largely uncertain. In earlier
work in the California Current upwelling system, off the west coast of the
United States, researchers found that upwelling occurs in distinct winter and
summer "modes" that have different impacts on biology. In this project,
oceanographic and atmospheric data from the Benguela Current system, off South
Africa and Namibia, will be analyzed for similar seasonal patterns and
relationships with the ecosystem. Comparisons between these two upwelling
systems will allow researchers to investigate if previous findings of regional
climate impacts on biology are applicable at a global scale and consider how
these systems may change in the future. The project will facilitate
collaboration between researchers from South Africa, Namibia, and the United
States, integrating a team of young and senior scientists from the three
countries and providing them with opportunities for broad-scale scientific
synthesis early in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be a
comparative analyses of climate forcing and biological responses in the
California Current (CCS) and Benguela Current systems (BCS), the two upwelling
systems with the most similar time series of atmospheric and oceanographic
conditions, seabird demography, and lower (chlorophyll) and mid (forage fish)
trophic data. The project will determine whether changes in the ecosystems can
be attributed to regional or global climate processes. Growth-increment
chronologies from fish in the BCS (deep-water hake) will be developed as
indicators of upper-trophic fish growth, and compared to rockfish growth
chronologies developed in the CCS. Mid-trophic level fish abundance will be
modeled as indices of prey availability for integration between climate and
upper-trophic-level parameters. Oceanographic and atmospheric data will be
analyzed from global observational and reanalysis data sets, as well as from
earth system model projections of climate change. The project will address the
following questions: 1) are seasonal upwelling modes (winter and summer)
discernible in the BCS as they are in the CCS? 2) are upwelling modes forced by
similar or contrasting atmospheric forcing mechanisms? 3) is there evidence of
coherence/covariance among mid-trophic fish, upper-trophic fish, and seabirds
(and at which lags) within and between the CCS and BCS? 4) will the positioning
and amplitude of the atmospheric pressure systems that result in upwelling-
favorable winds change coherently between ecosystems under various climate-
change scenarios? and 5) what are the fisheries and wildlife management
implications for variability in the seasonality and spatial distribution of
upwelling in a changing climate?