* 1434007
* Size structure and function of phytoplankton communities in a changing ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Michael Follows, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2018
* USD 531,997.00

Phytoplankton form the base of the marine food web and are a crucial component
in the global carbon cycle. They are also extremely diverse, with different
species ranging widely in size, biochemical functions, and light and temperature
requirements. How phytoplankton establish communities (mixtures of the different
species living in the same place) and how these vary between regions and with
time is poorly known. Community structure is important for the type of food webs
they can support and the amount of carbon they sequester in the ocean. The
diversity within the community may also be essential for stability of the
ecosystems under changing environmental conditions. Computer models, grounded by
observations, provide an important tool to explore marine ecosystems. Current
models however include very limited diversity of phytoplankton, focusing on
either their differences in size or function, but not both. This new modelling
effort will incorporate substantially more diversity and therefore be able to
address how and why different groups of phytoplankton co-exist in space and time
and how their community structures change in altered environments. This study
will be enhanced by new international collaborations with experts in France and
Canada. An ongoing collaboration with the San Francisco Exploratorium and its
Living Liquid display will be significantly enhanced as part of the Broader
Impacts. This installation is a large touch screen table that allows museum
visitors to make their own discoveries about phytoplankton diversity through
interaction with the model output. The software developed as part of this
project will be freely available, and visualizations of the results will provide
unique outreach tools.

This unique global modelling effort plans to incorporate multiple dimensions of
trait space: size, biochemical function, and adaptation to light and
temperature. The new model will be tested and constrained by compiling existing
and new empirical data sets. It will then be used to explore how community
structure and biogeochemical impact are controlled by the interplay of both
organism functional and size trait. In particular the model will be used to
explore how the diverse community structure is significant in regulating the
resilience of ecosystem structure and function to global change. The compiled
data, model, as well as theoretical frameworks will address the hypotheses: 1) a
model with multiple dimensions of traits will provide more realistic complex
community structures, with a size range within functional groups, and more co-
existence between functional groups; 2) community structure will be driven by
grazing control within functional groups, but nutrients supply rates will
control functional group ranges; 3) patterns of carbon export will be
significantly more complex when both size distribution of overlying communities
and ballasting by minerals such as calcium carbonate and opal are taken into
account; 4) climate change will lead to regionally varying patterns of size
shifts within functional groups or shifts between functional groups, and such
changes will lead to varying alterations to carbon export fluxes; and 5) the
inclusion of size will lead to more stable ecosystems in terms of productivity
and export to climate change perturbations.