* 1434799
* DMREF: High-Throughput Morphology Prediction for Organic Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Zhenan Bao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 900,000.00

DMREF: A High-Throughput Computational Morphology Prediction for Organic
Photovoltaics&lt;br/&gt;Zhenan Bao (Stanford), Vijay Pande (Stanford), Michael
Toney (SSRL)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: Organic
photovoltaic cells (OPVs) are alternatives to conventional solar cells as they
promise low-cost mass production combined with lightweight and flexible
applications. In particular, they offer a prospect to provide basic electricity
to the millions of people in rural areas of undeveloped countries who lack
access to the power grid. Many OPV materials have been reported in the
literature, but few have shown efficiencies greater than 8%. The key challenge
is to design materials that fulfill all the requirements. A typical OPV consists
of a donor and an acceptor blended together. Predicting the nanoscale morphology
remains one of the biggest challenge in predicting OPV performance. Therefore,
many material combinations and large processing parameter space (e.g.
donor/acceptor ratio, solvents, annealing conditions, film thickness) presently
need to be screened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project
aims at an integrated research plan for the high throughput morphology
prediction of OPV materials. A continuous feedback loop between theory,
synthesis and characterization will facilitate the exchange of results and
streamline the overall development process. A central theme of this project is
to develop high-throughput techniques for computational morphology calculation
and experimental characterization. The computational development takes advantage
of the massive computing power provided by distributed volunteer computing
networks. Pande will retool his massive Folding@home simulation engine (which
was originally developed for molecular mechanics/dynamics research on
biomolecules) to predict the bulk-heterojunction blend morphology for OPVs.
Folding@home has allowed Pande and coworkers to perform calculations that could
not be performed before, by allowing them to reach timescales that are thousands
to millions of times longer than would be possible by traditional means. Bao
will design synthesis routes to prepare model compounds for thin film
preparation and comparison with theoretically predicted morphology. Bao and
Toney will together perform optoelectronic, structural, and morphological
measurements on the compounds. The characterization will establish and employ
new high-throughput instrumentation. The experimental data, regardless of
positive or negative outcome, will be made available to the theory group where
it will be added to a collection of empirical data. The latter is utilized in
calibration schemes and provides the parameterization for many of the employed
models. Extending this data set will improve the related modeling efforts and
their predictive capacity. This in turn will lead to an adjustment of the
development processes. An extensive results and reference database will serve as
the hub for the information exchange between the three participating groups. The
vast amount of data accumulated in the course of this project will provide the
foundation for a better understanding of the molecular structure/morphology
correlations, and it will be an openly available resource for the OPV community.