* 1434707
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutional Arrangements and the Incorporation of Immigrant Populations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Omar McRoberts, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,215.00

Ethnic diversity is a common characteristic of urban environments and some
European cities have become "super diverse" over the last decade. In response to
this superdiversity, nations in Western Europe have created urban reception
offices for newly arrived migrants. It is in these reception offices that local
understandings of citizenship and incorporation are communicated and translated
through citizenship classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a social phenomenon, the
emergence of reception offices for the sake of incorporating newly arrived
immigrants speaks towards a shift in emphasis from the legal to the moral
dimensions of citizenship. In other words, in order for migrants to be
considered citizens, they not only have to obtain the appropriate legal
documents, but they also have to display "good moral character." Studies on
these aspects of citizenship are relatively scarce. Nevertheless, they are
important in order to get a better understanding of the theoretical categories
of citizenship and incorporation. It implies studying who is included in the
imagined community of citizens and who is not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation utilizes ethnographic research to investigate how newcomer migrants
are welcomed in practice in the bilingual and multi-institutional city of
Brussels, Belgium. Specifically, by comparing the French-speaking and the
Flemish-speaking welcoming practices, the study aims to understand how and why
new moral citizens are produced in an urban environment were there is no uniform
vision on the governance of newcomers. This research will thus shed light on the
micro processes whereby new moral citizens are produced as well as provide
insight into denationalized forms of moral citizenship. This is then
generalizable as information to advance theories of migration and integration
and becomes useful as evidence for developing effective strategies for
stakeholders involved in this process around the world.