* 1434326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interactions Between a Native Sedge (Carex nudata) and Physical River Processes: A Model of Coupled Biogeomorphic Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Patricia McDowell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,947.00

River restoration is currently the focus of enormous investment throughout the
West Coast, motivated by the imperative to enhance habitat for threatened
Pacific salmon populations. This research will contribute to these efforts:
Carex nudata, a native sedge that occurs throughout the West Coast, is
increasingly perceived as a facilitator of restoration goals, but land and river
managers lack a clear understanding of how it may alter channel morphology and
what environmental variables are critical to its viability. The proposed
research explores the interactions between C. nudata, a riparian sedge, and its
river environment. The research is distinguished by its aim to examine both
sides of this relationship: how the river's physical environment and flow
patterns drive C. nudata distribution, and how C. nudata then alters the
physical processes of the river. C. nudata caught the attention of investigators
in the Middle Fork John Day River where it has exploded in abundance following
the withdrawal of cattle grazing from river banks. C. nudata grows along the
edges of the low flow channel, on gravel bars, at the base of cut banks and as
islands, its dense root system allowing it to withstand strong flows. C. nudata
appears to be altering channel morphology in ways that enhance river complexity,
thus enhancing fish habitat and facilitating river restoration goals.

The investigators hypothesize that C. nudata facilitates the evolution of
compound channels in which C. nudata stabilizes a narrow low flow channel but,
unlike many plants, does not slow erosion of the cut banks, such that the
bankfull channel continues to move or widen. In some cases, this process is
hypothesized to lead to C. nudata patches at the base of banks "detaching" and
becoming islands, giving rise to multi-threaded channels. The investigators will
use multiple methods to examine these hypotheses. Changes in bank retreat and
channel bed erosion/aggradation will be examined using repeated topographic
surveys and erosion pins. Bank retreat and island formation will also be
examined with aerial imagery. Flow velocity patterns that may explain patterns
of erosion/aggradation will be examined with an Acoustic Doppler Current
Profiler. With regards to C. nudata distribution, the investigators hypothesize
that C. nudata patterns are driven by hydrological variables and sediment type.
These hypotheses will be examined with headwaters-to-mouth surveys for C. nudata
in three distinct river basins. Until the latter part of the 20th century, river
geomorphology focused solely on physical dimensions of river processes. Only
recently has vegetation been recognized as having significant effects on river
shape and form (Hughes 1997). Nevertheless, current studies of plant-river
interactions typically focus on one dimension of this relationship: i.e. either
the effects of the river environment on plant communities or the effects of
plants on certain physical processes. The proposed research follows Corenblit et
al. (2007) who emphasize the reciprocal nature of plant-river relationships and
propose the concept of biogeomorphological succession to describe the linked
development of river shape and form with riparian plant communities.