* 1434223
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Livelihood Strategies and Landscape Diversity Related to Agricultural Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* B. Turner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2016
* USD 14,994.00

Changes in the ways that people construct their livelihoods transform the
landscape, and landscape changes have implications for livelihoods. The often
complex relationships between people and the natural landscapes they inhabit are
the focus of scientific research designed to enhance more general knowledge, but
such research can have practical implications for decision making about
development endeavors. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
how agricultural development programs are transforming livelihood diversity and
landscape pattern in rural communities. Understanding interactions among changes
in landscape and livelihoods of rural populations is particularly important in
those locales where development programs and investors have turned their
attention to agricultural growth in this area. In this context, information
about the broader effects of agricultural growth can inform development agencies
as they seek to balance the tradeoffs among food production, poverty
alleviation, and environmental conservation. This is the case in the Morogoro
Region in Tanzania, where this project will take place, because interactions in
this region have posed challenges for the ongoing efforts of the U.S. Agency for
International Development's Feed the Future program and for the Tanzanian
government's Kilimo Kwanza [Agriculture First] strategy. This project will
contribute to these development efforts by gathering information about the
economic activities and needs of rural populations and by performing empirical
analysis of environmental data. Through close work with rural populations and
groups engaged in development activities, the doctoral student will identify new
opportunities for enhancing the resilience of rural communities in Tanzania and
in many other developing nations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While extensive research has been dedicated to
examining livelihoods and land use, little research has specifically addressed
this reciprocal relationship between space and livelihoods. Recent research has
suggested that space is central to livelihoods analyses and is essential to
understanding the processes that give rise to rural livelihood strategies. The
doctoral student whose dissertation research will be supported by this award
will examine an area where extensive agricultural change spurred by development
initiatives and foreign investment is underway. He will integrate research
methods from landscape ecology, land-change science, and sustainable livelihoods
research to examine the changes in spatial patterns of landscapes over the past
two decades as well as the changes in livelihood strategies related to these
development activities. Using satellite imagery, he will identify changes in the
spatial pattern of land use and land cover over time. He will conduct interviews
and gather survey data from smallholder famers to complement this analysis and
explain how agricultural programs have altered livelihood strategies and
resource use in the area. He also will interview representatives from
development agencies and other stakeholder groups to ascertain their perceptions
of the changes in the environment and the needs of rural populations. Through
this mixed-methods approach, the student will provide new understandings about
the complex relationship between changes in livelihood strategies and landscape
pattern as well as new insights into how development programs shape this
relationship.