* 1434432
* Collaborative Research: Robust Optimization of Rich Vehicle Routing Problems Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Panagiotis Repoussis, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 80,221.00

This project considers the utilization of a fleet of vehicles during freight and
service delivery operations, and aims to enhance the ability to optimize such
processes in view of operational uncertainty, such as uncertainty related to the
transportation network (e.g., traffic conditions, road closings or vehicle
break-downs), or uncertainty related to the delivery targets themselves (e.g.,
customer demands, time availabilities, or geographic locations). From a
practical perspective, failure to take into account uncertainty when making
operational decisions in this context may have significant economic and
reputational repercussions for operators, as slight changes in operational
conditions may lead even a carefully planned and "optimized" operation to become
highly suboptimal or outright infeasible. Furthermore, efficient optimization
and risk-management frameworks for vehicle routing operations, such as the one
developed in this project, can benefit the environment by reducing unwanted
side-effects of delivery systems such as traffic congestion and pollution
emissions. In addressing this important issue, this project applies and advances
the theoretical field of Robust Optimization (RO), which has emerged in the
scientific literature as a promising framework to optimize mathematical models
subject to parameter uncertainty. The project seeks to systematize the
application of RO in the context of mathematical models used for the
optimization of vehicle routing operations and to streamline the adoption of its
theoretical and methodological innovations by practitioners. The project further
impacts Education by providing training to graduate and undergraduate students
on issues of freight and service delivery operations, optimization methods and
algorithms, uncertainty quantification and analysis, and scientific computation,
as well as enabling STEM outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop an optimization framework for the systematic treatment
of uncertainty in rich Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs). VRPs consider a fleet of
vehicles and their optimal utilization in freight and service delivery
operations. Rich VRP settings particularly account for complicated operational
realities that are answered in practice. From a practical perspective, it is of
interest to design freight and service delivery systems that take into account
operational uncertainties, since failure to do so may lead to solutions that are
infeasible or highly suboptimal. The project applies the Robust Optimization
(RO) framework, which has not been considered much in the context of VRPs. The
framework seeks to optimize the problem in view of a "worst-case" scenario, as
dictated by an uncertainty set that is suitably selected to reflect the decision
maker's tolerance for risk and ambiguity. An RO-based approach can be
advantageous from a tractability viewpoint and does not require precise
distributional knowledge. The expected methodological contributions include the
development of (a) robust formulations, cutting planes, and efficient exact
solution approaches, (b) robust feasibility checks and efficient metaheuristic
solution approaches, and (c) associated uncertainty sets that are tractable,
practically relevant, and easily tuned according to risk tolerance. Furthermore,
we plan to compile comprehensive collections of new benchmark instances and
computational performance profiles, which will help to stimulate research
efforts in the area. Efficient rich-VRP optimization and risk-management
frameworks, such as the one developed in this project, can have an important
impact in the competitiveness, service quality and sustainability of companies
that adopt them. Furthermore, they benefit the environment by reducing unwanted
side-effects of delivery systems, such as traffic congestion and pollution
emissions. The project will further impact Education via providing training to
graduate and undergraduate students on issues of freight and service delivery
operations, optimization methods and algorithms, uncertainty quantification and
analysis, and scientific computation, as well as enabling STEM outreach to K-12
students.