* 1434714
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Synthesis of Colloidal Crystals Guided by Particle-Based Theory and Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* David Ford, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 539,484.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
collaborative research project will use a combination of theory, numerical
simulation, and experiment to discover and synthesize new crystalline materials
that can enable the manufacturing of metamaterials. Metamaterials have unique
periodic structures that can be used to manipulate electromagnetic or mechanical
energy. The materials will be formed from the self-assembly of colloidal
particles in suspension. This route to metamaterials is especially flexible,
because many kinds of interactions among the particles can be exploited to form
new crystalline materials. In addition, it allows better control over the
formation process, which can reduce defects in the resulting crystalline
structures. The results of the project will provide scientists and engineers
with improved tools for identifying colloidal systems of interest, predicting
stable crystalline structures, and guiding synthesis of the new materials.

Theory, simulation, and experiments will be integrated into a program to design
systems of colloidal particles that assembly into desired crystalline
structures. New theoretical and simulation methods will be developed to predict
stable and metastable crystal structures in colloidal systems, with a focus on
enhancing capabilities of classical density functional theory and applying
hyper-parallel tempering simulation methods. Experimental tools for measuring
and designing colloidal potentials and analyzing crystal structures will be
extended to binary mixtures. The focus will be on developing and measuring
suitable potentials for binary systems through the use of different particle
sizes and materials, doublets/dumbbells, and Janus configurations, and on
characterizing crystal structures using advanced confocal microscopy techniques.
The results will be used to design colloidal systems that assemble into desired
crystalline structures. Three specific platforms to be considered are solid-
fluid and solid-solid polymorphic transitions in binary mixtures of spherical
particles of different size and interaction potential, plastic to close-packed
solid transitions for doublet/dumbbell particles, and the formation of non-
close-packed structures for particles with orientation-dependent attraction
(Janus).