* 1435453
* Optimization in an Uncertain World: A Unified Framework for Optimization Models Involving Adversaries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Theodore Ralphs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 308,469.00

This project involves the modeling and optimization of decision processes that
unfold in stages over time. The explicit incorporation of time stages into
models of complex systems is one approach to accounting for an important feature
of real-world systems---the presence of adversarial entities whose potentially
detrimental actions in the future may disrupt plans being made in the present.
Such adversaries' can take the form of either difficult-to-predict random
processes (such as the weather or economic conditions) or direct competitors who
are actively seeking to disrupt operation of the system. Accounting for such
adversaries is challenging from a computational standpoint because it involves
implicit knowledge of all the ways in which the future might unfold as a result
of a given action. This work is to understand and mitigate the impact of this
complexity by developing techniques for compactly representing the effects of
uncertainty using sophisticated mathematical techniques, with which, for
example, one can intelligently determine a small set of "important'' scenarios
whose consideration will still allow for determination of an optimal decision in
the present that implicitly takes into account all possible future
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general class of optimization problems that
will be studied in this project are those in which the variables can be
partitioned into subsets whose values must be fixed in stages. The constraints
of later stages depend both on the values of variables fixed in earlier stages
and on the realized values of certain random variables. A key feature of the
general framework is that the variables in each stage may be controlled by
different decions-makers with different objective functions. This class includes
two important and challenging special cases - multistage stochastic programming
with recourse and multilevel programming. The features of these two classes are
complimentary and there is much to be gained by development of a unified
approach. The overall goal of this research is to develop computational methods
for such models, focusing in particular on the case in which there are discrete
variables.