* 1435178
* An Exploratory Study of Disaster Preparedness among Native American Communities in the United States
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Gary Webb, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2019
* USD 327,091.00

This study seeks to empirically measure disaster preparedness levels among
Native American communities in the United States. While past studies have sought
to measure preparedness at the individual, household, and organizational levels,
few have focused explicitly on the community level and none have looked
specifically at Native American populations. Thus, the research is
transformative in its aim to refine and extend existing disaster preparedness
frameworks while simultaneously broadening the field's horizon and reach through
the inclusion of a historically underrepresented group. In addition to measuring
preparedness levels, the study will also identify the major natural and
technological hazards faced by Native American communities; explore and describe
the structure of emergency management functions in those communities; and assess
the challenges they face in their efforts to implement various disaster-related
initiatives, such as the National Incident Management System and the National
Preparedness Goal. With the frequency, severity, and financial costs of natural
and technological disasters increasing, enhancing community resilience has
become a national priority and preparedness is one mechanism through which local
communities can strengthen their capacity to rebound from large-scale disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand disaster preparedness levels in
Native American communities and the challenges they face in their preparedness
efforts, this study employs a triangulated, mixed-method approach that
integrates survey research, focus group interviews, and geo-spatial analysis.
The level of analysis in the research is the community, which is a significant
departure from past studies, which have focused largely on individuals,
households, and organizations. Statistical tests will be performed to assess the
effects of numerous variables on levels of community preparedness, including
hazard exposure, past disaster experience, risk perception, and emergency
management capacity. In addition to the intellectual merits of the research in
terms of refining empirical measures of preparedness at the community level,
identifying factors that influence community preparedness levels, and focusing
on an understudied population, the findings of the research are also expected to
have important applied implications for emergency management practitioners and
other public officials responsible for preparing their communities for future
disasters and thereby enhancing societal resilience to a wide range of threats.