* 1435607
* Snapping Shells: Coupling Geometry, Dynamics, and Materials to Harvest Energy through Instability
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,11/30/2014
* Douglas Holmes, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 11/30/2014
* USD 294,590.00

When a structure snaps to an alternate shape -- like the inversion of an
umbrella on a windy day -- its structural and material integrity are often
permanently lost. Many soft structures, however, are able to reverse the change
between two shapes. This presents a fascinating opportunity to design dynamic
and adaptable engineering structures. The rapid leaf closure of the Venus
flytrap is an example of how snapping provides functionality in nature. This
award supports fundamental research on the mechanics of instabilities in
structures. In particular, it considers structures made of advanced and active
materials which are capable of converting deformation into energy. Its results
will help engineers design systems that use instabilities as a feature rather
than a fault, thereby enabling structures that easily and predictably change
shape over a short timescale, converting and storing energy in the process. Such
structures have applications in U.S. industries with needs for autonomous power
sources. Since snapping structures have been employed with great amusement in
the `jumping disc' and `popper' toys that jump with an audible pop, this
research will help increase public interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Many soft, slender structures are able to rapidly change between two
stable configurations by a snap-through elastic instability. This research will
establish the mechanical and geometric criteria for shell bistability. It will
determine the effect of shell geometry on the speed of snap-through, the post-
snap vibrations, and the rate of asymmetric-to-symmetric shell dissipation. The
effect of material properties will be examined to understand the self-actuated
snap-back of shells, structures that are temporarily bistable. The research team
will prepare shells out of an electrically active material. This will allow the
research team to conduct novel measurements of the in-plane strain in shells
during instability. These measurements will contribute important experimental
insight to the theory of shell structures. Finally, the dielectric elastomeric
shells will also offer a natural means for harvesting energy during the snap-
through deformation. The research team will further develop BLINK, the
innovative program that introduces students to the fast-moving science that our
eyes often miss. The program will culminate with students using the mechanics of
toy poppers as a way to study Newton's laws of motion. The implementation of
this program, and subsequent creation of relevant online video content, will
provide opportunities for students and the general public to realize the
importance of mechanics research in answering current technological challenges.