* 1435186
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing Quantitative Expertise in the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum (QEUBiC)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Katharina Wollenberg Valero, Bethune-Cookman University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 637,973.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Bethune-Cookman University
seeks to enhance undergraduate education in the biology department by developing
a curriculum that focuses on quantitative expertise. Students will be taught how
to work with large data sets to understand biological systems and to solve
problems in biology. Assessment metrics that integrate quantitative literacy,
scientific literacy and strategic learning will be developed as part of the
overall evaluation of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project
is to provide learning experiences for undergraduate biology majors to develop
quantitative and computational skills for biological discovery and analysis. The
project has two specific objectives: 1) to infuse data science competencies in
research-oriented courses and 2) to develop three new courses. The project will
infuse concepts of data flow, data analytics and data curation in a series of
five research-oriented biology core courses. The new courses will be in the
areas of bioinstrumentation, cloud computing and computational genetics.
Bethune-Cookman University will undertake critical activities to create an
adoptable model for core curriculum improvement in biology undergraduate
programs. These activities include development and assessment of course
resources and learning strategies; evaluation by students and faculty;
disciplinary education research by students and faculty; and dissemination.