* 1435785
* Complex Coronal Mass Ejection Structures and Associated Geo-effectiveness
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Noe Lugaz, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2020
* USD 335,587.00

The Sun is the ultimate driver of the physical properties of the entire
Heliosphere, and can cause severe perturbations to the near-Earth space
environment due to large-scale dynamic events taking place in the solar
atmosphere, such as Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs). Our society is becoming
increasingly dependent on technological assets that can be directly damaged by
these, so-called, space weather events. Consequently, predicting the occurrence
and detailed nature of such events is of critical importance to minimizing their
damage. The characteristics of CMEs that determine their impact at Earth can
change drastically if the CMEs encounter other large-scale structures on their
way through the interplanetary medium, such as other CMEs. Statistical studies
indicate that interacting CMEs, creating so-called complex ejecta structures,
are an important source for the most intense space weather events. This project
aims to investigate a multitude of ways in which these interactions can happen
and reveal the resulting complex ejecta characteristics and space weather
impacts. In turn, this will contribute towards better understanding and
predicting the formation of some of the largest geomagnetic
storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes significant science education
and public outreach components. The PI and other members of the proposal team
are contributors to the online website www.solarstormwatch.com, a website for
real-time prediction with citizen involvement. They will continue this
engagement as part of this project, amongst other through the development of
complementary materials for public dissemination, including 3-D visualizations
and multimedia materials. Funding is also included for the participation of
undergraduate students in the research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to carry out an in-depth study of complex
phenomena associated with multiple, interacting CMEs or CMEs interacting with
other solar wind streams, focusing on the physics behind the observed effects,
and their resulting geo-effective potential. This will be done through: (i) 3-D
numerical simulations with a state-of-the-art MHD code of idealized situations,
(ii) combined 3-D numerical simulations and data analysis of selected real
studies, and, (iii) analysis of in-situ measurements. Specifically, the ability
to generate white-light images and in situ measurements will enable the
inclusion of observational effects in the study when analyzing complex events
and the validation of the numerical findings by direct comparisons between
simulations and observations. The investigation will address the following
science questions: 1) What are the different manifestations of CME-CME
interaction observed remotely and measured in-situ? and what is their origin? 2)
How does the interaction of successive CMEs compress, accelerate, deflect and
rotate the CMEs? 3) What are the similarities and differences between CME-CME
interaction and CME-CIR interaction? 4) What makes complex ejecta and compound
streams so geo-effective?