* 1435611
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Accelerated Development of Next Generation of Ti Alloys by ICMSE Exploitation of Non-Conventional Transformation Pathways
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Rajarshi Banerjee, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,026.00

Non-technical Summary This DMREF research program aims to formulate an
integrated computational materials science and engineering (ICMSE) approach and,
consequently develop tools, to accelerate the development of new types of alloys
that most likely will have been missed by the traditional trial-and-error
method. This effort is an integral part of the national efforts under the
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) and the Integrated Computational Materials
Engineering (ICME) initiative. The successful implementation of these new
methodologies and design strategy for materials R&D will have a profound impact
on industrial exploitation of new materials and optimization of existing ones.
The provision of such ICMSE tools, applicable to an important class of widely
applicable structural materials, will have a marked impact on a broad range of
advanced technological areas including aerospace, transportation and energy.
Because future materials R&D activities, requiring substantially reduced time
and cost cycles, must integrate computational materials research with critical
experiments, the proposed program will directly prepare graduate students to
immediately contribute to the success of ICMSE in industry. Additionally, the
proposed training programs for researchers involved in materials development
will accelerate the implementation of the new methodology in industry, resulting
in very much increased effectiveness of our materials technologists. Regarding
educational outreach, the present DMREF program encourages high school students
with diverse ethnic backgrounds to enter science and engineering disciplines.

Technical Summary This research program involves the integration of
sophisticated computational models, at multiple scales, highly advanced
materials characterization techniques, and combinatorial and accelerated methods
for materials processing and property evaluation. Such a unique coupling will
undoubtedly raise significantly the state-of-the-art in the discovery and
development of new structural materials. Regarding the targeted material system
involved in the proposed program, i.e. titanium alloys, the focus is on the
exploitation of recently discovered non-conventional transformation pathways.
Thus, recent theoretical and experimental investigations suggest possibilities
of achieving extremely fine and uniform alpha+beta microstructures exhibiting
substantially improved properties through these non-conventional transformation
pathways including pseudo-spinodal decomposition and precursory phase
separation. Using an integrated computational materials science and engineering
(ICMSE) approach, the development of next generation of Ti alloys based on these
new and promising transformation mechanisms will be accelerated. For the first
time, alloy development will be led by computational modeling, mechanistically
informed and validated by critical experiments involving novel combinatorial
methods for materials processing and state-of-the-art characterization
techniques. The focus is on Ti alloys for structural applications in a broad
range of advanced technological areas including aerospace, transportation and
energy (petrochemical and nuclear). The outcomes will lead to a microstructure
simulator, a property simulator, and an alloy design simulator for titanium
alloys. An additional exciting aspect of this program is that the development
and application of this new methodology is expected to result in new science in
alloy design.