* 1435289
* RAPID: Computation of accurate binding energies of emerging organic contaminants on environmental and infrastructural interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Nathan DeYonker, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2016
* USD 49,937.00

Alexander&lt;br/&gt;1435289&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On January 9, 2014, Freedom
Industries in Charleston, West Virginia accidentally discharged approximately
10,000 gallons of chemicals, including 4-methylcyclohexanemethanol (MCHM), from
their storage tanks, an unknown portion of which then flowed into the Elk River.
On Tuesday, January 21, it was disclosed that about 7.3 % glycol ether (known a
PPh; propylene glycol phenyl ether) was in the "leaked fluids," as well. Before
anyone was notified of the chemical spill, it was at the intake of the main
water source for West Virginia American Water in Charleston. After discovering
the contamination, the State issued "A Do Not Use Order" for 300,000 people in 9
counties of West Virginia. A "Do Not Use Order" means not to drink the water,
and not to use the water for bathing or showering, cooking or clothes washing!
Essentially, all that the water is good for is flushing the toilet. Over the
next two weeks, residents of the affected areas were presented with conflicting
orders and large gaps in information by the State government, The Department of
Environmental Protection, West Virginia American Water, and Freedom
Industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project aims to investigate
quantum chemical computational methods to provide binding energies of all the
major crude MCHM and PPh ( a chemical that was not disclosed as present in the
spill until 1.5 weeks after the chemical release) components with simple models
of polymer surfaces used in domestic water systems (i.e. PVC and PE),
environmental interfaces prevalent in silts and clays (i.e. silicates and
carbonates), and materials used within water processing filtration (silica and
carbon). With the high-performance computing resources available to our Nation,
high-accuracy information about specific binding behavior of emerging
contaminants can be obtained essentially on-demand. The only requirement is a
well-validated model and knowledge of the particular calculations needed to
obtain this information. Our goal is to build these
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Build and test
useful chemical models of silica, calcite, polymer clusters, activated charcoal,
and/or other relevant surfaces where the released compounds may
adsorb;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Determine binding energies of previously
established organic contaminants (to calibrate our models with extant
experimental data) and crude MCHM and PPh with the surface
models;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Investigate and identify faster and cheaper
computational methods which give acceptable accuracy when compared to calibrated
data;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Examine the importance of treating solvation and
conformational complexity on the accuracy of binding energy
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID grant will lay the foundation for
development of models for accurate and predictive determination of binding
energies of future emerging contaminants with surfaces of environmental and
infrastructural importance. Our methods will be made available to the public
domain and will allow emergency responders to obtain on-demand and on-the-fly
estimates of the behavior of these contaminants and can help direct remediation
or prevention strategies on the ground in a timely manner in future incidents.