* 1435389
* Pilot of Southeast Regional PULSE (SERP) Institute for Inspiring and Supporting Department-wide Reform of Undergraduate Life Sciences Education
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Judy Awong-Taylor, Wofford College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2017
* USD 164,700.00

An award has been made to Wofford College to coordinate and evaluate the first
Southeast Regional PULSE (SERP) Institute, which will be held on the campus of
the University of Richmond from June 18-22, 2014. The Institute promotes the
mission of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE) to
stimulate whole departments to undertake the type of transformative changes
recommended in the report Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call
to Action (AAAS, 2011), so as to promote student learning of core concepts and
competencies, improve student retention in the sciences, and produce more
curious and scientifically literate citizens. In September 2012, the PULSE
founders from HHMI, NIGMS, and NSF appointed 40 Vision and Change Leadership
Fellows to pursue this mission, and the SERP Institute will be coordinated by
the 14 PULSE Fellows located in the Southeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
award funds the first Southeast PULSE Regional (SERP) Institute, which will host
teams from up to 20 colleges and universities, with at least 30% from minority-
serving institutions. The SERP Institute will begin with institutional teams
conducting a departmental self-assessment using the STEM Department Evaluation
Rubric developed by the Leadership Fellows, and participants will plan their
attendance at subsequent workshops based on the areas they identify as
unfamiliar and/or high priority for improvement. Each team's administrator will
be encouraged to attend sessions led by administrators who have supported
reform, and these leaders will share advice, successful strategies, and ways to
overcome common obstacles. Prior to departure from the Institute, each team will
develop an action plan to target improvements in their program for the next
academic year and beyond. The project's assessment plan, developed in
partnership with the American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS), will
include feedback on the structure and function of the Institute as well as
evaluation of each team's progress based on data collected before, during and
after the SERP Institute. Teams will also be encouraged to use particular
assessment tools to evaluate student learning outcomes and dispositions as well
as changes in faculty teaching practices and attitudes. Each team will provide
an update on their progress during a poster discussion session at the annual
meeting of the Association of Southeastern Biologists (which occurs ten months
after the Institute), and the southeast PULSE Fellows will present the results
of this project at the annual Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
Commission on Colleges (SACS-COC) Conference, the AAC&amp;U STEM Conference,
disciplinary conferences, a publication in CBE-Life Sciences Education, and via
the http://www.pulsecommunity.org website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education support of
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Education: A Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.