* 1435460
* Self-Assembled Protein Cage Nanoreactors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Trevor Douglas, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 195,546.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1104849 PI: Douglas, Trevor ORG: Montana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Self-Assembled Protein Cage
Reactors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Protein shells that sequester
enzymatic reactions are found in diverse organisms and may provide blueprints
for functional biomaterials design. The aim of this proposal is to design and
develop a new class of bio-inspired materials utilizing the directed confinement
of enzymes within viral protein cage assemblies. This is a powerful strategy for
combining biological supramolecular architectures with catalytic function. While
the encapsulated enzymes retain their native catalytic activity the protein cage
can be separately optimized as a container that can shield the enzymatic cargo
from its environment, enhance stability, and modulate enzymatic activity.
Viruses have emerged as transformational and significantly useful materials and
the PI has been a leader in the development of this field. The proposed research
will enhance the use of viral capsids for synthetic applications of bioactive
materials. Such materials will dramatically extend biotechnology's range of
applications, allowing biocatalysts to be used in contexts very different from
their evolved cellular role. This work will further the use of biological
systems for the inspiration, design, and synthetic implementation of functional
materials. The specific aims of this work are to: (1) develop programmed co-
assembly of a viral capsid with a range of enzymatic cargos including lactonases
for disruption of quorum sensing in bacterial biofilms, (2) evaluate the effects
of molecular crowding on the activity of the encapsulated enzymes, and (3) co-
assemble multiple enzymes into the viral capsids that can chemically communicate
with each other to create bio-inspired nanoscale reactors. The enzymes of
interest have been selected for their extreme thermal stability commensurate
with their use as materials building blocks. In addition, this effort will train
a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in this inherently green
chemistry approach to nanomaterials synthesis that incorporates the remarkable
materials properties already utilized by nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: This research has the potential to enable significant progress in the
emerging fields of biomaterials, nanotechnology, and nano-manufacturing.
Biological control mechanisms used by natural systems will be exploited to
create novel materials and devices exhibiting genetically programmed synthesis
in a biomimetic approach to making functional materials. The abundance and
unique qualities of these new viral materials will enable researchers to develop
new active bio-materials. Integral to this project is an innovative science
outreach program developed by the PI that creates meaningful outreach
experiences where undergraduate and graduate students learn to communicate
effectively their research and their passion for science. The outreach
infrastructure that has been developed and piloted provides a template for
faculty and students to effectively share their interest in science through
hands-on, inquiry-based events. Outreach events will take place in K-12 local
public schools and with rural and predominantly Native American schools. They
include site visits as well as hosting on-campus events. The fundamental goal of
this outreach program is to place active researchers in the front line of
community interaction. These events ultimately result in basic science
exploration, introduction to current research trends and local projects, and
most importantly, contact with active researchers who become role models and
recruiters of the next generation of learners.