* 1435269
* Stability characterization of liquid metal batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Oleg Zikanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2019
* USD 299,262.00

#1435269&lt;br/&gt;Zikanov, Oleg&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan - Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage is required to reconcile the Nation's
demand for uninterrupted energy supply, when utilizing wind or solar energy that
are supplied intermittently. A liquid metal battery is a device that can be a
promising solution to this problem. The decisive factor, however, for
transitioning this technology to the marketplace is the development of a flow
instability that shorts the circuit in the battery. The objective of this
proposal is to control this instability by advancing understanding of the
physical mechanisms responsible for it. The broader impact of this proposal,
therefore, is quite important. The proposal also offers a strong education plan,
including an international component. The proposed work will contribute to
establishing a competitive research environment at the University of Michigan -
Dearborn, an institution focused on serving the metropolitan Detroit community.
A graduate and several undergraduate students will be involved in the research
and results of the project will be incorporated in
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal with a very fundamental
objective that can eventually have an impact in energy storage and in
manufacturing. It is focused on hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic instabilities
that develop in a liquid metal battery, and it proposes a theoretical and
computational analysis leveraged with experiments that will be carried out with
an international collaborator. The project advances understanding of complex
instabilities in multi-layer fluid systems with electromagnetic effects. The
instability mechanisms, some of which are poorly understood, will be analyzed as
fully coupled phenomena in the framework of a realistic and practically
important system. Advanced techniques of numerical stability analysis will be
developed.