* 1435912
* SusChEM: Designing Small-Molecule Replacements for Fullerenes in Organic Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Samson Jenekhe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 318,880.00

Principal Investigator: Samson Jenekhe Number: 1435912 Nontechnical Description

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-free energy
on earth. Solar cells for conversion of light to electricity based on organic
polymers integrated into a photovoltaic (PV) device offer a potentially low-cost
route for renewable electricity production. The proposed research will enable
the development of a new generation of low-cost solar cells based on organic
materials. Specifically, this project will design and synthesize of a novel
class of organic materials with electronic properties that seek to replace
expensive fullerene materials used as the electron acceptor component of organic
polymer based solar cells. The new materials, and solar cells made from them,
have the potential to be more durable, inexpensive, and manufacturable at a
large scale compared to current materials for organic polymer based solar cells.
With respect to education and broadening participation, the project will provide
for the training of graduate and undergraduate students in chemistry, chemical
engineering, nanotechnology, and materials science and engineering. The project
will enable the principal investigator to continue a longstanding history of
facilitating the involvement of undergraduate, women, and minority students in
research.

Technical Description

This project will study a novel class of organic materials with electronic
properties that seek to replace expensive fullerene materials used as the
electron acceptor component of organic polymer based photovoltaic devices
(OPVs). Fullerene derivatives, particularly [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl
esters (PCBMs), have traditionally dominated fundamental studies of the
photophysics, carrier dynamics, blend morphology, and charge
transport/extraction for OPV materials. This project seeks to determine if non-
fullerene small-molecule or discrete oligomer electron acceptor materials such
as tetraazadifluoranthrene diimide can be rationally designed and experimentally
realized with charge photogeneration and photovoltaic properties that are
superior to fullerene-PCBMs. The project will focus on new n-type organic
semiconductors based on a three-dimensional non-planar oligomer motif. The
intrinsic electron transport and charge photogeneration properties of the new
n-type oligomers will be investigated, and OPV devices incorporating the new
acceptor oligomers with test donor polymers will be fabricated and characterized
with respect to their morphology, photovoltaic performance, and charge transport
properties. The observed structure-property-performance relationships of the
n-oligomer/p-polymer OPV systems will be used to validate the rational molecular
design approach. The difference in molecular geometry of the proposed n-type
oligomers (3D non-planar and non-spherical) relative to the well-studied
fullerenes is expected to result in new material morphologies that may lead to
improved photoconversion in n-oligomer/p-polymer blends, and thus advance
fundamental understanding of charge separation, transport, and collection in OPV
devices. With respect to education and broadening participation, the project
will provide for the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
chemistry, chemical engineering, nanotechnology, and materials science and
engineering. The project will enable the principal investigator to continue a
longstanding history of facilitating the involvement of undergraduate, women,
and minority students in research.