* 1435241
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Chemoresponsive Liquid Crystals Based on Metal Ion-Ligand Coordination
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Robert Twieg, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 603,622.00

DMREF: Collaborative Research: Chemoresponsive Liquid Crystals Based on Metal
Ion-Ligand Coordination

Non-Technical Description: Computer-based methods that can predict materials
properties have the potential to transform the current materials design paradigm
into one based on integrated "cycles" of computation, experimentation and data
analysis, thereby substantially accelerating materials development while
decreasing costs. This DMREF project seeks to advance this vision through the
formation of an interdisciplinary team with deep insight in computational
chemistry (Mavrikakis), synthetic organic chemistry (Twieg) and physical
property measurement (Abbott). The team will tackle the challenge of
accelerating deployment of promising classes of chemically-responsive materials
that are based on liquid crystals (LCs). In addition to addressing fundamental
scientific questions related to the design of chemically functionalized LCs and
interfaces, the project will advance the enormous technological and societal
potential of these materials as the basis of new classes of sensors and
actuators that can, for example, be used in the context of environmental
monitoring of climate change, detection of toxic industrial chemicals or
chemical warfare agents, and measurement of volatile gases in breath as an
indicator of disease. The multi-disciplinary environment created by this DMREF
project will also contribute to the training of a next generation workforce
fully versed in the new materials deployment paradigm that integrates
computational chemistry, synthesis and property characterization to rapidly
design and realize functional materials. The project will be leveraged by the
investigators to develop new university-level educational materials as well as
new programs for public outreach efforts and engagement of underrepresented
groups. Members of this DMREF team have a record of entrepreneurism; students
and postdoctoral fellows engaged in this project will be provided with
opportunities to participate in entrepreneurial activities. All of the efforts
of the group will be integrated by an approach to data management that is
designed also to interface to key US national databases and thus contribute to
the Materials Genome Initiative national infrastructure by providing unfettered
access to data and metadata for the broader scientific and industrial community.

Technical Description: Laborious and slow experimental efforts over the past
decade have demonstrated the promise of chemoresponsive liquid crystals (LCs) in
the context of sensing one important class of chemical targets
(organophosphonates). The principles, however, are far more general and thus an
opportunity exists to design chemically tailored LCs and interfaces that respond
selectively to many other classes of target molecules. This DMREF project will
address this broad opportunity by integrating cycles of computation (performed
at several levels, called Generations), organic synthesis of novel mesogens and
physical property evaluation to accelerate the timeline for design of LC
materials that respond selectively to societally important chemical species such
as HCN, (CH3)2CO, HCHO, O3, CO, NH3, NO, ClCN, CO2, NO2 and H2O. A key aspect of
the intellectual merit of this DMREF project lies in the development of new
knowledge that will enable integration of computation, experiment and data
analysis for the design of functional materials. The close feedback between
computation (at the level of electronic structure), synthesis of functional
mesogens and property characterization, which will lead to advances in each
methodology, will define new principles for the design of chemoresponsive liquid
crystalline materials based on metal-ligand coordination. It will also provide
fundamental advances in our understanding of hierarchical design of chemically
responsive materials, interfacial ordering of soft matter, and the use of metal
ion-ligand coordination interactions to control the interfacial ordering of LCs.