* 1435261
* New Methods for Studying the Time-Dependent and Steady-State Behavior of Markov Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Brian Fralix, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 242,600.00

Markov chains are mathematical objects used to model random phenomena, such as
customer flow within a call center, traffic flow on a highway, as well as
protein production within a cell. This project focuses on the development of new
methods towards studying, for such a phenomenon, both its long-run behavior, as
well as its behavior over moderate time frames. If successful, these methods
will provide new insight into the behavior of systems that can be modeled with
Markov chains, and could lead to improved methods toward managing such systems.
For example, such information could be used to set staffing levels in a call
center: a study of its long-run behavior may suffice when customer arrivals are
relatively stable over time, but a study over shorter time scales is needed if
the arrival rate fluctuates too often. This research plan will provide training
for graduate students to prepare them for research-based careers in academia,
government or industry, and the results of this study will be published in the
appropriate scholarly journals, and incorporated into graduate courses taught by
the PI. The methods developed within this project will build on new "random-
product representations" recently discovered by the PI, and will be used to
analyze both the stationary distribution, as well as the time-dependent
distributions of a Markov chain. Examples of the types of chains that will be
studied include hysteretic reflected Brownian motion, various types of two-
dimensional random walks on the nonnegative quarter-plane, Markovian queueing
systems under the influence of an external Markovian environment and other
`matrix-geometric' models, as well as other types of Markovian queueing networks
not included within the above-mentioned types of chains. The results of this
study should lead towards understanding what characteristics of a Markov chain
lead to stationary distributions having a "product-form-like" structure. Having
such insight should prove useful, as such a distribution often yields
analytically tractable performance measures that aid in further understanding
the behavior of the underlying Markov chain. The techniques used in this study
should draw from many concepts found within the theory of random walks, and the
theory of Laplace transforms should play a large role in the study of the time-
dependent behavior of the above-mentioned types of Markov chains.