* 1435602
* Interannual Variability of Winter-Spring Temperature in the Middle Atlantic Bight:  Linkages to Large-Scale Atmospheric and Oceanic Changes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Ke Chen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2017
* USD 768,030.00

The coastal ocean off the northeastern U.S. encompassing the Gulf of Maine and
the Middle Atlantic Bight is a dynamic and highly productive system supporting
economically important commercial fisheries. The ocean temperature in this
region experienced an extreme warming event in 2012, which greatly impacted the
coastal ecosystem and commercial fisheries. Therefore, understanding year-to-
year variability of ocean temperature in this region, especially extreme change
such as the 2012 warming, would provide the scientific basis necessary for
ecosystem management and thus has important economic impacts for the commercial
fishing industry. This project investigates the roles of large-scale atmospheric
and oceanic processes in the interannual variability of winter-spring
temperatures in the Middle Atlantic Bight, with a focus on the extreme warm and
cold years. The investigators have been discussing this research with several
scientists in the National Marine Fisheries Service and plan to share the
results with them. The investigators will also be in close contact with the
Commercial Fisheries Research Foundation in Rhode Island to communicate the
results to the commercial fishing industry in the Northeast and participate in
workshops dealing with management implications of the recent extreme interannual
variability in the Northeast. Finally, the investigators have been, and will
continue, presenting their work to the general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this research is to better understand the mechanistic links
between the large-scale atmospheric/oceanic processes and the interannual
temperature anomalies on the Northeast U.S. Shelf, with an ultimate goal of
identifying useful predictors of extreme temperature events. Recent studies
indicate that Arctic warming increases the north-south amplitude of the polar
jet stream and reduces its wind speed, resulting in slower-moving weather
systems in mid-latitude regions and a higher probability of extreme events. A
recent case study identified a direct link between the atmospheric jet stream
variability and ocean temperature anomalies on the shelf in the Middle Atlantic
Bight during the unusually warm winter of 2011-2012. This research will extend
this case study from one winter to a longer period with multiple extreme
warm/cold winter-springs to address the following scientific questions. What is
the response of the coastal ocean in the northeastern U.S. to such extreme year-
to-year variability of the climate system? To what extent is the interannual
variability of temperature in the Middle Atlantic Bight due to the large-scale
atmospheric forcing, e.g., jet stream variability? What are the relative
contributions from oceanic processes versus atmospheric processes? To better
understand the relative importance of the atmospheric and oceanic processes, a
detailed local ocean heat budget analysis will be carried out based on both the
observations and numerical simulations. The investigators will then explore the
links between the interannual variability of each heat budget term associated
with the temperature anomalies over the continental shelf and the large-scale
atmospheric/ocean circulation. The analysis will focus on the winter-spring
period, when inter-annual anomalies are the largest. This is also the seasonal
time frame when the extreme warm anomaly in 2012 and the record-low temperatures
in early 2014 occurred.