* 1435853
* The Mechanics of Lung Development in Three Different Species
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Celeste Nelson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Morphogenesis is the process by which simple tissues fold into the complex
shapes of mature organs, such as the branching airways of the lung. This tissue
folding is caused by patterns of mechanical forces (pushing and pulling the
tissue) that are induced by the expression of different genes throughout the
tissue. The final shapes of the lungs of mammals, birds, and reptiles are vastly
different, suggesting that the mechanical forces and genes expressed are
different as well. This award supports fundamental research to define the gene
expression changes and mechanical forces that fold the airways of the lungs in
three different species (mouse, chicken, and alligator). Understanding what is
unique and what is conserved between lungs of different species will provide
insight into how different organs evolved over time. Additionally, being able to
manipulate the expression of genes to control organ development is critical for
tissue engineering applications for the biomedical and healthcare industries.
Results from this research will therefore have economic and societal benefits
for the United States. This research combines techniques and insights from
several disciplines, including developmental biology, mechanobiology, and
biomedical engineering. This interdisciplinary approach will help broaden the
participation of underrepresented minority groups (at the undergraduate and high
school levels) and enhance outreach interactions with the lay
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammals, birds, and reptiles have evolved
different anatomical strategies for the conduction and diffusion of air through
the lungs, which must result from differences in airway morphogenesis in the
embryo. The objective of this project is to define and quantify these
evolutionary morphogenetic differences. The research team will use three-
dimensional traction force microscopy, real time confocal imaging, and continuum
mechanical modeling to quantify the forces exerted during morphogenesis of the
distinct airway architectures of embryonic mice, chicks, and alligators. In
parallel, high-throughput gene expression analysis will be conducted for each
morphogenetic movement in each species. These analyses will reveal the distinct
gene expression changes that control mechanical forces within the epithelium as
it folds lateral branches (mammals and birds), bifurcating branches (mammals and
reptiles), and anastomosing airways (birds and reptiles). This research adopts
for the first time the principles of mechanobiology within the framework of
evolutionary developmental biology to create a comprehensive physical
description of tissue morphogenesis, and will uncover the basic mechanical
differences underlying lung development in different species.