* 1435488
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Fundamental Study of Impacts of Manufacturing Processes and Automation on Material Properties of Composite Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Yu Zhou, SUNY Institute of Technology Utica-Rome
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Fiber reinforced polymer composites, by virtue of their high stiffness and high
strength-to-weight ratio, are increasingly used in a wide range of industries
such as transportation, marine, wind energy, aerospace, and construction.
Automation of composite laminates manufacturing is instrumental in meeting the
growing demand for composites and promises to revolutionize composite-dependent
industries. However, the few existing layup automation systems are prohibitively
expensive and are not fully optimized for product quality. This Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research aims to
establish a systematic framework that will assist in solving the critical
challenges in automation, monitoring and control for composite laminates
manufacturing. The framework will establish the necessary fundamental
understanding of relationships among composite constituents' properties,
principal composite manufacturing processes and automation, and fabricated
product quality. The new knowledge will help increase productivity and quality
of composite laminates manufacturing. Results from this research will assist
U.S. composite manufacturers and benefit the U.S. economy and society. This
GOALI research employs a multi-disciplinary approach (involving solid mechanics,
composites engineering, control theory and robotics) to achieve the research
objectives. In addition, it incorporates research goals with industrial needs
and helps broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and
enhance engineering education.

This research will fill the knowledge gap in the complex interactions between
fabrication parameters and laminas' temperature- and time- dependent properties
(viscoelasticity and tackiness) and their impact on the properties of composite
laminates (i.e., a stack of multi-directional laminas arranged to exhibit
specific mechanical properties). The research team will (1) create multi-physics
manufacturing process models to predict impacts of process parameters on
manufacturing induced defects and final product quality, and conduct experiments
to verify the models; (2) gain an understanding on the roles of quality
inspection and optimal control in increasing productivity through manufacturing
dynamics simulations; and (3) obtain the knowledge on how to control the
physical process to ensure the product quality as a guideline for manufacturing
practices.