* 1435371
* Collaborative Research: Strategic Planning of Internet Services in the Presence of User-Initiated Innovations: Implications for Network Neutrality
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Qiong Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 102,724.00

The Internet provides information services that are essential to society and
generate great economic benefits. An important contributing factor for the
explosive growth of the Internet has been the absence of usage fees, which has
been made possible in large part by Best Effort Service, the historical service
on the Internet. The absence of usage fees has made the Internet a breeding
ground for new user-created applications. However, as the network has matured,
it has become clear that Best Effort Service alone cannot meet users`
expectations and also the Quality of Service requirements of newer, more
sophisticated applications. These new requirements makes it necessary to
consider usage fee-based Managed Services with guaranteed service performance.
Whether allowing network providers to offer these services will negatively
affect Best Effort Service and the character of the Internet are issues at the
heart of the current Network Neutrality debate. This research project employs
the methodology of Operations Research to address this important policy
question. In the core are models and analysis of network providers' profit-
maximizing planning in which the influence of user-initiated innovations plays a
central role, which is new in analytic treatments. While short-term profit
incentives may induce a provider to degrade Best Effort Service to push
consumers to pay the usage fee and use the Managed Services, doing so suppresses
the creation of user-initiated applications, which generate future demands, and
thus new profit opportunities. By integrating the latter effect into the
planning model, the study can inform network providers about the importance of
Best Effort Service for their long-term prosperity. The investigators will also
analyze how regulators can create a policy environment to leverage this effect
to align private providers' profit incentive with public interest. If these
goals are achieved, the research project will help society to avoid the
difficult choice on Managed Services, and allow the Internet to benefit from an
expanded scope of services while sustaining Best Effort Service at a high
quality level.

This project will model and analyze business strategies of network service
providers and investigate resulting implications for public policies that are
pertinent to Network Neutrality. The first step will be to develop a multi-
period planning model for providers to maximize profit by controlling
infrastructure investment, bandwidth allocation, and service pricing. In a
departure from previous approaches, the model features a feedback loop in which
the provider's profit-maximizing decisions interact with user-initiated
innovations. The strength of such interactions depends on many factors, such as
price elasticity of demand, users' intolerance to delay, and positive network
externality. By solving this extended planning model and studying optimal
solutions, the dependencies will be quantified and conclusions will be drawn
regarding how the presence of user-initiated innovations affect network
providers' incentive for preserving the quality of Best Effort Service in
various scenarios. The model and analysis will then be applied to two case
studies on Sponsored Data Service and Content Delivery Networks, respectively.
The results will be used for empirical validation and refinements to the model.
The discussion on public policies will focus on enhancing the incentive for
offering Best Effort Service that is gained from user-initiated innovations. The
treatment will be carried out in a multi-provider environment. In such an
environment a provider can benefit from innovations that are the results of
other providers' high-quality Best Effort Service, even though the quality of
its own Best Effort Service is sub- standard. To counter the resulting free-
rider problem, different policy alternatives derived from experiences with past
network systems and approaches taken by other countries will be analyzed.