* 1435578
* Biological and Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office (BCO-DMO):   A System for Access to Ecological and Biogeochemical Ocean Data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Danie Kinkade, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2020
* USD 9,600,001.00

The Earth System is changing rapidly as a result of growing pressure from human
activities that are changing important components of the System. The oceans act
as the flywheel of the climate system, playing major roles in the climate, the
water cycle, the carbon cycle, global energy budgets, and sea level rise. Study
and understanding of this component of the Earth System requires integrated
multi-disciplinary investigations with access to oceanographic data of
biological, chemical, geological, and physical origin. The Biological and
Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office (BCO-DMO) was created to serve PIs
funded by the NSF Biological and Chemical Oceanography Sections and the Division
of Polar Programs Antarctic Organisms and Ecosystems Program as a facility where
marine biogeochemical and ecological data and information developed in the
course of scientific research can be managed and made publicly available. BCO-
DMO provides integrated chemical, biological and physical data inventories from
a number of large and intermediate-sized programs, as well as single
investigator projects. BCO-DMO also provides scientific investigators the
opportunity to explore complex and multifaceted datasets and supports cross-
disciplinary collaboration to address pressing environmental questions,
problems, and challenges that are exacerbated with the increasing pace of
climate change. The BCO-DMO collection of datasets contributed by researchers
funded by NSF and others is a publicly available resource accessible via the
BCO-DMO website. BCO-DMO supports synthesis and modeling activities, reuse of
oceanographic data for new research endeavors, availability of "real data" for
classroom use by teachers and students at K-12 and college level, and provides
decision-support field data for policy-relevant issues. BCO-DMO outreach
activities include participation in community training courses and workshops
both national and international, and help to foster long-term collaborative
partnerships between data management professionals and research investigators.
These outreach activities reduce community barriers by fostering the sharing of
ideas among synergistic, but otherwise independent research groups. BCO-DMO
actively participates in the exchange of knowledge at oceanographic and
informatics meetings, an important mechanism by which standards development and
adoption occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the BCO-DMO data
management repository is to manage existing and new datasets from NSF funded
individual scientific investigators and collaborative groups of investigators,
and to make the data available online. The BCO-DMO data management system is
composed of a metadata database and the distributed client-server JGOFS/GLOBEC
data system, plus text-based and map-based user interfaces and support for
machine clients to access the information and data available from the
repository. The office works with principal investigators and other data
contributors to support all phases of the data lifecycle; maintain an inventory
of projects, deployments, and datasets; generate standards-compliant metadata
records as required by federal agencies; promote compliance with the NSF Ocean
Sciences data policy; ensure submission of data to national data centers for
archive; support and encourage data synthesis by providing enhanced data
discovery and access systems; facilitate interoperability among distributed data
repositories; and facilitate regional, national, and international data and
information exchange. The office participates in the development and use of
open-source, standards-based technologies that enable interoperable data systems
to exchange data and information that will foster next-generation research in
all disciplines. As the analysis of ocean processes becomes more and more
sophisticated, multidisciplinary data integration will also grow more complex.
BCO-DMO fosters information sharing and is committed to being a fundamental
component of the ocean science research infrastructure without which the goals
of existing and future ocean research programs cannot be met.