* 1435947
* Targeted Infusion Proposal: Course Development for a 21st Century Smart Grid Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Pawan Tyagi, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 398,345.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) will implement a project entitled: Course Development for a 21st
Century Smart Grid Workforce. The Smart Grid courses to be developed at the
certificate and the bachelor degree levels will provide students the cross-
disciplinary knowledge and skills required to design, implement, deploy and
manage Smart Grid technologies and fill the gaps between the utility workforce
of today and the Smart Grid's workforce needs of tomorrow. Senior engineering
students will develop an educational Smart Grid Simulator with the functionality
and attributes typical to renewable energy resources. This simulator will be
made available to benefit other educational initiatives on Smart Grid
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to address the shortage of
qualified workforce and Smart Grid specialists by focusing on three objectives:
1) to develop introductory to advanced Smart Grid courses and experimental
resources to prepare students with interdisciplinary knowledge and skills for
preparing the future Smart Grid technology workforce, 2) to develop short
courses to help to address the knowledge gap of the current utility workforce,
and 3) to inform citizens and educators about Smart Grid technology and its
impact on society, the environment, the economy, and career opportunities. The
courses will be an integral part of a renewable energy minor at UDC. The project
aims to establish the University as a premier training center for the energy
workforce in the area of Smart Grid technology.