* 1435430
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Student Teacher Interaction and Learning
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Karen Kozlowski, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 8,846.00

SES-1435430&lt;br/&gt;Karolyn Tyson&lt;br/&gt;Karen Kozlowski
&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina- Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation research will examine how first grade students from
different racial and socioeconomic backgrounds learn how to "do" school. In
other words, it will examine what first graders think success in school is and
what kinds of learning behaviors they do in order to achieve academic success.
Education aims to provide equal opportunity for upward mobility to students; yet
for decades, racial inequality has persisted in achievement outcomes at every
level of the educational experience. To more effectively combat these
inequalities, it is critical to understand how and why racial inequalities grow
at some of the earliest stages in children's schooling. Drawing from two
theoretical frameworks, cultural capital mis/match and teacher bias, this
project will examine 1) what kinds of schooling strategies are necessary for
success 2) how students and teachers view those strategies similarly or
differently 3) how students develop their sense of what it takes to be
successful 4) how students make sense of interactions with and messages from
their teachers 5) how teachers interact with, assess, and evaluate students on
the basis of their skills and 6) how these interactions vary by race. To examine
these themes, this project uses ethnographic observations of four racially
diverse first grade classrooms, as well as semi-structured interviews with
teachers, parents, and students in those classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research contributes to scholars' understanding of two leading explanations of
the racial achievement gap by providing more complete definitions and
descriptions of what contemporary cultural capital mis/match or teacher bias
look like in classrooms and ultimately, which perspective may explain more of
the achievement gap. Beyond their intellectual contributions, the results of
this project will provide insight to educators about how and why students of
different backgrounds perform differently in their classrooms. It will also
provide parents and students a more explicit understanding of teacher
expectations and how to "do" school in ways that maximize chances for academic
success. Findings will be disseminated through project participants and school
districts, as well as through scholarly articles, presentations, and
publications for the general audience interested in educational practice,
outcomes, and inequality.