* 1435372
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Materials engineering of chromonic and colloidal liquid crystals via mathematical modeling and simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jorge Vinals, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 335,171.00

This research project is at the intersection of the fields of physics of
nonlinear phenomena, applied mathematics, nonlinear analysis, and computation.
Knowledge of liquid-crystal-based suspensions is currently advancing quite
rapidly, motivated by applications in materials science as well as in biological
systems. At a fundamental level, and in contrast with the disordered nature of
normal suspending fluids, nematic order in a liquid crystalline matrix leads to
long range elastic interactions either among colloidal particles or with
bounding walls, resulting in a variety of unexpected phenomena. Furthermore,
order in the matrix is distorted by the suspended particles, resulting in
unavoidable topological defects that must move with the particles. On the one
hand, the existence of structure in the liquid matrix affords new opportunities
for flow control, processing, and suspension stability. At the same time, and
for the same reasons, efficient engineering of these systems requires major
advances to our current understanding of simple fluid colloids. From proposals
for new display technologies and nanofluidic devices to more fundamental
questions about the mechanisms of clustering and de-clustering in systems of
particles, new experimental findings call for major modeling and analysis
efforts. For example, studies of electrophoresis in structured media can
facilitate related efforts in biology to model and control nano-fluidic
transport as well as contribute towards understanding of motion of cancer cells
and their clustering in tumor metastasis. This project addresses these important
challenges through the formulation, analysis, and simulation of variational
models of liquid crystalline colloids that allow for the presence of defects.
Technology transfer is another component of the proposed research. Improved
understanding of liquid crystal anchoring and defect dynamics will allow for
higher resolution, faster display devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
aims to develop a predictive theory of transport in suspensions within an
anisotropic liquid crystalline matrix, including electrostatically charged
particles and ions. The particles can have arbitrary shapes, be rigid or soft,
charged or electrically neutral, or be domains of the isotropic-nematic phase
transition (chromonics). Analysis and computation will be used to explore both
static and time dependent problems. Primarily variational methods will be
employed, either within energy minimization for static problems or within the
minimum dissipation principle for time dependent problems. Novel theoretical
aspects include comprehensive models of colloidal systems in structured media
that incorporate elasticity of the nematic matrix, surface anchoring, electric
field, ions, and flow and their interplay. The relative importance of these
effects will be established via the feedback between the modeling and
experimental components of this project. A significant feature that determines
the behavior of nematic liquid crystalline colloids is that the suspended
particles are accompanied by topological defects in the nematic matrix. As
singular structures, defects are inherently difficult to handle from a
mathematical point of view, however they must be incorporated into any
physically correct model. The principal challenge and contribution of the
proposed work is formulation, analysis, and simulation of variational models of
liquid crystalline colloids that allow for the presence of defects. Among the
questions to be addressed are those of modeling of observed nonlinear
electrophoresis and particle levitation, investigation of nematic domains in
isotropic lyotropic chromonic liquid crystal, and modeling of the experimentally
observed motion of disclination curves accompanied by negligible or no flow.