* 1435056
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Marine Cycling of Bioactive Trace Metals in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2016
* USD 328,737.00

In this project, a group of investigators participating in the 2015
U.S.GEOTRACES Arctic expedition will study the chemistry and regional
distribution of seven trace metals in the Arctic Ocean: iron, manganese, zinc,
cadmium, copper, nickel, and cobalt. These so-called bioactive metals are of
special scientific interest because of their role in multiple biogeochemical
processes including biological production of the sea and the planetary cycling
of carbon and nitrogen. Like other multinational initiatives in the
International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions. This study in
particular would contribute to our understanding of the sources and sinks of
these seven bioactive metals as well as examine their interaction with
biological processes. The project will focus on two major overarching research
questions: (1) What are the sources and sinks for micronutrients and
macronutrients in the Arctic? And (2) How does bioactive trace element nutrition
influence productivity and species composition in the Arctic, and conversely,
how do biological processes influence the cycling of these metals? In terms of
broader impacts, the PIs on this project will be actively involved in
educational outreach efforts, and the research team itself will include two
postdoctoral researchers and a graduate student. The team leaders also plan to
publish a children's ocean education book based on the expedition with the aim
of generating next-generation excitement about modern ocean
science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WIth regard to technical specifics, the
research team will measure the dissolved seawater phases of the bioactive metals
Fe, Mn, Zn, Cd, Cu, Ni, and Co, the dissolved stable metal isotopes 56Fe, 66Zn,
and 114Cd, and the chemical speciation of Co. The recent development of methods
for multi-element and multi-isotope analysis methods, in conjunction with the
high-resolution sampling of the GEOTRACES program, make it possible to
efficiently produce this dense dataset of metals and metal isotopes. This will
be a team-based approach to achieve comprehensive duplication for analysis of
the key parameters of dissolved metal concentrations. Each investigator will
further conduct specialized additional measurements of metal isotopes and
dissolved Co (which has unique analytical challenges) and Co speciation.
Interpretation of these rich datasets would will be directed toward
determination of sources and sinks as well as their ecological stoichiometry, in
collaboration with other U.S.GEOTRACES participants measuring synergistic
parameters. Together, this Arctic Ocean bioactive trace metal dataset is
expected to provide an important contribution to the understanding of
micronutrient roles in Arctic biogeochemical processes. These results should
also be highly relevant to research studies of the ancient ocean, in which
trace-metal analyses are commonly used to trace a wide variety of processes
including paleo-ocean circulation and biological productivity. Finally,
understanding the sources and sinks for elements in the modern ocean is key to
predicting how the concentrations of bioactive elements might vary in a changing
future climate.