* 1435923
* Physics-Based Framework for Computational Simulation of Reinforced Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Gianluca Cusatis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 281,664.00

The recent American Society of Civil Engineers report on the assessment of
infrastructure condition resulted in an overall grade of D+, which is rather
unsatisfactory. Long-term aging and deterioration of structures pose a
significant threat to structural resiliency in the event of natural and man-made
hazards. Reinforced concrete structures are difficult to model analytically
because of interaction between concrete and reinforcing bars. Hence, the
overarching goal of this project is to improve the capability of the engineering
community to analyze reinforced concrete structures computationally by
establishing a large-scale physics-based computational framework for the
simulation of infrastructure. With accurate computational simulation models it
would be possible to simulate deteriorating agents such as corrosion, cracks,
chemical attack on concrete etc. This research will advance the understanding of
failure mechanisms of aged concrete structures. The rigorous mathematical and
computational developments involved in the research will provide an ideal
training platform for graduate students and will bring opportunities for
educational advancement in the civil engineering undergraduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate analytical modeling of failure
behavior of quasi-brittle materials and structures in presence of long-term
deterioration is a complicated problem that is still unsolved. Reliable
simulations require accurate descriptions of various meso-scale phenomena, which
are not taken into account by available phenomenological computational models.
Meso-scale (the scale of coarse aggregate particles in concrete) models capture
these meso-scale features of failure but they are extremely intensive from a
computational point of view. Based on a recently formulated discrete model
called the Lattice Discrete Particle Model (LDPM), effective multi-scale
techniques suitable for up-scaling discrete systems will be developed in this
research. The main contribution of this project to the knowledge base will be
the formulation and validation of a multi-scale framework for the simulation of
reinforced concrete (1) accounting for the most common long-term deterioration
mechanisms, e.g., freeze-thaw cycles, alkali-silica reaction, shrinkage and
creep; (2) including a bond algorithm to couple the concrete model with steel
reinforcing bars and their expansive effect associated with steel corrosion;
and, finally, (3) featuring multiple scale algorithms for the simulation of
reinforced concrete frames.