* 1435484
* Analysis and Optimal Design of Aquatic and Atmospheric Vehicles That Use Biologically Inspired Propulsion and Control Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Muhammad Hajj, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Biolocomotion refers to the methods that creatures use to move through fluids or
across terrain. For life scientists, studying biolocomotion can clarify the
relationship between the physiology of a creature and the physical laws that
govern its movement. For engineers, studying biolocomotion can improve modeling
and design tools that are used to create advanced vehicles and mobile robots. A
perennial challenge for vehicle designers is the fundamental tradeoff among
size, weight, and power, a tradeoff that the natural world has resolved in
myriad, fascinating ways. Besides being extremely efficient in their use of
stored energy, many creatures exhibit astonishing degrees of control authority
and maneuverability. This award supports fundamental research to discover new
methods for integrated optimal design of both the geometry and movement of
biologically inspired aquatic and atmospheric vehicles. Civil and commercial
applications of these engineered systems range from the mundane (such as
unobtrusive traffic monitoring) to the futuristic (such as aquaculture,
pollination, or pest control). Moreover, the modeling and design tools developed
under this effort can be used to better understand natural swimmers and flyers,
feeding a virtuous cycle of knowledge flow between the life and engineering
sciences. The educational program will support interest in biolocomotion with
formal courses and informal, publicly available tutorials that visually
demonstrate biophysical applications of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric control and generalized averaging
theory can enable integrated optimal design of the morphology and gaits of
biologically inspired aquatic and atmospheric vehicles. The approach requires
dynamical system models that are general enough to represent a large class of
systems but have a structure that is amenable to analysis. The research team
will investigate the use of underactuated mechanical system models for
biological and biomimetic motion, validating these models through comparisons
with diverse examples from biology. The team will then construct a taxonomy of
design optimization problems for biomimetic locomotion and address a selection
of compelling problems as illustrative examples for use in visualizations and
tutorials. The research focus will be on the origin and nature of control
authority in biological or biomimetic systems that move by periodically
modulating their internal shape. For a large class of system models, one may
simplify the nonlinear, time-periodic dynamics using first or higher order
averaging theory. Control authority may then be inferred from the symmetric
product vector fields that define the given system's time-averaged dynamics.
Analysis of these vector fields reveals the role that morphology and input
waveforms play in determining the system's overall motion. The analysis and
design tools developed under this research program will therefore enable the
optimization of geometric and control parameters for biomimetic or biological
motion, where the moving agent is modeled as an underactuated mechanical system.