* 1435745
* Structured Composite Materials with Variable Adhesion Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kevin Turner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 381,323.00

Proposal 1435745&lt;br/&gt;Structured Composite Materials with Variable Adhesion
Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of applications for materials
that have the ability to adhere strongly to a surface under certain
circumstances, and to exhibit weak adhesion in other circumstances. Materials
with variable adhesion are needed for applications such as integrated circuit
fabrication, solar cell manufacturing, medical tapes, and climbing robots. While
adhesion at an interface can be altered through external forces such as
temperature or magnetic field, a much simpler design is to design materials with
variable adhesion that can be altered depending on the direction of the applied
force. This award supports fundamental research that will enable the design and
fabrication of structured composite materials that offer the ability to
significantly vary adhesion by changing the direction of loading applied to the
adhered interface. These composite materials with variable adhesion have uses in
manufacturing, healthcare, and consumer products, thus this research will
benefit U.S. industry and the economy. This award will also result in the
training of students in several disciplines, including mechanical engineering,
microfabrication, polymer processing, and materials science. This training in
key engineering areas will help to enhance the technical workforce and improve
U.S. competiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed composite materials
provide the ability to significantly alter the effective adhesion of an
interface by changing the loading direction. While the basic principles of these
materials have been demonstrated through preliminary experiments and modeling,
fundamental research is needed to establish an understanding of the relationship
between the processing, structure, and adhesion properties of structured
composite materials. This research will use analytical and computational
mechanics models to investigate the relationship between the structure of the
composite and the failure behavior of the interface. Experiments will be
performed to characterize the adhesive and constitutive properties of the
constituent materials of the composites as input for the models. A combination
of microfabrication and polymer molding techniques will be used to fabricate
structured composite materials that will then be extensively characterized under
various loading conditions. The combination of modeling and experiments in this
research will lead to new fundamental understanding of structured composite
materials and will enable the rational design of materials with variable
adhesion.