* 1435309
* Template-based Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Optical Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* William Dennis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 255,001.00

Metamaterials are artificial media composed of engineered sub-wavelength
structures, which cause them to have fascinating new electromagnetic properties
that are not usually found in nature. They could be used as high performance
antennae, perfect absorbers, super-lenses, cloaking devices, etc. The response
wavelengths associated with the underlying structures are a function of size,
shape, composition and lattice arrangement. Although there has been great
progress in shifting the response of metamaterials from the microwave frequency
regime to the optical frequency regime over the past 10 years, there are still
many challenges to overcome before "metamaterials" become practical materials
for optical applications. This award will focus on studying an inexpensive,
accessible, and large-scale fabrication process to construct three-dimensional
optical metamaterials. Discoveries from this project will be disseminated to
technical as well as general audiences through publications, and incorporated
into classroom teaching. The project will include strong and sustained education
programs involving both undergraduate students with diverse ethnicity and
regional K-12 students. A metamaterial structure will be fabricated through the
combination of glancing angle deposition and two-dimensional self-assembly
methods. Novel design and fabrication of three-dimensional metamaterials,
especially chiral metamaterials, will be explored both numerically and
experimentally. The research team will take advantage of both high-performance
electromagnetic modeling and advanced nanofabrication and characterization
methods to create and optimize novel nano-architectures for optical
metamaterials. Unique optical metamaterials, such as vertically aligned split
ring arrays, Swiss roll arrays, and single helical/double helical arrays, etc.,
will be designed and their fabrication conditions will be determined. It is
expected that these structures will demonstrate negative index properties in the
near infrared and visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum, and that
helical structures will exhibit strong electromagnetic chirality in the near
infrared-visible region. The use of these structures in electromagnetic
cloaking, anti-cloaking, and super-lenses will be explored both theoretically
and experimentally.