* 1435205
* Collaborative Research: Changes in ecosystem production and benthic biodiversity following the widespread loss of an ecosystem engineer
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brenda Konar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 303,195.00

In many ecosystems the presence of a single dominant species can modify the
physical conditions of the environment and alter patterns of biodiversity,
nutrient cycling, and primary production. Losses of these "ecosystem engineers"
can have profound impacts to how ecosystems function. Coastal kelps provide
excellent examples of organisms whose structure modifies the physical
characteristics of their habitats (light, nutrients, water motion) and supports
enhanced biodiversity. The kelp forests in the coastal waters of the Aleutian
Archipelago have suffered large-scale declines over the past several decades.
This project will examine how these losses impact patterns of ecosystem
production and biodiversity using a combination of techniques ranging from in
situ benthic chambers and shipboard incubations to remote sensing using
satellite imagery. The results will provide an understanding of how such events
may impact this and other ecosystems. This project will support graduate
students and will introduce the public to the Aleutian ecosystems in a series of
videos. The investigators will also work with a San Diego high school teacher to
integrate project findings into classroom activities, and they expect to involve
a teacher in their field program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
ask two highly integrated questions: 1) How do the widespread losses of kelp
forests impact benthic productivity across the Aleutian Archipelago? 2) How do
the widespread losses of kelp forests impact benthic biodiversity and community
structure across the archipelago? To address these, the investigators will
estimate changes to productivity at ten islands where they have historic data on
seaweed community composition and estimates of kelp canopy cover. They will use
in situ benthic chambers placed in both kelp forests and urchin barrens to
measure plot-scale patterns of net ecosystem productivity (NEP), and shipboard
incubations to examine net primary productivity (NPP) for the dominant
macroalgae. Data for individual species rates of NPP will be scaled by their
biomass and combined with in situ plot-scale benthic chamber experiments of
whole communities to estimate NEP at the islands visited. These estimates will
be scaled up to calculate NEP across the entire archipelago by first
extrapolating results from the study sites to entire islands, and then across
the archipelago. They will also estimate broad-scale patterns in production by
characterizing water column irradiances across the archipelago and modeling NPP
using species-level relationships between irradiance and photosynthesis.
Coupling these with estimates of water column irradiance and community
respiration will allow modeling of NEP across this region. Benthic biodiversity
will be assessed using diver surveys and shipboard benthic trawls. Following
these activities, satellite remote sensing of the kelp canopies dating back to
the 1980s and the investigators' own historical data on benthic macroalgal
abundances at these and other islands will be used to estimate the temporal and
spatial patterns of change across the archipelago.