* 1435783
* Rapid and Scalable Manufacturing of Graphene Electrodes for Next Generation Lithium-ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Walczyk, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The next generation of Lithium-ion batteries for all-electric vehicles as well
as portable electronics devices will require breakthrough improvements in both
energy and power density. In order to achieve such improvements radically new
materials concepts for the anode and cathode will have to be developed and
manufactured in a scalable and cost-effective manner. One such material concept
is that of graphene-based electrode materials. However traditional manufacturing
processes for graphene electrodes are not viable due to lack of process
scalability and mass manufacture. The objective of this project is to develop
novel approaches to overcome these challenges and enable the scalable and cost-
effective manufacturing of graphene-based electrode materials. This can lead to
new battery technologies which in addition to portable electronics such as cell
phones, laptops and tablet computers could also play a central role in next
generation wireless communication devices, stationary storage batteries,
microchips and in next generation hybrid and all-electric vehicles.

To address mass scalability of the graphene electrode manufacturing process, two
new graphene oxide deposition approaches will be explored. These include an
electric-field driven process called electroplating and one fluid flow-based
process, namely ultrasonic spraying. Furthermore, using a photo-thermal
reduction process, a highly porous graphene electrode will be formed. To
demonstrate process scalability, a web-based continuous (roll-to-roll)
deposition process for graphene paper manufacturing will be developed. This will
involve designing, prototyping, and testing an experimental test-bed. Once
operational, the test-bed will be used to explore the effect of process
variables and conditions on various key performance metrics such as yield and
throughput. The structure, properties and performance of the graphene electrodes
produced by the proposed scalable manufacturing process will be characterized
in-depth to confirm that it provides the breakthrough improvements in energy and
power density that were observed in preliminary lab-scale testing.