* 1435077
* Integrated Structures for Multimode Ambient Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Matthew Bryant, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2018
* USD 295,000.00

Harvesting energy from the environment can allow wireless electronic devices to
operate indefinitely. This project is for the development of a flexible,
multifunctional structure that can generate electrical power from both incident
sunlight and ambient wind flow. Such a device could be an ideal power source for
wireless sensors or mobile robots in areas where hardwired power is unavailable
and battery replacement is costly or impractical. Combining wind and solar power
takes advantage of the two major sources of ambient energy and would allow the
energy harvesting system to operate both day and night. The technology developed
here will benefit society and the environment by offering a new approach for
creating self-reliant sensing devices that does not rely on short-term and
environmentally hazardous consumable batteries. These sensors could provide
structural health monitoring for bridges and buildings, collect weather or
ecological data in remote areas to help understand global climate change,
improve security around critical infrastructure, or even provide early warnings
about natural disasters like floods or Tsunamis. In addition, the low profile
and integrated nature of a wind and solar hybrid energy harvester could also be
useful on rooftops and exteriors in urban areas to power sustainable buildings.
In addition to its technical objectives, this project will train graduate
students and provide mentored summer research experiences for underrepresented
undergraduate students through a multi-university program among North Carolina's
public colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will create an
integrated, solar and wind hybrid energy harvester that offers unparalleled
simplicity and robustness, low mass, and a negligible increase in geometric
footprint compared to a solar array alone. The envisioned device will consist of
an array of slender, ribbon-like, flexible thin film solar cells that are
laminated with piezoelectric patches. These piezo-solar ribbons will be mounted
in longitudinal tension and exposed to a transverse wind flow, creating a fluid-
elastic system that will experience aeroelastic limit cycle oscillations (LCO)
over a broad range of wind speeds, causing them to vibrate in the flow like
plucked guitar strings. These vibrations will produce cyclic strains in the
piezoelectric layers, generating an alternating current that can be rectified
and used to charge storage elements or power electrical loads. The solar cells,
on the other hand, will directly transduce incident sunlight into direct
current.