* 1435147
* Wave Breaking Across the Inner Shelf and Nearshore Regions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* James Kirby, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 363,133.00

The inner shelf region, in which the wind and wave-driven upper ocean comes in
contact with, and is modified by, the bottom, represents a still poorly
understood region of the ocean. The region is important as a pathway for the
transport of materials between the surf zone and shelf, and represents the area
where surface waves begin to play a role in the mobilization and distribution of
sediments. Wave breaking in this region plays an important role in momentum
transfer from atmosphere to water column and likely provides a strong control on
the form and strength of mean currents which would shift as the nature of
breaking events changes with depth. The project will develop a variety of
modeling approaches to study wave breaking in the range of depths from deep to
shallow water, building on this team's recent experience in high resolution
Large Eddy Simulation of breaking events in laboratory settings, and on ongoing
work in developing wave resolving and wave-averaged models for dispersive wave
processes. The project will also contribute to the training of a Ph.D. student
and K-12 outreach activities through laboratory visits and informational
scientific talks to the public, web broadcasting of public lectures, and special
events at open houses at the University of Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will focus on a transition from the topology of deep water breaking, where
a vortex ring spanning the underside of the breaking event is generated, and
shallow water breaking, where the breaking event is laterally bounded by regions
in which vertical vortex cores ending at the surface and bottom are generated.
The transition between these two topologies will be denoted as a principal
demarcation between intermediate depth and shallow water behavior. In
particular, the transition region represents a shift from deeper water, with
breaking making a significant contribution to horizontal vorticity generation,
to shallow water, where breaking primarily contributes to predominantly vertical
vorticity at length scales corresponding to breaking wave crest geometries. This
effort will be organized in three main topics: (1) detailed examination of
breaking of finite crest lengths in a range of relative water depths spanning
from deep to shallow water, using high resolution calculations based on a
combined Large Eddy Simulation and Volume of Fluid model previously verified for
intermediate depth breaking in wave flume experiments, (2) development of
extensions to an existing non hydrostatic, wave-resolving, shock-capturing
solver for surface wave breaking to improve the representation of intermediate
and deep water wave breaking, for application to larger spatial scales, and (3)
development of an impulsive force model for individual breaking waves, together
with a stochastic formulation for the distribution of breaking events in space
and time, which spans the depth range from deep to shallow water. This last
model will be implemented in a non hydrostatic, wave-averaged model for use in
describing wave-driven processes in the full range of water depths from
shoreline to inner shelf.