* 1435861
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced Flow and Shear of Irregular Grains and Powders
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephen Teitel, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 115,000.00

CBET 1438077/1435861&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental and
computational studies of the flow of granular materials composed of mixtures of
particles. The project will investigate the surprising observation that adding a
small number of needle-like particles in a granular material composed of
spherical particles significantly increases the ability of the material to flow.
For very small particles, the investigators hypothesize that the needles and
spheres stick together in a way that results in an effective particle shape and
size that enables the material to flow more easily. For larger particles less
likely to adhere, other lubrication mechanisms are suspected. A series of
experiments will be conducted to show how the particle size and the mixture
ratio affects flow characteristics. The experiments will be complemented by
numerical simulations that can predict the arrangements of particles and
correlate particle arrangements with flow behavior in well-defined model flows.
The project will provide an environment for graduate and undergraduate students
to participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the
flow and shear of mixtures of particles consisting of spherical and irregularly-
shaped particles. Experiments will be conducted with canonical geometries, such
as hoppers, cylindrical column collapse, and annular-Couette shear, to study the
flow behavior as functions of particles size and mixture ratio. The experiments
will tie together several quantities currently used to quantify flow, including
the static and dynamic angles of repose, dynamic deflection modulus and
flowability index. Computer simulations will study shear in dense systems of
rods and mixtures of rods and spheres to reveal the fundamental mechanisms for
enhanced flow whether it is changes in the effective morphology or segregation-
induced lubrication.