* 1435829
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Graphene Based Origami and Kirigami Metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Paul McEuen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Campo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,199,999.00

Graphene-Based Origami and Kirigami Metamaterials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Description: The paper arts of origami and kirigami ('ori' = fold,
'kiri' = cut) provide a powerful framework to design responsive and tunable new
materials. For example, a simple series of cuts can turn a sheet of paper into
an accordion-like spring, or a sequence of folds can convert it into a swan.
Indeed, many biological tissues develop folds and cuts reminiscent of origami
and kirigami that endow them with distinct and useful mechanical properties. The
seemingly limitless number of forms that can be created speaks to the potential
of exploiting such design principles for materials beyond paper. This project
will extend these design ideas to the microscale using graphene, an atomically
thin two dimensional material, as the nanoscale paper foundation. Lithographic
techniques borrowed from the semiconductor industry will be used to pattern the
graphene, and a variety of approaches will be employed to create folds, all
chosen to realize a specific mechanical property. The focus is on creating
mechanical 'metamaterials' - materials whose properties reflect the patterns of
folds and cuts rather than the properties of the underlying paper. With room
temperature applications in mind, the theoretical effort will focus on the
crucial role of thermally-activated Brownian motion in determining the material
properties of graphene monolayers with cuts and folds. This paper-arts-inspired
strategy has the potential to fundamentally transform the way materials are
designed for the micro-world and could find applications in areas ranging from
micro-robotics to mechanical sensors and actuators that mimic biologically
'active' tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Using lithographic
techniques, graphene sheets will be perforated and cut to create modules with
prescribed mechanical properties. These modules will be assembled to create
mechanical meta-materials whose response to applied stresses, temperature, and
other environmental signals can be tailored. The project focuses on the
following interrelated goals: (a) Experimentally testing current predictions for
graphene's thermomechanical properties and their dependence on geometry and
boundary conditions; (b) Creating a library of mechanically programmable modular
units out of cut graphene sheets; (c) Designing meta-materials assembled out of
the basic graphene kirigami and origami modules to achieve a particular
function; (d) Creating a theory of thermally excited atomically thin membranes
with cuts and folds, to guide experiments and improve understanding of the basic
principles. These goals will form the cornerstone for building a general-purpose
open source design tool that can be used by engineers to assemble materials out
of the origami and kirigami based modules, simulate their mechanical properties,
and allow for iterative design work flows. This tool will be used to promote
rapid materials discovery, development, and property optimization of atomic
membrane origami and kirigami metamaterials.