* 1435866
* Collaborative Research: Coordinated Real-Time Traffic Management based on Dynamic Information Propagation and Aggregation under Connected Vehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Srinivas Peeta, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 110,000.00

Advances in wireless communication technologies have enabled communications
among vehicles, and between vehicles and the associated infrastructure. These
technologies can be significantly leveraged to enhance the safety and
performance of current roadway transportation systems. This study seeks to
understand how traffic information spreads among vehicles and between vehicles
and the roadside infrastructure, and how that data can be efficiently collected
and used to develop real-time traffic management strategies, so as to improve
safety, mobility, and sustainability. Further, through the education programs at
Illinois Institute of Technology and Purdue University, this study will aid the
development of new skills for the workforce that can leverage these emerging
technologies for innovative applications, and broaden research and educational
opportunities for under-represented groups.

This study seeks to develop real-time coordinated traffic management strategies
built upon dynamic information propagation and aggregation in connected vehicle
systems. To achieve this goal, it investigates three interrelated research
challenges: (i) information propagation dynamics, (ii) distributed information
aggregation, and (iii) coordinated real-time traffic management. These methods
bridge advanced scientific knowledge in computer science, transportation
science, and operations research. Further, they adapt well-known and/or emerging
concepts in traffic flow theory, network modeling, wireless communication,
optimization theory, stochastic modeling, and algorithm design. The novelty of
this research is highlighted through the holistic consideration of the unique
features of a connected vehicle system: a distributed system with dynamic
information propagating therein. At a fundamental level, the study outcomes will
contribute to scientific knowledge and technologies for connected vehicle
systems in the following aspects: (i) a better understanding of the interactions
between information dynamics and traffic flow dynamics; (ii) the opening of a
new research venue related to distributed information processing methods; and
(iii) the understanding of real-time traffic management through the coordination
of individual vehicle knowledge and centralized traffic control.