* 1435065
* Cutting and Shuffling: A New Dynamical Systems Paradigm for Mixing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Umbanhowar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 379,307.00

Engineers and scientists generally think in terms of three means to mix fluids,
which can be easily explained in terms of mixing cream in coffee. Diffusion
disperses the cream in a cup of coffee via molecular collisions; chaotic
advection, or stirring, generates thin layers of coffee and cream that merge;
turbulence mixes the coffee and cream by strong agitation or vigorous stirring.
However, the simple technique of cutting and shuffling, much like what takes
place in shuffling a deck of cards or mixing the colors of a Rubik's cube, is
also a means of mixing that is commonplace. However, it is not well understood
in the context of engineering systems such as mixing powders and granules for
pharmaceuticals, plastic resins, and chemicals. This award supports the
development of a formal mathematical framework to predict mixing by cutting and
shuffling that is validated by computational and experimental results. The
theory is inspired by abstract mathematical concepts, but is motivated by
systems for blending and mixing bulk particles or granules, a common process in
the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. The research links fundamental
mathematics and practical applications while training the next generation of
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While molecular diffusion,
chaotic advection, and turbulence as mixing mechanisms have long been studied,
mixing by cutting and shuffling is not well explored or understood. This award
centers on a relatively new mathematical approach that describes cutting and
shuffling known as Piecewise Isometries (PWI). The idea is to apply PWI concepts
to mixing as well as to connect PWI with traditional dynamical systems
approaches. The objective is to develop and utilize PWI within a dynamical
systems framework to predict mixing by cutting and shuffling in 2D and 3D
geometries with eventual applications to practical mixing systems. The
development of the 3D dynamical systems framework will be informed by the mixing
of granular materials, leading to an integrated theory inspired by abstract
mathematical concepts but connected to practical applications of cutting and
shuffling. The mathematics of PWI will be integrated into the dynamical systems
toolkit, while complementary experiments and simulations will be used to confirm
the applicability of the theoretical approaches to a model granular mixing
system. The merging of new mathematics, dynamical systems approaches, and
physical applications could result in an entirely new paradigm for understanding
and predicting mixing.