* 1435590
* Quantification of  Wind-Driven Surface Water Transport Process for Aircraft Icing Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 291,000.00

PI: Hu, Hui&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1435590&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will explore in detail the conditions that lead to icing on aircraft
wings. The flow of water, ice and air around the wings of an airplane will be
observed with an experimental technique that will be developed as part of this
proposal. The experimental facility is rather unique for a US academic
institution. In addition to fundamental knowledge on the process of icing,
understanding and predicting this process can lead to both safer and cheaper
operation of aircrafts. Connections to local science and math teachers and
outreach activities for K-12 schools are also proposed. The PI proposes to
develop a new aircraft icing and demo experimental module that would be used in
outreach activities to attract young students to engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the PI is to develop a novel technique
to quantify the unsteady surface water transport process driven by boundary
layer airflows over ice accreting airfoil/wing surfaces leading to safer and
more efficient operation of aircrafts in icing conditions. This new experimental
technique (Digital Image Projection Sensing, DIPS) is based on structured light
triangulation, which is similar to stereovision techniques that provide 3D
images, but it involves replacing one of the cameras for stereo imaging with a
digital projector. If successful, the proposed DIPS technique will be a non-
intrusive technique capable of achieving instantaneous measurements of thickness
distributions of surface water droplet/rivulet flows (i.e., unsteady surf ace
water transport process) over ice accreting airfoil/wing surfaces. This will
provide the foundation to address challenging problems involving multiphase flow
interactions with solidification. The effects of the surface properties (e.g.,
hydrophobicity and thermal conductivity) of aircraft wings on the surface water
transport and ice formation will be studied in detail.