* 1435820
* DMREF/GOALI/Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Simulations and Experiments to Develop Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Joost Vlassak, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Description: The increasing demand for higher performing materials
across many fields requires the development of ever more complex materials. In
this project a novel materials discovery methodology will be developed based on
advances in combinatorial computational thermodynamics and experimental
techniques. Bulk metallic glasses will be taken as example materials because of
their technological potential - they can be considered high-strength metals that
can be formed like plastics - and their suitability for the development of a
general methodology. Many alloys - on the order of thousands - will be
synthesized and characterized simultaneously. The ability of these alloys to be
deformed, a property that correlates with the glass forming ability, will be
measured experimentally. The crystalline phases competing with the glassy phase
will also be characterized. These crystalline phases will be compared with
atomic modeling results considering the energy of many possible crystalline
phases. Since direct modeling of the glass forming ability is not possible from
first principles, correlations will be established between the experimental
glass forming ability and the competing crystalline phases from atomic modeling.
The development of such a methodology and correlation through this research will
accelerate the pace of discovery and deployment of advanced materials.
Specifically for bulk metallic glasses, the potential development of
technologically relevant alloys, particularly those that are based on Cu or Al
can be expected to have a lasting impact on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This objective will be
realized through an integrated approach of combinatorial ab-initio simulations,
combinatorial synthesis of sputtered composition spreads, and high-throughput
characterization methods. To massively parallel synthesize complex alloy systems
comprising ~1,000 alloys, this research uses combinatorial magnetron sputtering.
Compositional libraries will be characterized using specific high-throughput
methods for measuring liquidus temperature, formability, thermal, and structural
properties. Within such an approach a vast amount of experimental and
computational data will be generated, which will be data-mined to identify
correlations. Rather than trying to directly simulate glass formation, the
strategy will be to integrate experiments and computations to understand which
structural and energetic aspects of the liquid and competing crystalline state
best correlate with glass forming ability. Identifying correlations is a key
aspect of the research and these correlations will be used to search for new
glass forming compositions through combined computational and experimental
means.