* 1435771
* Collaborative Research: Distributed Solution Algorithms for Large-Scale Multi-Stage Stochastic Programs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Burhaneddin Sandikci, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

Many important decision problems in areas such as energy, finance,
manufacturing, telecommunication, transportation, logistics, and health care are
difficult to solve because they are characterized by uncertain outcomes when
decisions are made, and furthermore the decisions and subsequent outcomes occur
repeatedly, in multiple stages over time. Solving such complex problems easily
exceeds the state-of-the-art capabilities of current desktop computers. To
overcome this issue, typical methods discard or aggregate problem data, thereby
losing information that may be critical. This award supports fundamental
research to develop, evaluate, and implement a comprehensive methodology for
optimizing such large-scale multi-stage problems under uncertainty by using a
distributed computing environment. The need for this research is evident from
the lack of generally applicable efficient solution methods for such problems.
The results of this project will be directly applicable to sequential decision-
making problems under uncertainty that are widely encountered in public and
private sectors, therefore benefiting the U.S. economy and society. This
research will positively impact engineering education by promoting the
participation of underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research consists of theoretical and methodological advancements for solving
large-scale multi-stage stochastic programs. Specifically, it involves designing
bounding schemes and exact solution algorithms to solve such problems in a
distributed fashion. There is a lack of efficient solutions methods,
particularly when mixed-integer decision variables are involved. Existing
methods typically make restrictive assumptions such as convexity. This
methodology is broadly applicable, as it does not assume any special problem
structure. Moreover, an inherent feature of this approach is its natural fit
into a distributed computing environment, which makes it amenable to solving
truly large-scale instances. In addition to developing methods, the research
team will implement and evaluate their performance using large-scale instances
on a state-of-the-art high-performance computing cluster.