* 1435661
* Towards Energy Efficiency Through Low-DO Nitrification:  Extending our Knowledge of Ammonia-Oxidizing Organisms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Daniel Noguera, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,205.00

1435661&lt;br/&gt;Noguera&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards Energy Efficiency Through
Low-DO Nitrification: Extending our Knowledge of Ammonia-Oxidizing
Organisms&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In wastewater treatment activated sludge is a
common process. Activated sludge is the single largest energy user because of
the amount of oxygen that is needed to maintain aerobic (oxygen rich)
conditions. This proposal seeks to identify and characterize the novel organisms
that perform ammonia oxidation under low-DO conditions and thereby reducing the
cost of the process. The hypothesis is that unrecognized ammonia-oxidizing
organisms are likely responsible for nitrification in low-dissolved oxygen
activated sludge systems. If this study is successful it will result in a
significant reduction in energy costs for many wastewater treatment plants in
the Nation. The project will also allow the PIs to continue mentoring high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and will fund the training of two
PhD students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the project is divided into three
tasks which include; 1) screening a collection of pure cultures isolated from a
lab-scale reactor performing efficient nitrification, 2) focused on the
identification of the abundant ammonia-oxidizing organisms in lab-scale
reactors, and 3) conduct kinetic experiments to characterize the microbial
communities in pilot-scale reactors coupling and treating primary effluent from
a full scale wastewater treatment plant. The effective coupling of enhanced
biological phosphorus removal and low-dissolved oxygen nitrification will be a
transformative development, since aeration for nutrient removal can account for
nearly half of the energy use. This project will enable development of new
technologies that contribute to the wastewater industry's overarching goals of
achieving energy neutrality and shifting the focus from waste treatment to
resource recovery facilities.