* 1435625
* Efficient Algorithms for Continuous Time Service Network Design Models that Accurately Estimate Consolidation Opportunities in Time
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Mike Hewitt, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2018
* USD 349,898.00

The objective of the research supported by this award is the development of
planning methods for in service systems that will enable high-velocity services
in a cost-effective manner. The main motivation is in planning of transportation
services by consolidation carriers. Consolidation carriers play a prominent role
in order fulfillment and the supply chains that support product manufacturing.
With the continued trend towards just-in-time practices, fast shipping requests
in the retail sector are echoed in the supply chains providing the products
ordered. As a result, many consolidation carriers are facing increased pressure
to deliver goods in less time and at low cost. Transportation planning decisions
for a consolidation carrier have both a geographic and temporal component. A
common technique for handling time in planning models is discretization, which
means that a model will include the decision that the dispatch occurs in a
certain time window. The planning model will represent time at each facility
with a series of windows, with the choice of windows determined a priori.
Customer demands for rapid delivery necessitate a fine granularity, i.e., many
narrow time windows. Existing solution methods cannot handle that level of
granularity efficiently enough to be useful in practical settings. This award
will yield solution methods that can handle precise representations of time,
enabling carriers to provide, in a cost-effective manner, the short delivery
times requested by their customers (some of the savings may even be passed on to
the customers). These methods will help both the carriers and the companies they
support compete in a global economy. As cost is primarily a function of
(trailer) miles traveled, reducing miles can also lead to a reduction in
emissions. By modeling time more precisely, carriers may also be able to better
synchronize their transportation options, leading to greater use of greener
options like rail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is widespread use of
discretizations of time in service network design models the fundamental
question behind their use has not yet been answered; namely, "Can one produce a
methodology that yields the benefits of discretizing time to a very fine degree
without explicitly modeling each discrete point in time?" The research supported
by this award will answer this question in the affirmative. A service network
design problem defined on a very fine discretization of time will be studied so
that consolidation opportunities can be accurately captured. An algorithmic
framework that can be adapted to this problem will be developed, yielding an
algorithm that can solve it in a runtime that is acceptable for use in practice.
The framework will be primal-dual in nature, and algorithms that follow it will
repeatedly solve service network design models, while dynamically adjusting the
time representation. One representation will yield a relaxation of the problem
(the dual), while the other will produce a feasible solution (the primal). The
framework will be extended so that it may be used to initiate the development of
algorithms for a broader class of service network design models. For example,
models that value or choose the times when shipments are available for pickup
and due for delivery, which impact how they can be consolidated with other
shipments. Moreover, the framework will be extended to produce algorithms that
can solve these models in reasonable run-times.