* 1435902
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Design and Analysis of Quantitative-Qualitative Responses in Manufacturing and Biomedical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lulu Kang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 117,888.00

The research objective of this award is to establish a set of experimental
design, analysis, and quality control methodologies for systems with both
quantitative and qualitative (QQ) responses. Systems with QQ responses are
commonly encountered in various manufacturing and biomedical applications. For
example, in a thermal spray coating process, the coating quality is often
measured by quantitative surface roughness and a qualitative coating failure
indicator. Another example can be found in an organ transplant process, where
the quantitative biopsy testing scores and doctors, qualitative evaluation are
used to evaluate the health condition of the organ. The new methodologies are
based on a joint modeling of the QQ responses to unveil the hidden relationship
between the two types of the responses, and thus are more advantageous than the
traditional methods that model the two types of responses separately. These
methodologies will be tested and implemented in real case studies provided by
industrial collaborators. The education plan will promote undergraduate and
graduate students from the underrepresented groups to obtain the rigorous
quality control training in various manufacturing and biomedical applications.
The research results will be used to improve the quality in real industrial
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will lead to
effective and reliable modeling, experimental design, monitoring and control of
the systems with QQ responses. The joint modeling method considers constrained
likelihood estimation with joint variable selection. It will further accommodate
various complex scenarios including functional predictors, missing values,
multiple responses, and nonlinear quality-process relationship. A Bayesian
optimal design of QQ responses is planned to address the experimental design
needs, which can be extended to sequential designs and designs for robust
systems. Based on the modeling method, the model-oriented process monitoring
will detect process changes, and identify root causes from the predictors or
from the system itself. The quality improvement will be fulfilled by optimizing
objectives accounting for the hidden relationship between the QQ responses.
These methodologies will serve a set of powerful tools for manufacturing scale-
up and biomedical quality improvement. Moreover, the educational plan will
provide undergraduate and graduate students with various course modules and
research opportunities. Real case studies will be used in lab sessions and
undergraduate capstone projects. The research will equip students with critical
thinking and hands-on skills in applied statistics, manufacturing, and
biomedical systems. Research results will also be disseminated to academia and
industry through publications, conferences, and workshops. A website will be
established to share data, case studies, and advanced tools for promoting
research collaboration.