* 1435698
* Collaborative Research: The Next Generation RAFOS Float:  A More Capable, Cost-Effective  Subsurface Drifter for Observing Deep Ocean Currents
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* H. Thomas Rossby, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2020
* USD 160,646.00

For over 40 years, acoustically tracked subsurface drifters have provided a
unique and valuable perspective on deep ocean currents. The most recent
generation?called the RAFOS float (SOFAR, or Sound Fixing And Ranging spelled
backwards)-- presently provides the only means by which to observe the variable
pathways of narrow currents, the orbiting motion of eddies, and dispersion of
pollutants below the surface. With additional sensors, RAFOS floats can monitor
biological processes, measure vertical gradients and observe vertical velocity
while following a specific patch of water. With their high-resolution tracking
(provided by an array of moored sound beacons) and inherent tendency to spread
over large horizontal areas, acoustically tracked floats complement the widely
used moored current meter and Argo float. Arguably, without acoustically tracked
floats, there would be much less awareness of the richness of coherent
structures in the subsurface ocean and their impact on the transport of heat,
salt, nutrients and other water properties. In spite of the many insights gained
from the acoustically tracked float, its future is uncertain. Some of the core
electronics have not been modernized for many years. Cost and sophisticated
ballasting requirements limit more widespread use and development of new
enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this grant, the principal investigators
will develop the next generation RAFOS float to be smaller, lower-cost, more
efficient, more capable and easier to use. The heart of the new design will be
the recently completed and tested 'Fish Chip' an acoustic receiver on a micro-
chip that has been developed to track fish using moored sound beacons. It
includes a complete receiver (preamplifier, correlator, time-of-arrival
algorithms, and data storage management), as well as a 10-bit digitizer to
measure temperature and pressure. As part of this grant, the principal
investigators plan to bring together the Fish Chip with the other components
necessary for full RAFOS float functionality, including task scheduling and data
transmission via iridium. Built in to the new 'Fish Chip (FC) RAFOS' will be
accommodations for new sensors, an active buoyancy control unit, and provisions
for a small acoustic altimeter to add bottom-following capability. Five
prototypes will be constructed and tested in a short-term field demonstration in
the Gulf of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the FC RAFOS
float will attract new users and open up new areas of research in oceanography
as a result of the addition of ports for new sensors, lower cost, simpler
ballasting and bottom-following capability. With its small size and minimal
power requirement, the completed FC RAFOS receiver on a micro-chip could be
added to any autonomous vehicle for long-range acoustic tracking.