* 1435522
* Plant-Based Removal of Emerging Contaminants and Pesticides from Contaminated Surface Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Patrick Wilson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,017.00

1435522 Wilson

Plant-Based Removal of Emerging Contaminants and Pesticides from Contaminated
Surface Water

Water quality throughout the United States and elsewhere in the world is a major
concern. Non-point source contaminants originate from many different land-use
activities, and include organic pesticides used in landscape maintenance as well
as contaminants of emerging concern associated with use of reclaimed water for
irrigation. Methods are needed to remove these bioactive compounds from
contaminated surface water. Stormwater retention ponds were originally designed
to reduce sediment discharges from watershed drainage basins by slowing the flow
of the drainage water. These systems remove sediment-associated contaminants,
but are not designed for removal of dissolved contaminants. Floating
bioremediation islands planted with emergent macrophytes may provide an
innovative option for adding organic contaminant removal functions to stormwater
retention ponds. Emergent plants grow on a mat floating on the water surface,
rather than rooted in the bottom sediments. Unlike in constructed wetlands,
these emergent plants can tolerate wide fluctuations in water depth that are
typical of stormwater retention ponds. Such systems have been used for removal
of nutrients and heavy metals from stormwater. However, no information is
available regarding the removal of organic pollutants. This project has the
potential to provide dissolved organic contaminant removal options to every
community in the United States and the world, where they are present in
stormwater retention ponds. This could reduce ecological risks and develop
higher quality water sources. This project will also provide an educational
opportunity for a doctoral student, who will learn and routinely practice
critical thinking skills, chemical extraction and analysis methods, trouble-
shooting and operational principles, and statistical analysis. In addition to
providing tangible improvements in water quality where implemented, results from
the studies will be also packaged in written and video format for incorporation
into the PI's extension program at the University of Florida/IFAS. Materials
will be used to train extension agents, students, environmental managers,
teachers, agency staff, and any other stakeholders who can use the information.

The overall objective of this project is to evaluate the potential for enhancing
the removal of harmful organic contaminants from contaminated surface water
using emergent wetland plants grown on floating islands. The plants essentially
function as biological pumps and as a substrate for possibly synergistic,
contaminant-degrading microflora to attach and grow. Specific aims are to
characterize the kinetics of pollutant removal, the fate of the contaminants
within the phytoremediation system, and the effects of plant density and type on
phytoremediation efficiency. This project focuses on eight surrogate
contaminants with Log Kow values ranging from 1.4-4.2, the optimal range for
plant uptake. Additionally, two emergent wetland plant species are evaluated.
These are hearty plants that have been shown to remove organic herbicides from
hydroponic solutions. The fate and possible degradation of contaminants by the
plants will be evaluated using non-radiolabeled standards and Gas
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry analysis. Mass-balance studies to measure the
kinetics of uptake and accumulation sinks will be conducted using radiolabeled
contaminants and mass-balance chambers. Predictions of potential mass uptake
relative to cumulative water volume transpired through the plants will be made.
These predictions will be validated using mesocosm-scale field studies. Results
will define expectations for removal efficiencies and will be useful for
designing systems targeting specific contaminants based on their properties.