* 1435949
* A Manufacturing Process for Producing Thick Films with Controlled Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Desiderio Kovar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 484,556.00

Patterned thick films are used in the manufacture of integrated circuits and
sensors for applications ranging from camera sensors, to medical implants, to
computer networks. Currently, most thick films are produced by a screen printing
process, which involves deposition of pastes containing fine metal particles
which are then heated to high temperatures to bond the particles so that the
conductivity is increased to an acceptable level. The need for high processing
temperature limits the choices of substrates upon which the films can be
deposited, and often requires expensive and rigid glass or ceramic substrates.
This award supports research towards advancing a new method for depositing thick
films that can dramatically reduce processing temperatures and would allow
deposition on lower-cost and flexible substrates, while also allowing novel
material structures that have the potential to produce films with superior
properties. Such patterned films that exhibit improved properties would have
applications in many devices including high power electronics and solar cells,
and other applications that could advance US competitiveness in manufacturing.
The multidisciplinary approach which involves a combination of computer
simulations and experiments will enable the education of graduate students, and
the outreach activities will integrate this research with a proven program that
enables high school teachers to effectively teach engineering to encourage and
prepare their students to enter engineering and science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laser ablation of microparticle aerosol
process is a relatively new process for depositing patterned, micro-scale thick
films with nanostructured features. Nanoparticles are produced from commonly
available and inexpensive powders via an aerosol ablation and then impacted at
high velocities onto a substrate. High production rates allow direct writing of
inorganic (metallic, semiconductor, or ceramic) thick films without a mask at
room temperature onto polymeric, metallic, or ceramic substrates. The grain size
and porosity in the films can be controlled through the ablation and deposition
parameters. The current process, however, is limited to producing
polycrystalline or amorphous films with a maximum as-deposited relative density
of about 70 percent. A combination of predictive molecular dynamics computer
simulations and experimental studies of the nanoparticle impaction and film
growth processes are planned to develop an understanding of how processing
parameters influence deposition efficiency, the film morphology, and film
structure on a nano- to-micro scale. Computer simulations will be used to
systematically study the influence of particle size, impaction energy, substrate
temperature, material composition and crystallinity, defect orientation and
concentration, and particle/substrate misorientation on the resulting films. In
combination with the computer simulations, the experimental apparatus will be
modified to allow experiments to be conducted under conditions in which the
simulations can be validated. The experimental data will be used to modify the
computer simulations as needed so that accurate predictions of the resulting
film microstructures can be made. It is expected that by studying the factors
that control deposition and film growth will lead to a much larger range of
microstructures and densities than is currently possible, including single
crystal patterned films with relative densities approaching 100 percent.