* 1435007
* Hurricane Surge and Wave Loads on Near-Coast Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Andrew Kennedy, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 261,570.00

Hurricane storms such as Sandy and Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines have caused
catastrophic damage. In the near-coast region, a large amount of this damage has
been from wave and surge impacting buildings and other structures. Currently
there are criteria for surge and wave loads that are used for design. However,
standard empirical loads neglect the effects of unsteady wave and surge
processes, which can lead to much larger loads in the immediate vicinity of the
shoreline. This project will pursue fundamental research into the nature of
these unsteady structural loads, and how they affect buildings. Computational
simulation backed up by case studies from Hurricane Sandy and Super Typhoon
Haiyan in Philippines will develop and test representations for near-coast
structural loading from unsteady waves and surge. Results will allow engineers
and planners for better designs as they work to reduce damages from future
hurricanes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neglect of unsteady radiation stresses in
standard phase-averaged wave and surge models results in underestimation of
maximum wave heights and current velocities in the near-coast region, and the
neglect of bore-like loading. This can lead to severe underestimates of
structural design loads. The research team will examine these processes using
Boussinesq and Navier-Stokes fluid mechanics models to (1) map regions where
low-frequency hydrodynamic processes are significant; (2) establish
relationships between hydrodynamic properties and associated structural loading
for canonical geometries; and (3) synthesize these results for design purposes.
Loads will be subdivided into impact and quasi-steady categories, with different
analyses and synthesis for each. The hypothesis that specific momentum flux is
proportional to loading will be tested closely, as this may provide a relatively
simple method to incorporate many of these processes into structural loading
parameterizations.