* 1435544
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Collaboration to Accelerate the Discovery of New Alloys for Additive Manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Anthony Rollett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 345,000.00

Non-technical: Recently, there has been significant interest in additive
manufacturing, also known as 3-D printing. While there have been many efforts
aimed at exploring the geometric design space, thus enabling innovative
components, such efforts invariably use legacy materials (e.g., Ti-6Al-4V) that
were designed and optimized decades ago for conventional manufacturing
approaches. When the material is not part of the design strategy, there is both
an intrinsic risk and an opportunity lost. With respect to risk, such legacy
materials may exhibit properties that are inferior to the same material prepared
using conventional approaches. For example, when Ti-6-4 is arbitrarily selected
for additive manufacturing processes, the resultant material exhibits properties
that vary according to both testing direction and spatial location. With respect
to the lost opportunity, there are unique characteristics of the additive
manufacturing processes, such as very high solidification rates, that can result
in superior properties for the right materials. Thus, there is a need to design
new materials that leverage the unique characteristics of additive manufacturing
processes to achieve a balance of properties that exceeds what is currently
possible when legacy materials are used. The titanium alloys developed under
this Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
program, as well as the general framework of accelerated alloy development, will
be disseminated through a series of industry dissemination workshops. This
dissemination will impact a wide range of economic sectors, including, for
example, aerospace, automotive, and biomedical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
This project is directed toward the design of a modern creep-resistant beta-
titanium alloy to be produced via additive manufacturing. This will be achieved
by integrating high-throughput combinatorial materials science, state-of-the-art
materials characterization, computational materials science, and data-science.
The project seeks to: (1) discover and model the fundamental interrelationship
between the far-from equilibrium conditions of additive manufacturing processes
and materials composition on the resulting microstructure and properties; (2)
fully describe the materials composition and structure using multi-dimensional,
multi-spatial, and multi-spectral approaches; (3) determine, via powerful data
science approaches, hidden correlations (e.g., mechanisms) between composition,
structure, and properties as assessed using both computational and experimental
techniques; (4) validate the mechanisms via computational modeling and critical
experimentation; and (5) design, as a multi-university team, a new material for
additive manufacturing processes. Along the way, the team will develop both an
ontology and data science standards so that the information can be shared easily
amongst the four universities during the program and disseminated more broadly
at the conclusion of the effort.