* 1435133
* Collaborative Research:  Relating Topographic Complexity and Circulation Patterns on Coral Reefs from Colony-Scale to Reef-Scale
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* James Hench, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 289,784.00

Many important coastal marine systems either grow on or form complex topography
that varies continuously over a wide range of spatial scales. For example, on
coral reefs, topography varies from branch (centimeter) to patch (10-100 meters)
to reef (several kilometers) scales. In the coastal ocean, water motion is
forced past topography at a wide range of time scales by surface waves, tides
and slowly varying currents. Understanding how these flows interact with complex
multi-scale topography is critical for predicting circulation patterns in
shallow coastal systems like reefs. At present, the physics of these
interactions is not included explicitly in observational efforts or modeling
studies and one of the biggest challenges for predictive modeling of circulation
in coastal systems like reefs is a lack of methods for a priori estimation of
drag and mixing parameters from topography spatial statistics. This project will
provide a theoretical and conceptual framework for flow over complex topography
in the coastal ocean that includes the physics of interactions of currents and
waves with multi-scale topography. New parameterizations for flow over complex
topography will be developed for use in ocean circulation models to improve
their predictive ability in important coastal systems like coral reefs. Improved
predictions of circulation over reefs should then lead to better estimates of
cross-reef exchange and transport of nutrients and contaminants, as well as a
better description of larval retention, dispersion and connectivity. The field
study will be conducted at the NSF-supported Moorea Coral Reef Long Term
Ecological Research (MCR-LTER) site which brings together many leaders in coral
reef science. Through planned interactions with MCR-LTER and French/Tahitian
researchers the results will directly reach a multi-disciplinary international
audience. A PhD student will be trained in physical oceanographic field work,
modeling, and theory, and gain interdisciplinary and international experience by
interacting with the MCR-LTER. At least nine undergraduate students will conduct
independent studies and write honors theses related to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a theoretical and conceptual
framework will be developed for the interaction of currents and waves with
multi-scale topography. A set of novel field measurements and simulations will
examine how flow with different time scales interacts with topography
characterized by different obstacle size, spacing, and patchiness. Topography
spatial statistics will be computed from high-resolution satellite bathymetry
and 3D scanning sonar measurements. Spatial variability in currents on the reef
at scales from 0.2-500 meters will be quantified using a nested sampling array.
Field measurements over constructed geometries will investigate how natural flow
that varies at a range of time scales interacts with bottom topography with
different length scales. Numerical modeling of steady and unsteady flow over
idealized reef geometries and real reef segments will examine dynamics of flow-
topography interactions across the range of currents, waves, and topography
length scales at the field site.