* 1435417
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies toward the Development of New Corrosion-Resistant Steels and Corrosion Inhibitors for Reinforced Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Liney Arnadottir, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 349,379.00

Corrosion of steel reinforcement is one of the most prevalent deterioration
mechanisms in concrete structures. Annual cost of corrosion of civil
infrastructure in the United States is estimated to be around $25 billion, and a
large part of this amount is ascribable to steel corrosion in concrete.
Therefore it is critical to develop innovative, inexpensive, and ubiquitously
effective corrosion mitigation strategies in the form of new corrosion-resistant
steels and corrosion inhibitors. Trial-and-error procedures to produce new and
affordable materials to resist steel corrosion in concrete have been, to a large
degree, ineffective. The development of these new materials has also been
hindered by the gaps in the fundamental understanding of steel corrosion in
concrete and the lack of tools to intelligently design and test new materials.
The combined experimental and theoretical approach of the present work will
provide the tools and knowledge to bridge this gap. This research will have far
reaching social, political and economic impacts by enabling researchers and
material developers with the fundamental tools to hypothesize, design, optimize,
and test new materials to mitigate issues associated with steel corrosion in
reinforced concrete structures in a cost effective way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of the present research is to combine molecular dynamics
simulations, first-principles calculations and experimental nano-scale material
characterization techniques to make transformational contributions to the
understanding of passivity and depassivation processes of steels in concrete and
to create the required knowledge base and tools to develop inexpensive but
highly effective new corrosion-resistant steels and corrosion inhibitors.
Passivity, depassivation and corrosion of steel in concrete are atomic/molecular
scale phenomena that take place within a 10-20 nanometer layer on the metal
surface. Therefore, the fundamental understanding and the tools to design and
test new materials need to be developed by combining nano-scale material
characterization techniques and molecular level calculations. Based on the new
insights provided by these techniques small, inexpensive and effective
compositional changes on conventional steels can be made to increase their
corrosion resistance or custom-designed corrosion inhibitors can be designed to
slow down or prevent corrosion. In pursuit of these goals, the study follows a
multi-disciplinary approach that brings together expertise from corrosion
science, cement/concrete chemistry, electrochemistry, metallurgy, applied
mathematics, numerical modeling, surface analysis and theoretical chemistry.