* 1435074
* Collaborative Research: Observing, Analyzing, and Modeling Design-Team Problem-Decompositions in Facility Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Herrmann, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,969.00

Engineers work in teams to solve complex system design problems like determining
the layout of a factory or medical facility. Many problems are too complex to be
solved all at once, so that engineers separate the problem into a set of
subproblems and solve the smaller subproblems. Because this decomposition
strategy affects the overall quality of the facility design, it is important
that the teams use good decomposition strategies. This award supports
fundamental research to gain understanding of how teams of engineers solve
facility design problems and how their strategies affect the performance of the
facilities they design. The research will study teams of engineers as they solve
factory redesign problems and medical facility design problems. The medical
facilities to be designed are points of dispensing, which are designed for
dispensing medication to the public in a public health emergency. The results
from this research will include guidelines for designing points of dispensing
and other types of facilities. The results will be disseminated in scholarly
publications and through short courses on facility design, enabling better
points of dispensing, more productive factories, and economic benefits to
manufacturing firms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Facility design problems are an
important class of system design problems. The research team will identify the
reasoning processes and problem decompositions used by design teams to solve
facility design problems and generate hypotheses about which decompositions lead
to better solutions. This in turn will enable future research on how to design
better design processes. In a series of field studies, the research team will
observe teams of human designers as they decompose and solve facility design
problems. Using qualitative data analysis, the researchers will identify their
decomposition strategies. This involves empirical observation of professionals
solving two distinct instances of facility design problems during relevant
training courses: teams of public health professionals designing a mass
antibiotic distribution facility and teams of professional engineers redesigning
a manufacturing facility. The results will describe how teams of engineers
decompose design problems in realistic facility design settings, enriching the
knowledge base of design theory for facility design in particular and system
design more generally.