* 1435152
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing a Minor Program in Applied Statistics within the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at Fort Valley State University.
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Dawit Aberra, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 469,522.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Fort Valley State University will
implement a Targeted Infusion Project entitled: Developing a Minor Program in
Applied Statistics within the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science.
The project is designed to develop students' statistical knowledge and thinking
through activities that require scientific and data driven decision making
processes; improve enrollment and retention of students in STEM fields by
enhancing enrollment and retention in statistics; engage students in mentor
supervised research in areas related to statistics applications; and enhance
learning, teaching and research capabilities through the use of new
instructional technologies and methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
team will enhance an existing course with interdisciplinary activities and
projects and develop five new courses for the minor in Applied Statistics
curriculum within the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science. Courses to
be developed will cover topics in applied methods in regression, key concepts of
biostatistics including mathematical modeling and computational simulation
techniques, methods of constructing and designing statistical experiments, time
series, and nonparametric statistics. Curriculum development efforts will be
complemented with faculty mentoring, summer research internships, and peer-to-
peer advising.