* 1435368
* Collaborative Research:  Design of Negative Stiffness Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Eric Macdonald, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2017
* USD 86,605.00

Engineers frequently face a critical selection decision between materials with
high structural stiffness and materials with superior damping capabilities.
Existing materials cannot provide both capabilities simultaneously. This award
supports fundamental research to break this tradeoff by designing negative
stiffness (NS) metamaterials. These materials gain their properties from their
internal structure, which includes micro-scale structures that snap back and
forth to absorb energy - a phenomenon called negative stiffness. Novel top-down
design strategies developed in this project will allow engineers to quickly
identify the material designs that meet performance goals as closely as
possible. Negative stiffness metamaterials will benefit a variety of
applications of great interest to society, such as stiff, low-vibration wind
turbine blades and rotors and sonar mounts for submarines. The research involves
graduate and undergraduate students, educational outreach activities, and a
minority-serving institution, which will help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups and positively impact engineering education.

The research team will design these materials with a novel, top-down design
exploration strategy for quickly and efficiently back-propagating application-
specific, system-level performance requirements to the characteristics of the
micro-scale material structure. This top-down strategy contrasts with trial-and-
error, bottom-up strategies that cycle through multiple material structures in
search of satisfactory system-level performance. The top-down design exploration
strategy utilizes Bayesian network classifiers for mapping structure-property
relationships at each level of the multi-level design problem in such a way that
the maps can be intersected across levels to identify good multi-level designs
and also efficiently guide the search for better designs. The design exploration
strategy is coupled with three levels of material models, ranging from (a) the
micro-scale level on which the geometry and fabrication route for the snap-
through inclusions must be designed to provide negative stiffness behavior to
(b) the meso-scale level on which the distribution of inclusions in a ductile
matrix must be designed to provide targeted effective material properties to (c)
the macro-scale level of a component, which must be designed along with the
metamaterial to provide targeted structural stiffness and damping. Materials
design and modeling efforts will be validated by additively manufacturing micro-
scale inclusions using microstereolithography, embedding them in a matrix
material, and testing the resulting composite to determine the overall dynamic
structural stiffness and loss characteristics. A collaboration with an
industrial partner will pave the way for applications of the NS metamaterials in
challenging military and commercial applications.