* 1435386
* Quantitative analysis of the Costa Rica margin 3D seismic volume to reveal subduction zone structure, tectonics, and the development of the seismogenic zone
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Nathan Bangs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2017
* USD 372,430.00

Subduction zones are where major earthquakes and tsunami generation occur but
the regional human risk varies since geologic and hydrologic conditions vary
along a given margin. The presence of (possibly lubricating) fluid within the
'megathrust fault' where the Pacific plate slides down beneath Costa Rica will
be documented and related to the pattern of seismicity. Above the megathrust
fault, many smaller faults control deformation within the sedimentary wedge.
This study will provide new understanding of this margin's evolution and a more
complete picture of the range of hazards will be obtained. Training of next
generation marine scientists will take place via involvement of undergraduate
students in the data analysis and a postdoctoral scholar will play a significant
role throughout the study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of the structure of an
offshore portion of the Costa Rica margin will document fluid pathways within
and at the base of the sedimentary wedge that forms the toe of the tectonic
plate that overrides the megathrust fault. Advanced analysis of the 3-D multi-
channel seismic reflection dataset previously collected by the R/V Langseth will
be conducted. Prior study determined the geometry of the megathrust and this
study will quantify physical properties within the fault zone. Amplitude versus
offset results should discern whether portions of the megathrust fault are fluid
bearing. The relation with seismicity patterns will address the possible role of
fluids in controlling historical slip along the fault. Detailed structural
modeling of the accretionary wedge, which is riddled with small faults, will be
conducted to show how deformation of the overriding plate is accommodated over
time. Re-analysis of a legacy ocean bottom seismic refraction profile will
provide comparison to velocity structure in a neighboring part of the margin so
that along-strike variability can be assessed. The findings will provide key
context for interpretations of past and possible future scientific ocean
drilling results.