* 1435115
* Mechanics and Dynamics of Viscoelastic Metacomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Caglar Oskay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 204,999.00

Metamaterials are microachitectured materials that exhibit unusual properties,
such as negative apparent stiffness and density, not ordinarily observed. These
exceptional properties allow realization of structural behavior that is not
possible with conventional materials. One such possibility is suppressing or
significantly damping the propagation of waves of certain of frequencies within
a structure. This project investigates the possibility of realizing
metacomposite materials that can suppress or significantly damp vibration,
impact and blast loads by tuning the material microstructure and properties of
its components. If realized, the innovation of this novel and unusual class of
materials will result in very effective protection systems for civil
infrastructure against hazards such as blast, impact and earthquakes. Additional
areas of direct transformative impact of this research are vibration control of
mechanical systems, energy harvesting and sensing. The PI will hold annual
workshops for high school students and teachers to introduce them to the concept
of simulation-based engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
elucidate the fundamental relationships between time dependent viscoelastic
properties of the constituents of acoustic metacomposite materials, its
microstructural morphology and its wave mitigation characteristics under dynamic
loading. This fundamental structure-property relationship is currently lacking
for metamaterials that do not exhibit elastic response. The primary hypothesis
of this project is that the interacting mechanisms of wave dispersion induced by
the material heterogeneity and wave dissipation due to material viscosity can be
employed to control and suppress wave propagation within large frequency
bands(i.e., tunable bandgaps). Within this research, an efficient and accurate
multiscale computational homogenization methodology for transient dynamic
response of heterogeneous materials with material nonlinearity will be
developed, and a comprehensive study on wave propagation and energy dissipation
characteristics of viscoelastic metacomposites will be performed. Asymptotic
analysis and the mathematical homogenization techniques will be used to
formulate high order balance equations that can accurately capture nonlinear
dispersion. Computational solution algorithms will be developed to accurately
capture the emergence of bandgaps in multidimensional microstructures. These
computational tools and algorithms will be employed to tailor the morphological
makeup of a composite material for achieving superior wave mitigation property
at targeted frequency ranges. The focus of the investigations is on core-shell
particle-reinforced composites with dissipative,viscoelastic, constituents.