* 1435889
* Enhancing Remote Scanning Technology for Detecting and Measuring Small and Localized Deformations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brent Rosenblad, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 353,730.00

This award funds research to develop methods of remotely detecting small
deformations of the ground surface and civil infrastructure. Natural and
constructed geotechnical facilities, such as dams, retaining structures, and
earthen slopes, are vital components of civil infrastructure. Monitoring
movements and deformations of geotechnical facilities is important for ensuring
acceptable engineering performance and identifying potential hazards to the
public. Ideally, problems should be detected at an early stage when the
movements are both small in magnitude and localized in area. In practice, this
can be challenging due to the massive size of geotechnical facilities and the
limitations of current deformation monitoring technology. This research will
focus on application and enhancement of an emerging remote sensing technology
"ground-based interferometric radar" for detecting and measuring small and
localized deformations of geotechnical facilities. The ultimate goal of this
research is to develop and improve technology that can be used to better
understand the performance of civil infrastructure, detect problems at an early
stage of development, and mitigate the effects of natural hazards on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground-based interferometric radar is an emerging
active-source, scanning technique that has the potential to fill a gap in
deformation measurement capabilities for geotechnical engineering applications.
Past studies of ground-based interferometric radar have focused on measuring
large spatial-scale surface movements (e.g. landslides) where the surface area
of interest may be tens of thousands of square meters and cover thousands of
radar ground pixels. This study will focus on the application of ground-based
interferometric radar for detecting small (sub-mm) and localized (a few m2)
movements where the region of movement may be pixel scale or smaller in size.
The conventional approach to collecting and processing interferometric radar
data (developed for satellite-based studies) was not designed and optimized for
these applications. There are no in-depth studies of ground-based
interferometric radar for detecting small and localized deformations. Unique
existing data sets will be used in conjunction with data collected from this
project to meet the following objectives: (1) identify effective data collection
and processing procedures for detecting and measuring sub-pixel to pixel scale
surface movements using ground-based interferometric radar, (2) use controlled
studies to quantify the accuracy and uncertainties in ground-based
interferometric radar deformation measurements of sub-pixel to pixel scale
surface movements, and (3) study methods to model and mitigate atmospheric
effects and other noise. Successful completion of the project objectives will
result in advancement of the state of knowledge regarding the application of
ground-based interferometric radar for measuring deformations of the ground
surface and civil infrastructure.