* 1435868
* Collaborative Research:   How can bacterial viruses succeed in the marine environment?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Libusha Kelly, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2018
* USD 348,490.00

Microbes make up the majority of the biomass in the ocean and viral mortality is
one of the main ecological factors determining the diversity, abundance and
turnover of microbial taxa. Yet, in spite of the known overall importance of
viruses, the dynamics of their interactions with their specific microbial hosts
remain poorly understood. This project will characterize viral strategies for
survival and interaction with their hosts in the ocean, with the goal of
enabling a better understanding of the conditions under which viruses can
effectively control bacterial populations. The work will generate and integrate
diverse data types, ranging from quantification of specific interactions,
environmental dynamics of microbial hosts and their viruses, and comparative
genome analysis. While the project focuses on the coastal ocean of New England,
the approaches and findings will be applicable to the larger field of marine
microbial ecology, to other virus/host systems in nature and to engineered
systems. This project will fill a gap in current microbial ecology curricula by
creating a bioinformatics module to provide training in large-scale sequence
data collection and analysis. The module will be refined through testing during
an annual course in Nicaragua and will be broadly accessible in the US and
internationally. The close collaboration, throughout this project and its
associated outreach, between two laboratories with complementary research
strengths will provide highly interdisciplinary training for undergraduate
students as well for two graduate students.

Viruses and their microbial hosts have co-evolved over billions of year and
shape the ecology of the ocean in many ways. Broadly, understanding the
mechanisms and emergent properties of virus-host interactions will allow for
better understanding and modeling of biogeochemical cycles and the diversity of
microbes at the population and genomic level. The guiding hypothesis of this
project is that the prevalence of each of different viral strategies is
probabilistic and linked to host availability, environmental parameters, and
frequency-dependent competition with other virus strains for available hosts.
This research will address four aims that characterize how viruses interact with
their hosts in the dilute ocean environment by (1) quantification of ecological
tradeoffs between specialist and generalist viral strategies, (2) estimation of
the prevalence of dual lytic/lysogenic strategy in marine viruses, (3)
identification of host surface receptors of particular viruses and examination
of genetic signatures of distinct viral strategies in virus and host genomes,
and (4) identification of genetic and metabolic interactions between virus and
host genomes. This study takes advantage of a model system with the largest
available collection of viruses and hosts for which host range and genome
sequences have been determined. This work will provide fine-scale analysis of
host and phage genomic diversity and abundance in this model system, while at
the same time estimating host-range and co-infection, all of which represent
important, poorly constrained parameters in virus-host interactions. Finally,
this project complements the large number of studies that have looked at single
host-virus interactions, metagenome sequencing, and assessment of viral impact
on microbial production.