* 1435649
* Combinatorial Additive Manufacturing Approach for Fabricating Nano/Micro 3D Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Salil Desai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,499.00

The fabrication of three dimensional structures in free space is important for
building certain miniaturized devices. Additive manufacturing popularly called
as 3D printing is critical in advancing this field. Over the past three decades
additive manufacturing methods have been explored to build complex parts using
metals, ceramics and polymers. However, many of these methods can fabricate
structures at a fixed dimension with minimal control on the local composition
and microstructure. This limits their applicability to the manufacturing of
novel devices which require variation in local topography. This research aims to
develop a combinatorial additive process by combining microextrusion and droplet
based fabrication methods. The hybrid manufacturing method will enable the
fabrication of structures that have controlled density, material content,
lattice structure, porosity and geometrical configuration based on the
application intent. Typical applications include tissue engineering scaffolds,
high performance energy devices, and embedded electronics for aerospace
components. This research will positively impact the US economy by spurring jobs
within the industrial sector and lead to fundamental process investigations
within the academic and research communities. This research will impact
underrepresented students in discovery based learning of advanced manufacturing
methods at a historically black university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates the additive manufacturing of hierarchical nano/microstructures
using a combination of filament based micro extrusion and droplet based
manufacturing. The objectives of this research include: (1) understanding
micro/nano structure formations using the hybrid approach; (2) studying the
filament extrusion, nano/micro droplet deposition, laser irradiation and
solidification of materials; and (3) establishing relationships among
interacting process parameters by experimental design of hybrid process. The
micro extrusion process will be employed to deposit microscale filaments of
material based on the nozzle size. These filament lattice structures will be
deposited with droplets ranging from nano to micro size based on a scalable
direct-write manufacturing method. The droplet content can range from molten
metal, polymers to nanoparticle solutions which serve as an effective method to
infiltrate selective regions of the filament to produce the desired
microstructure and material property. High power CO2 laser system will be used
to selectively sinter the deposited structures in multiple layers to generate a
3D part. Using finite element analysis and molecular dynamics models,
computational models will be developed to study intriguing multiphysics
phenomena during the interaction of micro filament structures with micro and
nano droplets.