* 1435474
* Reduced Order Models of the Navier-Stokes Equations of Fluid Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Earl Dowell, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2018
* USD 479,493.00

Turbulence is the apparently random motion that occurs commonly in almost all
fluid flows. It has been called one of the most challenging unsolved problems in
Newtonian physics. The aggregate cost to our society resulting from our
incomplete understanding of turbulence is significant. Consider, for example,
the environmental and economic costs associated with sub-optimal performance of
virtually every fluid-thermal system such as internal combustion engines and
air-conditioners. It is usually not possible to directly and routinely simulate
turbulent flow because its multi-scale characteristics require prohibitively
high computational resources. Even when adequate computational resources are
available, simulations often provide too little understanding of the solutions
they produce. There are significant scientific and engineering benefits in
developing and studying (reduced-order) models of turbulence that retain the
needed physical fidelity while substantially reducing the size and cost of the
computational model. The ultimate goal of reduced-order modeling of turbulence
is to provide efficient and accurate solutions with minimal reliance on
auxiliary empirical models. Empirical models are inherently undesirable because
they degrade simulation accuracy and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to develop a reduced-order modeling
approach to turbulent fluid flows that is free of empirical closure models.
Unlike traditional approaches, the new methodology does not rely on empirical
turbulence modeling or ad hoc modification of the Navier-Stokes equations. It
provides spatial basis functions different from the usual proper orthogonal
decomposition basis function in that, in addition to optimally representing the
solution, the new basis functions also provide stable reduced-order models. The
approach is illustrated with three test cases: two-dimensional flow inside a
square lid-driven cavity, two-dimensional mixing layer, and three-dimensional
turbulent flow around the Ahmed body. Future work will extend this method to
more complex flows including the effects of higher spatial dimensions and higher
flow velocities (Reynolds numbers).