* 1435266
* Establishing more accurate chronologies for marine climate records using data from deep-sea cores from northern East China Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Steven Clemens, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 202,464.00

The ability to accurately quantify differences in the timing of change in
different aspects of the earth system (deep ocean, surface ocean, and
atmosphere) is one of the key means by which scientists are able to decipher the
physics underlying climate change in response to variability in global ice
volume, greenhouse gasses, and solar insolation. To accurately quantify the
differences in this timing of change requires accurate ages for climate data
developed from deep-sea cores. This project seeks to improve the accuracy of
ages for marine climate records developed from deep-sea cores by comparing these
records to well-established, highly-accurate land-based records of mineral
deposits (speloethems) in the Hulu-Sanbao cave in China. The results of this
research will make ages for marine climate records more accurate, thus providing
better data for climate models that enhance our ability to understand climate
change, past and future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work has two main
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1) Understanding the mechanisms underlying the strong
sensitivity of East Asia to monsoonal climate change&lt;br/&gt;2) Significantly
increasing the accuracy of the global benthic delta 18-O chronology over the
past 350,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;The first objective is part of a longer-term
international collaborative effort associated with Integrated Ocean Drilling
Program (IODP) Expedition 346, located in the region between Japan and Korea.
The collaborative research will last beyond the two-year term of this grant
proposal, whereas the second objective is the primary focus of this proposal and
will be completed in the proposed project duration. Planktonic foraminifer
(Globigerinoides ruber) delta 18-O and delta 13-C will be measured on 3800
samples spanning the 180 m length of the IODP Site U1429 in the northern East
China Sea. This data will result in a ~425,000 year long time series with ~100
year temporal resolution, capable of resolving centennial through orbital-scale
variability in the East Asian monsoon system. Collaborators from the University
of Kiel, Germany, will analyze the same 3800 samples for benthic foraminifer
(Cibicidoides wuellerstorfi) delta 18-O and delta 13-C. The plantonic delta 18-O
will be mapped onto the radiometrically dated Hulu-Sanbao speleothem delta 18-O
record using dynamic programming methods, thus transferring this highly accurate
age scale into the paired benthic marine record. This is possible because both
the cave and planktonic delta 18-O records are driven by the same large-scale
monsoonal forcings (temperature and precipitation); the location, length, and
sedimentation rates at Site U1428 are uniquely suited to this effort