* 1435281
* EAGER: A Novel Approach to Application Specific Instruction Processor  Synthesis from Polychronous Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Sandeep Shukla, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2016
* USD 79,999.00

Complex embedded systems contain a multitude of sensors, actuators, and a number
of micro-controllers or embedded processors, which require complex multi-
threaded programming with synchronizations that are conditional. The task of
implementing such software manually is error-prone leading to crucial errors,
and hence require expensive validation. Due to inherent difficulties of post-
implementation verification, this project takes the approach of synthesizing
systems that are correct by construction. This project uses a polychronous data-
flow specification language which lends itself naturally to multithreaded
software synthesis. The theory and tools developed in this project will enable
software/hardware synthesis from the same specification which could have a
significant impact for a wide array of safety-critical embedded
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a new semantics to
polychronous specification languages in the form of conditional partial orders,
and utilizes this semantics to develop algorithms for application specific
processor synthesis. To synthesize the processor, the investigators identify the
instruction sets required, and optimize their implementations, while the
synthesis of the micro-code programs to implement the functionalities are
derived by schedule synthesis.