* 1435254
* Experimental Investigation of the Scalability of WindTurbine Aerodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Marcus Hultmark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2017
* USD 330,000.00

Principal Investigator: Marcus Hultmark&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1435254&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade,
the size of wind turbine blades used for the conversion of wind energy to
electricity has grown rapidly. New designs for wind turbines are often tested
using scale models in a wind tunnel, similar to testing of new airplane designs.
However, the behavior of scale models of wind turbines within a wind tunnel
often does not represent the behavior of actual wind turbines deployed in the
field because of issues relating to the scaling of the air flow around the
turbine blades for long turbine blades. The goal of this research is develop a
new approach for designing wind tunnel tests for wind turbines. This will be
accomplished by using a wind tunnel which uses highly compressed air at over 200
times atmospheric pressure to proportionally scale the effects of flow inertia
relative to blade rotation for a scaled down model wind turbine. Aerodynamic
models will be used to scale the behavior back up to a real wind turbine
operating at atmospheric pressure. This approach has the potential to improve
the reliability of wind tunnel data for the design of new wind turbines, leading
to improved performance models and wind turbine designs. As the part of the
project activities, the principal investigator will serve as a mentor for
National Wind Resource Center Summer Research Institute Program, organized at
TexasTech University, and work with undergraduate students, high school
students, and high school teachers to provide training in wind energy topics and
recruit students from under-represented groups for future graduate
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to develop a new approach for scaling wind
turbine scale model tests within wind tunnels to Reynolds numbers that are
representative of full scale wind turbines in field operation. Wind turbine
aerodynamics is mainly governed by two dimensionless parameters, the Reynolds
number and the Strouhal number, also known as the tip-speed-ratio. Over the past
decade, the size of wind turbines has grown rapidly, and has moved their
operation to higher Reynolds numbers. In order for wind tunnel tests to give an
exact representation of the aerodynamics, both the Reynolds and the Strouhal
number must simultaneously be matched to what is experienced by the full scale
turbine. However, studies on scaled down models in conventional wind tunnels can
only match one of these parameters, and not both simultaneously. This project
will investigate the effect of the parametric mismatch and give new insight into
the effect of rotation on the aerodynamics by developing a new experimental
approach that will allow for simultaneous matching of both parameters. This will
be accomplished using a unique high-pressure flow facility where both the
Reynolds number and tip-speed-ratio will be matched to a modern large scale wind
turbine. Since the working air pressure can easily be changed from 1 to 220 atm,
a wide range of Reynolds numbers can be tested, and can potentially provide new
insight on scalability of wind tunnel studies. A miniature wind turbine will be
built and installed in the existing High Reynolds Number Test Facility.
Experiments will be conducted at full dynamic similarity, which will address
fundamental questions about how Reynolds number and rotational effects determine
the aerodynamic behavior and power output of wind turbines. As the part of the
project activities, the principal investigator will serve as a mentor for
National Wind Resource Center Summer Research Institute Program, organized at
TexasTech University, and work with undergraduate students, high school
students, and high school teachers to provide training in wind energy topics and
recruit students from under-represented groups for future graduate study.