* 1435968
* GOALI: Probing Temporospatial Correlations at the Nanoscale in High-Temperature Electrocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Roger Proksch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2019
* USD 489,499.00

Abstract Title: GOALI: New Scanning Probe Methods for Imaging Local Activity in
Electrocatalysts on Nanometer Length Scales

A key requirement for our nation's future energy infrastructure is an ability to
efficiently interconvert chemical (fuel) and electrical forms of energy. Such
interconversion is facilitated by using oxide electrocatalysts at high
temperature, which provide highly active surfaces upon which molecules and
electrons can interact. Unfortunately the factors governing activity and
degradation of electrocatalysts are not very well understood. This project seeks
to develop new scanning probe methods that can image in real time, and during
operation at up to 500-600°C, where and when reactions occur on the surface,
with nanometer resolution. This GOALI award brings together Professors Stuart
Adler and Jiangyu Li with expertise in electrocatalysis and scanning probe
methods at the University of Washington and Dr. Roger Proksch, head of the
research staff at Asylum Research, a leading developer of scanning probe
instruments to develop an advanced high-temperature scanning probe system. This
instrument and the resulting research work will lead to major advances in how we
study electrocatalysts, as well as provide key insights leading to new
technological advances in electrocatalysis. The project will also provide
advanced graduate education to two PhD students, provide research opportunities
for undergraduates, and support the mentorship of Seattle-area K-12 students in
pursuing a deeper scientific education.

A universal challenge facing development of high temperature electrocatalysts is
a lack of fundamental understanding of physical and chemical rates at local
length scales (10-50 nm). A growing body of research shows that the composition,
structure, and properties of these materials near solid-solid or gas-solid
interfaces deviate substantially from the bulk. The purpose of this GOALI is to
develop scanning probe techniques (based on measurement of local lattice strain,
conductivity, and surface work function) to quantify and image local rates in
porous high-temperature electrocatalysts under in-situ conditions. This project
seeks to 1) link strain, work function, and other locally measurable properties
to variations in charged defect concentrations, 2) implement scanning probe
techniques in-situ on working electrodes as witnesses of local dynamics, and 3)
extend the current experimental capabilities to access higher temperatures
(500-600°C). Ultimately, the active region of a porous electrode will be imaged
as a function of variables, resulting in the extraction of basic information
about relative rates of molecular reactions, surface transport, and bulk
transport occurring at a local level near the electrode/electrolyte interface.