* 1435233
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Exploring the Feasibility of a Novel Thermosyphon/Heat Pipe Heat Exchanger with Low Air-Side Thermal Resistance
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Amir Faghri, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 04/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

1435131 / 1435233&lt;br/&gt;Bergman / Faghri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will have scientific, technological, educational, and societal impacts
relevant to power plant cooling. Currently power plant cooling represents the
second largest source of water withdrawl in the United States. The research
forms the basis upon which current dry cooling tower technologies could be
potentially transformed, leading to reduced water consumption for power plant
cooling. In addition to supporting graduate students, research experiences will
be provided for undergraduates. The proposed concept will also have a broad-
based, beneficial impact on applications ranging from high power electronic
cooling to large scale data center and server thermal management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative exploratory effort, involving
investigators at The University of Kansas and The University of Connecticut,
involves the innovative integration of two-phase, closed thermosyphons or heat
pipes with heat transfer augmentation techniques to develop a new heat exchanger
concept with expected very low air-side thermal resistance. The heat transfer
augmentation techniques include, specifically, judicious use of porous metal
foams or fins on the air side of the thermosyphons. A new physics-based
continuum physical model will be developed that will describe the pertinent
multi-phase, multi-domain, three-dimensional transient heat transfer occurring
within an integrated two-phase, closed thermosyphon heat exchanger. The heat and
mass transfer effects within the two-phase, closed thermosyphon are coupled to
heat transfer phenomena external to the thermosyphon-heat pipe, specifically on
the air- and cooling water sides of the thermosyphon. This physics-based model
will provide the necessary insight to understand the pertinent heat transfer
phenomena and how they interact to reduce the overall thermal resistance of the
device. The physical model will be validated by conducting a set of carefully-
designed experiments.