* 1435582
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Faunal Economy And Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* John Krigbaum, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 29,993.00

Complex state level societies are a recent development in human prehistory and
archaeologists want to understand how they emerged and functioned. How, for
example did hierarchical political and economic structures develop. As this took
place how did they function and how were multiple systems integrated? This
project addresses these issues directly through the analysis of faunal remains
recovered from an Iron Age site. It employs isotopic analysis of animal bone.
Isotopic patterns reflect how animals during their lifetime moved across the
landscape.

Under the direction of Dr. John Krigbaum, Gypsy Price will analyze isotope
ratios (delta 13C, 15N, 18O, and 87Sr/86Sr) derived from faunal bones and teeth
from disparate socio-economic contexts of the iconic palatial settlement of
Mycenae, Greece, during the Late Bronze Age (circa 1600-1150 BC). Historically,
Mycenaean economies were characterized as re-distributive systems in which
exchange of goods/labor were regulated by a central authority (the palace).
Recent investigations challenge these models, noting that they ignore the
practical circulation of mundane resources such as subsistence goods,
interactions between the non-elite, and site-specific variation. Rather, it is
argued that multiple economic systems operated concurrently between palatial and
non-palatial settlements. These systems mobilized resources upwards towards
palatial settlements in response to political and social strategies (e.g.,
feasting, production of wealth items, mortuary ostentation, and reverence of
divinities/ancestors).

This research will contribute a unique, micro-scalar perspective to Mycenaean
economy by integrating isotopic data and zooarchaeological analyses to assess
patterns of faunal resource use. Material will be sampled from two sites: Petsas
House, thought to have operated within an independently provisioned
industrial/domestic sphere; and the Cult Center, thought to have operated within
a state provisioned religious/cult sphere. Isotopic variation by taxon and
excavated context will allow assessment of the management and distribution of
exploited faunal resources (e.g., provisioning techniques, seasonal movement,
place of birth) to clarify distinct faunal economies within a larger socio-
political network. This research will apply social and political economic theory
to clarify the interaction between resource production, resource distribution,
and political authority. Methods employed will facilitate the construction and
testing of nuanced socio-economic networks by using well-excavated faunal
remains to augment existing interpretative narratives. Additionally, this study
will provide comparative data for dietary and mobility studies of human and
faunal remains in the region, as well as contribute methodologically to
traditional zooarchaeological analysis by utilizing isotopic ratios to assist in
the identification of intra-taxonomic subgroups which were previously
unidentifiable.

The broader impacts of this research include methodological and theoretical
contributions to understanding early complex societies, education and public
outreach, and undergraduate and graduate training. This research represents the
combined efforts and support of the University of Florida, the University of
California, Berkeley, the University of Connecticut, the Mycenae Archaeological
Museum, the Archaeological Institute of America, and the Archaeological Society
of Athens. It calls upon multiple disciplines to generate and interpret data
using methods developed in paleontology and geochemistry and theoretical methods
based on socio-economic theory. Results from this research will be presented at
national and international meetings, integrated into curricula at the University
of Florida, University of California, Berkeley, and Thayer Academy in Braintree,
MA, presented during field site tours attended by locals and groups affiliated
with various educational institutions, and help inform the displays at the
Archaeological Museum at Mycenae. Additionally, this research will provide
training in analytical and lab techniques geared towards using small samples
size to minimize destruction to the archaeological record for undergraduate and
graduate students in the Bone Chemistry Lab, Department of Anthropology,
University of Florida.