* 1435881
* Sustainable urban development in the Sun Corridor: Finding engineering alternatives through coupled WRF-urban land surface modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Zhihua Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2019
* USD 299,838.00

1435881 (Wang). Rapid urbanization is associated with substantial modifications
of land use and land cover (LULC), producing complex socio-ecological urban
landscapes. Changes in LULC have profound impacts on urban-land-atmosphere
interactions, with modification of the transport of energy, water, and tracers
over built terrains. Well-known effects of these changes include the urban heat
island (UHI) and the emission of greenhouse gases and pollutants, which will
likely be exacerbated by anticipated climate change. In this project, the
researchers will use development scenarios of Arizona's Sun Corridor developed
jointly by city planners and researchers as prototypes for investigating urban
system dynamics. The Sun Corridor is one of the fastest growing urban areas in
the U.S. Rapid expansion of the Sun Corridor has attracted increasing research
attention on many socio-ecological issues such as the UHI effect and regional
hydroclimate impacts. Despite this effort, there is a lack of a novel physical
modeling framework to investigate how innovative engineering design and
socioeconomic planning can help to mitigate adverse environmental effects. This
project aims to bridge this gap. The central hypothesis is that scenarios for
future urban growth derived from numerical modeling can reveal the interplay
between land use change and regional hydroclimate leading to novel outcomes for
urban sustainability. To address this, urban system dynamics including human-
environment interactions need to be faithfully represented by multi-scale
modeling frameworks (MMF) at high resolution with statistically quantified
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers will develop
an MMF by integrating the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model with a
state-of-the-art urban land surface model (LSM) to capture anthropogenic
stresses and coupled transport of water and energy in urban canopies. The major
outcome of the work will be the application of the integrated WRF-LSM for
assessment of urban planning strategies. The result of simulations will shed
light on how engineering infrastructure can ameliorate urban stresses, for
example the adoption of green infrastructure to mitigate UHI. The work is
expected to provide guidelines of sustainable urban development for land use and
water resource planners, embracing various dimensions including water resources,
hydroclimate, and engineering infrastructure. In addition, model uncertainty
characterization in conjunction with scenario analysis, will provide insight
into the vulnerability of urban environments to LULC and climate changes. Though
this study is focused on the Sun Corridor, research findings are expected to
have implications to other cities. This project will actively engage
stakeholders and personnel from local cities and water resources and land
planning agencies. The research team will seek participation and feedback from
stakeholders in modeling efforts, scenario development, and interpretation of
research findings relative to local cities and agencies throughout the project
duration. Two-way communication between the project team and stakeholders will
be conducted through technical briefings and workshops organized by the Decision
Center for a Desert City (DCDC) at the Arizona State University. For example,
LULC characteristics under future urban development will be gathered from city
planners as the boundary conditions to the integrated WRF-LSM model. Meetings
with stakeholders will be facilitated by auxiliary 3D graphic presentation and
other innovative dissemination mechanisms. In addition, this project will
support one research engineer and one graduate student at the Ph.D. level, who
will be actively engaged in education and outreach activities throughout the
project duration. Research findings of this study will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate-level courses, and disseminated to scientific
communities as well as broader audiences, through conference presentations,
peer-reviewed journal publications, and outreach activities.