* 1435358
* Functionalities Emerging in Adaptive Brain Networks through Selective Synchronization of Neurons by Targeted Feedback
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Hermann Riecke, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Two pervasive aspects of the brain motivate this project: brain rhythms and
feedback connectivity. Rhythms indicating partial synchronization, neurons
acting in unison, are ubiquitously observed in the brain by EEG and other
techniques. But their function is still not well understood; certain rhythms
tend to be enhanced when an animal pays attention to specific aspects of its
environment. A second characteristic aspect of brain networks is their extensive
feedback connectivity, which allows the processing of information in a brain
area to be modulated by the very brain area that receives that information. This
project will study rhythms in neuronal networks with feedback connectivity,
investigating whether such targeted feedback allows selective synchronization of
specific neurons and what functionalities emerge from it. It is expected that
selective synchronization contributes to solving tasks similar to the cocktail-
party problem of following the voice of a specific speaker among many people
talking simultaneously. The research will focus on the olfactory system. There,
a corresponding challenging task is, e.g., for a dog to track the faint smell of
a drug or landmine amidst many other smells. The project will inform efforts to
enhance the processing of the outputs of biologically motivated, event-driven
technological sensors for complex stimulus scenes. The training of graduate and
undergraduate students in applied mathematics, neuroscience, and
interdisciplinary communication skills is an integral part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will develop a combined neuronal network
model for the olfactory bulb and the piriform cortex. Incorporating aspects of
the extensive structural plasticity of the olfactory system, the network will be
adaptive, allowing the feedback connections to reflect previous experience.
Biophysically detailed neuron models as well as highly simplified neuronal
networks will be employed. Mathematically, the research will use and further
various analytical and computational dynamical systems methods: weak coupling of
mixed-mode oscillators and of delay-induced oscillators; weakly nonlinear
analysis of neuronal populations interacting with multiple delays; bifurcation
analysis of resonant, delay-induced Hopf bifurcations; numerical branch
continuation. These approaches will be complemented by direct simulations.