* 1435624
* From Discrete Dislocation Dynamics to Crystal Plasticity - A Spatio-Temporal Coarse-Graining Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Amit Acharya, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2019
* USD 366,348.00

The objective of this work is to develop and demonstrate the fundamentals of a
predictive, next-generation, computational tool for microstructure-sensitive
design of metallic components of modern machines that are subjected to
mechanical stress and deformation. The generally irreversible deformation of
metallic materials at the macroscopic scale called plastic deformation arises
due to the motion of vast numbers of defects in their underlying regular
crystalline structure under applied loading. Such defect motions lead to special
spatial patterns of organization of multiple defects called microstructure, and
it is known that this defect microstructure has significant effect on the
material's macroscopic properties like strength and ductility. The individual
defect motions occur at much smaller length scales and much faster time scales
than those of macroscopically observed plastic deformation, thus requiring a
mathematical process of averaging to define the macroscopic model of collective
behavior of defects from the microscopic dynamics. This award supports the
development and validation of such a macroscopic model from microscopic
fundamentals through multiscale mathematical and computational modeling. The
project addresses a key scientific question with significant impact on society.
A great deal of modern manufacturing, design of light-weight, high-strength
structural materials and materials for gas turbines for energy and aerospace
applications all depend upon understanding of microstructure evolution and its
effect on material properties. Widely used industrial design codes do not at
present make use of microstructure sensitive material models. This research will
develop a truly material microstructure-sensitive model for plastic strength and
dislocation microstructure evolution that has the potential to revolutionize the
way metallic materials are designed in many industries, bringing about
significant cost and energy savings for the US economy. The research tightly
integrates the fields of Applied Mathematics, Mechanics of Materials, and
Materials Science, and this will lead to fruitful interdisciplinary interplay of
ideas between these fields, all directed to very practical outcomes, including
the training of students which will enhance the US workforce in science and
technology. Efforts will be made to archive developed computer codes at the NSF
supported Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center to enable systematic, free,
widespread access to interested practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
challenge of this work is to develop a novel computational tool for accurate
multi-scale simulations of plasticity and dislocation microstructure evolution
in crystalline materials. The tasks addressed will be the computation of plastic
strength and associated microstructure of a material at the meso and macroscale
directly from the underlying motion of crystal defects. This application is a
paradigmatic complex system, with immense practical relevance. Specifically, an
exact, but non-closed, partial differential equation based theory representing
the evolution of space-time averaged dislocation dynamics will be utilized, that
contains well-defined place-holders for microscopic dislocation dynamics based
input. These inputs, typically prescribed as phenomenological constitutive
assumptions, will be replaced in this work by a carefully designed coupling, on
the "slow" time-scale of meso-macro response, with time-averaged response of
"fast", local (on the macroscopic scale) Discrete Dislocation Dynamics
simulations. The overall strategy is based on novel and sound continuum
mechanical principles like a conservation statement for topological charge
carried by crystal defects coupled to macroscopic elasticity as well as modern
mathematical tools like Young Measure theory for averaging multi-time scale
response of nonlinear Ordinary Differential Equations. Interestingly, this
approach for solving a patently practical problem involves finite dimensional
dynamical system input into an overarching infinite dimensional dynamical
system.