* 1435494
* Evaluation of Earthquake-Induced Liquefaction Damage Potential to Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Russell Green, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2019
* USD 255,316.00

The recent earthquakes in New Zealand, Chile, and Japan highlight the damaging
effects of earthquake-induced liquefaction on both the natural and built
environments. For example the 2010-2011 Canterbury, New Zealand, earthquake
sequence resulted in approximately $35 billion in damage to buried utilities,
roads, buildings, and other infrastructure in Christchurch, with much of the
damage being a direct consequence of liquefaction. "Turning disaster into
knowledge," this award supports the development of a framework to assess
liquefaction damage potential on infrastructure using the wealth of field
performance data from the recent earthquakes, as well as data from well-
documented historic liquefaction case histories and supplemental computer
simulations. This research project is motivated by the need to properly account
for triggering and damage within a framework that respects their fundamental
differences, systematically classifies the severity of liquefaction and relates
it to the response of the entire soil profile, removes much of the subjectivity
in interpreting liquefaction case histories used to develop triggering curves,
and avoids the double counting of factors that influence liquefaction damage
potential. The results of this award will help minimize losses from earthquakes
by improving the current methods for liquefaction risk assessment. Furthermore,
the educational impacts will not only result from the increased technical
understanding of the subject matter, but will also result from the international
collaborations with colleagues in New Zealand, Chile, and
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distinction between liquefaction triggering and
the resulting damage is blurred by subjectivity in current approaches used to
develop liquefaction "triggering" curves. The reason for this is that
liquefaction "triggering" curves are primarily based on observed severity of
surface manifestation data. As a result, the purported simplified liquefaction
"triggering" curves are actually combined "triggering" and "surface
manifestation" curves. Consequently, the use of these curves within current
liquefaction damage potential index frameworks inherently double counts factors
that influence liquefaction damage potential. This is particularly an issue for
reliably assessing the risk due to liquefaction. This award supports the
development of a liquefaction triggering curve and damage potential index within
a consistent framework that provides a clear separation and proper accounting of
liquefaction triggering and liquefaction damage potential. Most notably, this
framework avoids the need to tie liquefaction occurrence to a specific layer
within a profile; instead, this framework integrates information from the entire
profile for each case history. The classification of manifestation severity will
follow a detailed rubric such that a unified and objective approach for
liquefaction hazard assessment is formed. The field performance data will be
analyzed using the Bayesian updating technique to develop a probabilistically
based "true" liquefaction triggering curve. This technique will also be used to
determine the damage potential index values that correspond to different
probabilities of liquefaction severity, where liquefaction severity is used as a
proxy for damage potential. However, this framework will preserve the elegance
and simplicity of the simplified liquefaction triggering evaluation procedure
and Liquefaction Potential Index formulation because of their familiarity to
practicing engineers.