* 1435926
* Coupling Experimental and Theoretical Molecular-Level Investigations to Visualize the Fate of Degradation of Organic Compounds in Aqueous Phase Advanced Oxidation Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mark Rouleau, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

1435926&lt;br/&gt;Minakata&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupling Experimental and
Theoretical Molecular-Level Investigations to Visualize the Fate of Degradation
of Organic Compounds in Aqueous Phase Advanced Oxidation
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of an overarching management plan combined
with uncertainty about the adverse human health and ecological impacts of trace
amounts of known and emerging organic compounds have raised public concerns
about water. These issues also present major challenges to next generation water
treatment utilities dealing with de facto and planned wastewater reuse. Advanced
oxidation processes that produce highly reactive hydroxyl radicals are promising
technologies to control trace amounts of organic compounds. Although the initial
fate of hydroxyl radical induced reactions with diverse organic compounds have
been studied, the mechanisms that produce intermediate radicals and stable-
byproducts are not well understood. Significant barriers remain in our
understanding of complex multi-channel elementary reaction pathways embedded in
peroxyl radical bimolecular decay that produce identical intermediate-radicals
and stable-byproducts. The model developed in the course of this research will
give researchers and policy makers the ability to predict the likely chemical
by-products and alternative options to provide least adverse impact on the
general public who will directly consume this water or other ecological
organisms who will be exposed indirectly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
study will integrate three thrusts to discover the currently unknown fate of the
three major degradation pathways. First, we will perform pulse-photolysis
kinetic measurement to determine the temperature-dependent overall reaction rate
constants for multi-channel peroxyl radical reactions. We will also measure the
resulting byproducts using a mass spectrometry. Second, we will employ quantum
mechanical theoretical calculations to determine the elementary reaction
pathways and associated reaction rate constants. Third, we will then combine our
kinetic measurements with our theoretical calculations to develop an agent-based
model that will enable us to visualize and predict the fate of organic
compounds. With explicitly assigned reaction rules and molecular behavior
embedded within a simulated reaction network, the resulting agent-based model
will use software agents to represent radical species and organic compounds and
then simulate their interactions to predict corresponding consequences (i.e.,
byproducts) over time and space. Finally, experimental observations will
validate the outcomes from the agent-based model.