* 1435766
* Lubrication by Chemical Reaction Products at Sliding Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Sliding and rubbing interfaces of machineries, whether they are big or small,
need lubrication to mitigate friction and wear for reliable operation.
Otherwise, these interfaces are bound to fail eventually. The last defense of
the sliding interface from such failure is boundary lubrication layers which are
chemically or physically adhered to solid surfaces. This layer can be applied to
the tribological interface before the assembly and full operation of mechanical
devices, or formed in-situ during the operation of the devices. This work
focuses on in-situ synthesis of boundary lubrication films directly at the
sliding interfaces during the device operation. This research can generate a new
lubricant additive chemistry which can reduce parasitic frictional energy losses
for automobile industries. This work could also revive the microscale
electromechanical technology requiring reliable operations of moving and sliding
structural components. This project will train students with multidisciplinary
skills covering surface science, molecular characterization and imaging, and
tribology; these students will make substantial contributions to newly emerging
nano-engineering fields as well as traditional lubrication sectors. The research
outcome will be incorporated into a graduate surface characterization course and
disseminated through to a broad range of science and engineering fields covering
chemistry, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, materials science, and
tribology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanochemical reactions readily occur at all
length scales; however, key parameters governing the reaction yield and
selectivity are not well documented or understood. This study aims at advancing
mechanistic understanding of mechanochemical reactions that can produce reliable
boundary lubrication films with complementary properties such as low interfacial
shear and high load-bearing. Two specific systems to be studied are (i)
mechanochemical polymerization of unsaturated alcohols and esters adsorbed from
the vapor phase for synthesis of multilayer films of polyols and polyolesters
and (ii) ferrocene-catalyzed mechanochemical reactions of organic precursors in
lubricant oils and their graphitization at the sliding interface. This work will
undertake systematic studies to understand how contact pressure, shear rate,
structure of reactant molecules, and chemistry of substrate materials affect the
mechanochemical reaction yield and selectivity as well as the lubrication
properties of the produced films. The outcome of this study will not only make
breakthroughs in surface engineering for extreme-condition lubrications, but
also advance fundamental knowledge of tribochemistry which is still empirical
and qualitative.