* 1435159
* Collaborative Research:  Temporal and spatial scaling of dissipation under non-breaking surface waves
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Brian Haus, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 544,171.00

Quantifying the rate at which surface waves dissipate energy is necessary to
properly model upper ocean mixing, circulation and the waves themselves. A
fundamental assumption for much of the work so far is that little to no energy
goes from waves into turbulence as long as the waves are not breaking. This
study will explore the limits of validity of this assumption using a novel
instrument, the Optical Turbulence Sensor (OTS) that can measure turbulence over
very short time periods, so that turbulence intensity over different parts of a
wave can be resolved in the laboratory. This project will result in a richer
understanding of upper ocean turbulence under waves and lead to improved
parameterizations to be used in models. The project will also support two
graduate students, include outreach activities for the general public through
ongoing community programs at both institutions, and distribute wave and
turbulence visualizations through the student-run video project Waterlust.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breaking of waves has been shown to be the dominant
mechanism for dissipation of wave energy in most circumstances, however it has
also become clear that additional dissipation is required to match observations
in non-breaking conditions. To address this, equations were derived for the
dissipation of swell wave energy due to interaction of the sheared wave-induced
Stokes drift with pre-existing turbulence. An alternative approach recognizes
that water has finite viscosity and as such there must be turbulence and
dissipation induced by the wave orbital motions. Unfortunately, it is
essentially impossible to isolate these proposed sources of dissipation in the
field where mean flows, wave breaking, sheared wind-drift currents and buoyancy
effects co-exist. Some laboratory studies have confirmed the existence of non-
breaking wave-induced turbulence. However, flow visualization studies did not
see evidence of turbulence until the wave amplitudes were such that
microbreaking could be important. Addressing this significant knowledge gap
regarding the turbulent dissipation of non-breaking surface waves will take a
comprehensive laboratory study. Established measurement technologies will be
used to calibrate and validate the OTS in the first year. The OTS can measure
the temperature dissipation spectrum over temporal windows as short as 1 ms.
This enables the measurement of turbulence in non-stationary conditions and can
resolve wave phase dependence. The next experiments will quantify the temporal
and spatial scales at which turbulence occurs when non-breaking waves propagate
over a fluid that is initially at rest. Additional instrumentation will be used
to observe mean flows, wave heights and wave slopes. The final experiments will
quantify turbulence generation and amplification in the more realistic condition
when there is significant pre-existing turbulence. First, monochromatic
mechanical waves will be propagated over water containing grid generated
turbulence. Then waves with energy distributed from ~0.2 to 2 Hz will be
included. Finally, the wave fields will be forced with variable winds and will
be sampled for longer duration to investigate the turbulence generation when
sheared mean flows are present. This study will resolve the role of pre-existing
turbulence, address whether there is a wave related threshold for turbulence and
determine the time, depth and space scales over which turbulence develops.