* 1435188
* Enabling the Design of Large-Scale Complex Engineered Systems using Self-Organizing Optimization Algorithms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Joaquim Martins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 329,998.00

The design of complex engineered systems is of critical importance to society
due to the impact these systems have on productivity and quality of life. The
complexity of systems such as electronic appliances, aircraft, spacecraft, or
cars has grown tremendously as the expectations for performance and
functionality continue to increase. The process for designing engineered systems
has itself become complex, to the point where this complexity is becoming
unmanageable. This award supports research on new approaches for designing that
can tackle problems of unprecedented complexity through the use of optimization
algorithms. Using optimization software, an automotive engineer can already
design a car that maximizes the fuel economy by varying the car shape,
dimensions, and engine characteristics, while satisfying all safety constraints.
However, for engineered systems that involve large numbers of components and
parameters that depend on each other, existing optimization algorithms become
unacceptably slow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a new set of computational design optimization algorithms that will be
able to optimize large-scale complex engineered systems in a scalable way. This
scalability will be achieved by taking advantage of high-performance parallel
computing resources and by exploiting the mathematical structure of the problem,
decomposing it automatically into manageable components. The algorithms will be
built upon recent mathematical developments that unify numerical methods for the
solution and sensitivity analysis of coupled systems. The developed algorithms
will be tested in collaboration with the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration for the design optimization of a satellite and its operation. The
resulting software will be of general purpose, and will be published under an
open source license agreement.