* 1435965
* DMREF: SusChEM: Simulation-Based Predictive Design of All-Organic Phosphorescent Light-Emitting Molecular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Jinsang Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 997,787.00

DMREF: SUSCHEM: SIMULATION-BASED PREDICTIVE DESIGN OF ALL-ORGANIC PHOSPHORESCENT
LIGHT-EMITTING MOLECULAR MATERIALS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Description: Organic light emitting diodes (OLED) exhibit remarkable energy
efficiency in applications ranging from urban lighting to large-screen display
panels. Current technologies are based on phosphorescent materials that contain
organo-metallic compounds, which involve heavy-metal ions. These are expensive
to procure, present limitations with regard to device longevity, and in some
cases are considered environmentally unsafe or even toxic. The goal of this
research is to eliminate the need for heavy-metal ions by developing a
fundamentally new class of all-organic phosphorescent molecules. The principal
task is to design molecules in which the juxtaposition of electronic orbitals
promotes the processes underlying phosphorescence while at the same time the
chemical bonding patterns provide the structural rigidity needed to minimize the
non-radiative decay of electronic excitations. To this end an integrative
computational-experimental approach is employed, in which molecular simulations,
chemical synthesis, and materials characterization are combined in a synergistic
and iterative sequence. The expected outcomes of this project are novel
environmentally benign phosphorescent materials that are based on sustainable
chemistries and that are immediately deployable for lighting applications. The
new insights into the functional response of molecular materials gained while
perfecting metal-free OLED benefits organic electronics in general, and advance
technologies such as photovoltaics, sensors, and displays. Finally, software
toolkits, data management utilities, and workflows for simulation-based
predictive materials design are established as a new paradigm for materials
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The efficiency of
phosphorescent materials is based on the ability to emit not only from singlet
but also triplet excited states, which are populated as a result of spin-orbit
coupling. The strength of this coupling is attributed to the presence of heavy-
metal ions in organo-metallic compounds. However, organo-metallics are
accompanied by significant challenges: besides the high cost of precious metals,
dislocated metal ions in the emitting layer may trap charge, which jeopardizes
device longevity. By serendipity, the co-PI demonstrated metal-free organic
phosphors with unprecedented high solid-state phosphorescent quantum yield of up
to 68% at ambient conditions. The current research aims to further develop this
fundamentally new, environmentally benign, and chemically sustainable class of
all-organic phosphorescent molecules with improved performance characteristics
by employing an integrated computational-experimental approach. Specific
objectives are to (i) eliminate the heavy metal ions form the emitting molecules
with the aim to lower materials cost and obtainability, improve ease of
fabrication, and prolong device lifetime and dependability; (ii) deconvolute the
dual roles of halogen bonding, i.e., to promote spin-orbit coupling and suppress
vibrational energy dissipation, and supplant the intermolecular secondary
bonding-induced phosphorescence enhancement mechanism with intramolecular
analogs; (iii) optimize the molecular architectures of both the emitting and
host species so as to minimize vibration-mediated non-radiative decay of excited
states through stiffening of intramolecular bonding patterns, stabilization of
emitters by host molecules designed to suppress detrimental vibrations within
effectively packed geometries, and crystallization of emitters within nano-
confinement. To this end, concept emitter and host molecules are constructed and
their structure and electronic properties, e.g., excited state energies,
singlet-triplet transition rates, charge mobilities, etc., predicted using
first-principles calculations. Structural models are generated using shape
packing algorithms and molecular simulations, and possible crystal structures
are predicted. Best candidate molecules are synthesized, characterized, and
their emissive and vibrational properties measured.