* 1435521
* A Scalable Roll-to-Roll Printing Approach to Integrating Nanomaterials into High-Performance Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Seok Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The emergence of a variety of high quality nanoscale materials in the last few
decades have brought forth novel tunable properties with which new and improved
technologies can be envisioned. Prospects include low-cost solar cells with
unprecedented power conversion efficiencies to high-contrast biomedical imaging
agents. While high-performance in laboratory scale devices incorporating
nanoscale materials have been demonstrated, for many applications such as
photovoltaics and displays, scalable manufacturing of high efficiency devices
and device arrays is an absolute necessity. Currently, there are no clear
pathways to achieving such practical large area, large arrays of complex, high
performing structures. This award supports fundamental research to build the
necessary foundation for developing a scalable roll-to-roll printing approach to
assembling large arrays of nanoscale materials within functioning device
architectures. Such an ability to integrate large arrays of nanoscale materials
should enable manufacturing of a wide variety of electronic and optoelectronic
devices from high-performance solar cells to energy efficient displays and
lighting technologies. This multidisciplinary research involving materials,
mechanical and manufacturing sciences as well as optoelectronics will provide
research opportunities for students from underrepresented groups and
promote/enhance engineering education.

Heterogeneous integration of various 0D, 1D, and 2D nanomaterials such as
quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, and graphene into vertically stacked multilayer
structures allows for effective methods of utilizing the unique electrical and
optical properties of these nanomaterials in a monolithic architecture. However,
well-established fabrication processes such as photolithography are often
incompatible with nanomaterials. Dry transfer printing using elastomeric stamps
is a potential solution to this incompatibility problem but the nature of
kinetically switchable adhesion of elastomers requires different peeling speeds
between retrieval and printing steps. This requirement in turn introduces a
grand challenge in employing elastomeric stamps to scalable roll-to-roll
printing since retrieval and printing need to be carried out with the same
roller, thus the same peeling speed. This research aims to explore shape memory
polymers as stamp materials to replace kinetic control by stiffness control of
dry adhesion and, furthermore, to enhance the adhesion force and switchability.
The research team will examine the mechanics of shape memory polymers for
transfer printing, investigate the fundamental properties of nanomaterials and
interfaces assembled using shape memory polymer and apply the knowledge gained
to assemble multilayer stacks consisting of nanomaterials and other relevant
device components in a continuous roll-to-roll fashion.