* 1435964
* DMREF: Self Assembly with DNA-Labeled Colloidal Particles and DNA Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Brenner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,492,761.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Creating materials and devices that can assemble
themselves has long been a holy grail in materials science, since it would
introduce qualitatively new ways of making nano-scale structures and materials.
The field of DNA nanotechnology has exploded with striking advances in creating
robust and dynamic materials made entirely out of DNA, but the uses of DNA as a
material on its own are much more limited than if it could be combined with
other materials. A potentially vast synergy lies in the combination of colloidal
assembly and DNA nanotechnology. Instead of mediating the interactions between
particles by using DNA linkers (the current state of the art), one could control
these interactions using more complex and potentially dynamic DNA nanostructures
in solution. This project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of how
(dynamic) DNA nanostructures can control and program colloidal self-assembly. By
putting this concept on a strong fundamental footing, it will be possible to
exploit it to maximum effect through the design of DNA reaction networks that
solve essential challenges to making colloidal self-assembly a practical
materials fabrication platform. The set of possible interactions between
building blocks is so large that this design space can only be systematically
explored with a combined attack from theory, numerical simulation, and
experiment. The project aims both to discover the fundamental principles
underlying DNA particle-nanostructure interactions and to create new materials
from plasmonic molecules to metafluids with immediate technological impact. The
project will also involve Harvard undergraduates in a design curriculum for
inner city middle schools, in a summer software development project through
Harvard's Institute for Applied Computational Science, and in teams that
participate in the International Genetically Engineered Machines
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will work to understand and harness the different ways of making novel periodic
and aperiodic colloidal structures out of particles and DNA nanostructures.
Several types of DNA nanostructures can be used to control colloidal self-
assembly. The simplest type of mediating DNA nanostructure involves single
strands of DNA (ssDNA) in solution. Preliminary experiments show that free DNA
strands give an unprecedented level of control over assembly and melting through
strand displacement reactions. The investigators will also develop mediating DNA
nanostructures that give an effective valence to inter-particle interactions,
even when the particles are uniformly coated with ssDNA. Valence creates many
new directions for robust self-assembly, from building large structures to
designing structures that form spontaneously in a bath at finite concentration.
Finally, they will investigate how DNA hairpins can lead to non-equilibrium
interactions. This opens up new vistas for theory and experiments, including the
design of self-replicating colloidal clusters and the development of kinetic
proofreading schemes for significantly increasing the fidelity of the
interactions over the equilibrium limit. For each type of DNA-mediated
interaction, the team will use theory and simulation--which in some cases
requires developing new methods--to enumerate the possibilities of what can be
assembled. These will be used in conjunction with experiment to realize the
assemblies described in the simulations, and these experiments will inform
refinements of theory and simulations. Ultimately, they will arrive at a
holistic view of what can be assembled with each mediating nanostructure.