* 1435708
* GEOTRACES Arctic Section:  Processes affecting the biogeochemical cycling of essential and toxic metalloids in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2018
* USD 238,385.00

In this project, an investigator participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will establish the concentrations, chemical speciation, and cycling
processes of arsenic and selenium in the Arctic Ocean. In common with other
multinational initiatives in the International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of
the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and quantify fluxes that
control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and
to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental
conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life, others are known
biological toxins, and still others are important because they can be used as
tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the sea.
The metalloid elements arsenic and selenium to be studied in this project are
toxic to many marine plants and animals, and their cycling in the Arctic is not
well known. Thus, this project will have important implications for increased
knowledge on the chemistry of these potentially toxic elements. Results from the
project will be shared through outreach to Arctic residents and through a
PolarTREC teacher who will participate in the cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
metalloid elements arsenic and selenium have dynamic marine cycles that affect
the microbiology of the water column and in turn are affected by it. Both exist
in multiple oxidation states and inorganic and organic species within an
oxidation state. This chemical speciation affects their reactivity and biotic
uptake and toxicity. As shown in lower latitude waters, the concentration and
speciation of dissolved arsenic can control the abundance and types of primary
producers. In the Arctic virtually nothing is known about arsenic cycling,
although there are possibly enhanced anthropogenic inputs from Canadian rivers
and atmospheric deposition. In contrast, data from the high latitude North
Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea strongly suggest that anthropogenic selenium from
coal combustion is entering the Arctic and enriching its concentration in at
least one top predator. The goal of this project is to qualitatively describe
the input, removal, and internal cycling processes affecting the speciation and
concentrations of arsenic and selenium, and determine rates of inputs and
outputs of these processes using both direct measurements and computations. The
study will greatly expand knowledge about arsenic and selenium cycling, with
strong implications for the changing Arctic.