* 1435957
* DMREF:  Thin Film Biofabrication for Integrated Bio-electronics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,332,069.00

1435957&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;Payne&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to integrate advances
in biotechnology and microelectronics by developing generic, biologically-based
thin film fabrication methods to incorporate biological function into
electronics. Thin hydrogel films will be triggered to self-assemble in response
to locally-imposed electrical signals. The PIs propose methods to incorporate
small molecules, proteins, and cells into the hydrogel films, and will focus on
understanding how fabrication conditions control the structure-property-function
relations. A multilayer thin film system is proposed that will allow
communication between the biology and the electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work is potentially transformative in four ways. First, the PIs will apply the
advances in biology as an underpinning for materials science. Second, theory and
experiments will be coupled to characterize the mesoscale self-assembly of soft
matter. Third, the spatial, temporal and quantitative precision of electrical
signals will be used to create structure, confer properties and perform
functions. Finally, the biotechnology and electronics will be
integrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong international collaborations are
proposed which will provide students with opportunities to participate in
projects that span continents and cultures. The proposed collaboration with
industrial partners will accelerate the incorporation of biology into materials
science. The PIs also propose to integrate the activities within existing
University partnerships with Food and Drug Administration and the National
Institutes of Science and Technology. Because they provide the metrology and
regulatory guidelines, these agencies will be integral to the speed that
biologically-based materials are introduced into the marketplace. These
partnerships will assist in accelerating translation and also in providing
meaningful externships for students.