* 1435467
* Comparing the Roles of Bone Cells and Marrow Cells in the Adaptive Response of Bone to Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Glen Niebur, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 370,000.00

A healthy skeleton is essential to maintaining an active lifestyle. Bones grow
stronger when subjected to regular loading from exercise or daily activities.
Conversely, they become more fragile during prolong inactivity or when the
applied forces are below normal, such as during space flight or prolonged bed
rest. Exploiting the underlying mechanisms of this phenomenon may provide new
methods to combat bone loss due to aging and disease. The process of bone
adaptation is controlled by the coordinated activity of cells embedded inside
the bone and with cells in the bone marrow, but the potential for each family of
cells to act independently is not known. In this project, small samples of bone
will be kept alive in an incubator with mechanical loading applied to stimulate
new bone growth. The response of cells within the bone and in the bone marrow
will be detected and compared in order to identify potential ways to most
effectively target them individually or in combination to maintain bone
strength. The insights gained in this research have the potential to inform
future investigations into novel pharmacological treatments to prevent bone
loss. Furthermore, the research will have an educational impact through an
established relationship with a local high school to encourage a broader
participation in science and engineering and a continued international
collaboration with the University of Ireland, Galway.

Bone adaptation relies on the coordinated activity of osteoblasts, osteoclasts,
and osteocytes. Osteocytes act as the primary sensors of bone deformation and
signal neighboring cells to affect bone formation and resorption. However, many
cells resident in the bone marrow are also mechanosensitive, and could
contribute to the adaptive response of bone. This study will employ ex vivo
mechanical stimulation applied to trabecular explants to study its effects in
both bone marrow and osteocytes. Low magnitude mechanical stimulation (LMMS)
will be used to induce shear stress in bone marrow while the small acceleration
and mass of the bone result in effectively no bone deformation. Computational
models will be used to quantify the marrow shear stress, which will be spatially
correlated to bone formation. The effects of LMMS on beta-catenin signaling will
be quantified in the presence of both agonists and antagonists to WNT signaling
to identify the mechanobiological mechanisms that act within the marrow cells.