* 1435655
* Fast and High-resolution Dynamic Mechanical Spectroscopy of Biological Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Igor Sokolov, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2018
* USD 418,112.00

Dynamic mechanical spectroscopy allows measuring mechanical properties of
materials at different speeds. It is a popular technique for studying soft
material such as polymers. However, because of several intrinsic problems, this
technique has not been extended to study the properties of biological cells as
of yet. Besides fundamental interest, the study of cell mechanics makes a
practical impact in understanding mechanical changes of cells in various
diseases, like cancer, malaria, Alzheimer, and even aging. However, most cell
studies were done for their static properties. While the changes in dynamic
mechanical properties of cells are expected to be much richer, the existing
attempts to measure cell dynamic properties have been very limited, and the
results are controversial. This award supports fundamental research to provide
knowledge needed for the development of a new quantitative technique to perform
dynamic mechanical measurements of cells. The new method has the potential to
revolutionize the study of cell mechanics. In general, it will also bring a new
dimension to the study of the mechanics of biomaterials and nanocomposites at
the nanoscale. It will expand the knowledge base to a scale of resolutions
previously inaccessible. A translational part will include investigation of
biomechanics of cancer cells. This application can build the foundation for
nanomechanical applications in healthcare, which can benefit the U.S. society by
saving billions of dollars through the early detection of cancer. The research
will combine physics, biology, electronics, and nanotechnology. This multi-
disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research and positively impact mechanical and biomedical engineering
education.

Dynamic mechanical spectroscopy deals with the storage and loss moduli of
materials which are the least model dependent quantities. While this method is
standard for soft material, excessive time of measurements and low resolution
preclude its use from obtaining reliable moduli on biological cells. In
addition, cells are complex composite objects. This research will combine fast
Fourier spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy to improve the speed and
spatial resolution of dynamic mechanical spectroscopy. The improvement is
expected to be more than 100x in speed and 100x in the resolution compared to
the existing methods. The research team will apply this method to develop an
appropriate viscoelastic cell model, in particular, taking into account
pericellular brush, an important cellular organelle which dynamical mechanical
properties are yet to be discovered. The obtained knowledge will be applied to
study biomechanics of human cervical and breast cancer cells.