* 1435914
* New Data-Driven Methods for Managing Complex Inventory Systems in Global Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sridhar Tayur, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 264,722.00

Global companies that produce a variety of goods (ranging from consumer products
(such as items in health, personal and beauty care, food and beverages),
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and electronics) are facing a triple threat: (1)
increasing variety of products for an increasingly impatient and discriminating
consumer base, (2) shorter life cycles due to increasing speed of innovation and
(3) shrinking profit margins due to intense competition from new on-line
competitors. The ability to plan for (and stock appropriately) the thousands of
items across hundreds of locations has become an increasing critical aspect of
the business, both to capture revenues (by not missing sales due to shortage of
inventory) as well as to avoid costs of unsold material (including the costs on
the environment). Unlike in the past where sufficient amount of data was
available, and the planning horizons were more stable, today these decisions
need to be made with low number of historical data (albeit with complex
interactions across large number of products, locations and time) on a more
frequent basis. This research project will yield new methods to help these
companies by bringing to bear previously unavailable methods developed from, and
successfully applied in other areas of applied mathematics, statistics and
engineering. The investigators have worked closely with several companies and
have representative data on which they can test the performance of the new
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective management of inventories in today's
complex data environment of highly competitive global supply chains (fighting to
delight impatient customers with a dazzling array of products, excellent service
levels and low prices) is critical for business success across a variety of
industries. Competing on product availability has become a key strategic weapon.
This requires new data-driven methods rather than approaches that rely on
distributional assumptions (which are the mainstay in current practice). There
are five aspects that make the data complex. First, having a limited amount of
purchase history makes it difficult to have a complete picture of the already
uncertain consumer; thus, the parameter uncertainty in the model has to be
accounted for, in addition to data uncertainty. Second, items are bought in
sets, or act as substitutes, and so a tractable multi-variate model is needed
that can be built with limited amount of data. Third, there are temporal aspects
of purchase behavior, with auto-correlations and lags, due to consumer trends.
Fourth, not every item is bought in every period, nor are they bought in fixed
sums; this sporadic (intermittent) demand modeling is crucial as well, in
addition to correlations between the time between purchases and purchase
quantities. Finally, due to seasonality and life cycle phases, the purchase
behavior is non-stationary. The investigators will use a framework that accounts
for parameter uncertainty, a multi-variate representation that is at once sparse
and general, and develop fast algorithms starting from available limited data by
making the least amount of assumptions on the data generation process. Prior
work was very successful in dealing with the single-product, limited history
situation with no intermittent demand, and early testing shows very good
performance with intermittent data. Beyond research, the investigators also plan
to provide tools for educators so that these can be made part of the next
generation of teaching tools for senior undergraduates and Masters students
(including technical MBAs).