* 1435138
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Novel Graph Models for Studying Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Peter Bearman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,872.00

The problem of popular, collectively organized political action has long had a
grip on the attention of historians, sociologists and political scientists. The
British campaign for the abolition of the slave trade (1788-1807) is perhaps the
first of such cases. Across social science disciplines that engage with this
problem, there is now a consensus that the patterning of social relations has a
bearing on the level of mobilization. This dissertation examines this case,
using archival data to model the social networks of individuals and settlements
through which the movement was organized and diffused. Novel graph models will
be used to estimate these structures and investigate which features contributed
to movement success. The insights that this research provides will help inform
the historical narrative of the period and the movement itself, and, moreover,
this research will contribute to a more complete understanding of the type of
network structures that enable or constrain collective mobilization in other
social and historical contexts.

This research introduces an innovative methodology - exponential random graph
modeling (ERGM) for ego-centrically sampled data - as a solution to move
empirical investigations grounded in data and simulation closer. These models
have been developed to study the spread of infectious diseases, and thus they
lend themselves well for the study of British abolition because (1) it is easy
to see the parallel (though not equivalence) between the diffusion of diseases
and ideas; and (2) the data problems of hard to find contemporary populations
that often confront infectious disease modelers are strikingly similar to those
that historical sociologists face. Primary source documents for a case study of
Manchester which then is embedded at the national scale in England provide the
data for these models to: (1) answer the question of why abolitionist
mobilization was successful at these different scales, (2) provide a framework
to study other mobilization events in similar historical con- texts, and (3)
bring ERGMs, a new analytic tool, into the mainstream sociological research on
mobilization.

This work is a combination of highly technical network analysis and the
meticulous compilation of datasets from digital archives. These data sources are
not yet widely exploited in historical research, and thus this research will
provide a template for conducting similar work by interdisciplinary scholars
from history, the social and computer sciences. In addition, this work will
point to some of the determinants of social movement success. The data produced
by this project will be useful to researchers for continued investigation of
methodological techniques, theory building, and the study of this particular
case.