* 1435072
* Improving Virtual Product Development Through Isogeometric Analysis Based on Rational Triangular Bezier Splines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Xiaoping Qian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,945.00

In modern product development, the geometry of objects is represented digitally
using computer-aided design (CAD) models. To predict the behavior of these
virtual objects, analysts often use finite element analysis (FEA). However,
despite the growing usage of these technologies in an increasingly broad range
of applications, they each have become highly sophisticated digital islands,
only loosely connected to each other. An important reason for this is that
different mathematical descriptions are used to represent geometry in CAD and
FEA tools, leading to the need for model conversion, approximation, and meshing.
To bypass this laborious meshing process, isogeometric analysis (IGA) uses the
same geometric basis functions for both CAD and FEA. This award supports the
fundamental study of using triangular Bézier splines as basis functions for
isogeometric analysis. If successful, this research will lead to disruptive
competitive advantages to a host of industries where currently the lengthy
processes of preparing analysis models from CAD models is the bottleneck in
design-analysis integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research exploits the
fact that techniques are available for automatic creation of triangular meshes
from CAD models. The premise of this research is that such techniques for
creating triangular meshes can be extended into techniques for automatic
parametrization of complex objects with smooth triangular Bézier elements. The
research objective is thus to understand the parametrization quality during the
automatic decomposition of CAD models into rational Triangular Bézier Spline
elements (rTBS) and its influence on analysis performances in terms of
convergence rate, consistency and stability. Based on this new knowledge, rTBS
based parametrization completion algorithms and analysis techniques will be
developed. Successful completion of this research will lead to a new set of
rTBS-based algorithms for computational design that enable seamless integration
of design-through-analysis. It represents a paradigm shift from current
laborious manual processing of CAD models into finite element meshes or manual
parametrization with tensor-product based splines for IGA.