* 1435691
* RUI:  Collaborative Research: Surface reservoir ages and ventilation in the Bering Sea during the last deglaciation from tephras and radiocarbon
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2018
* USD 147,490.00

Radiocarbon estimates of the past ocean are valuable because they have the
potential to trace the distribution and transport of water masses, which are
both important for understanding the role of ocean circulation in climate
changes. A well-known problem with radiocarbon reconstructions from paired
measurements of benthic and planktonic foraminifera is that most studies assume
that the offset between the apparent radiocarbon age of the local surface water
and the contemporary atmosphere (the "surface reservoir age") has been constant
through time. Modeling simulations show that surface reservoir age probably
changed by hundreds of years at centennial to millennial timescales in the past.
Unaccounted-for changes in surface reservoir age are problematic, since they can
introduce as large a signal into a radiocarbon reconstruction of the ocean
interior as the changes associated with ocean circulation. In this collaborative
project, the research team will match volcanic ash layers (tephras) from marine
sediment cores in the southeast Bering Sea to independently-dated tephras from
nearby Sanak Island. This will allow reconstruction of surface reservoir ages
from this location and testing of the hypothesis that reservoir age varied by
hundreds of years in the past. The team will also be able to re-evaluate the
conclusions of studies based on foraminiferal radiocarbon where the authors
assumed constant surface reservoir age, including the hypothesis that North
Pacific intermediate water ventilation was antiphase with the North Atlantic
during the last deglaciation. The results of this study have potential impact
across disciplines, including improving the dating of archaeological remains
from the earliest humans in the eastern Aleutians, and the understanding of the
timing of waves of migration with ecological and climatic changes from that time
period. Funding also supports research experiences for undergraduates from
Williams College (an RUI institution).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
the recently published tephrochronology from the last 17 ky from Sanak Island in
the eastern Aleutians (Misarti et al. 2012) presents a new and unique
opportunity to reconstruct surface reservoir ages and ventilation from the
subarctic Pacific, since Sanak Island is near the Umnak Plateau in the southeast
Bering Sea, which has been cored for high-resolution paleoceanographic work. The
research team will measure major and trace element abundance with electron
microprobe and laser-ablation-inductively-coupled-plasma mass spectrometry to
match tephras between Sanak Island and three nearby marine sediment cores
spanning 1 to 2 km water depth, creating tephra-based age models for the cores.
They will then measure a time series of planktonic radiocarbon in the sediment
cores to produce a record of local surface reservoir age changes from the SE
Bering Sea. They will measure benthic radiocarbon at the same resolution and use
the tephra-based age model to calculate the Delta14C of the water column at 1 to
2 km in the Bering Sea. With this reconstruction, the team will be able to
evaluate proposed changes in North Pacific circulation and Bering Sea
ventilation from the last deglaciation, and constrain the end-member properties
of North Pacific water masses from the past.