* 1435874
* Effects of ingestion of manufactured nanoparticles on endogenous microbiota and pathogen resistance in rainbow trout
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Theodore Henry, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2017
* USD 299,982.00

PI: Henry, Theodore B. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1435874&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Effects of ingestion of manufactured nanoparticles on
endogenous microbiota and pathogen resistance in rainbow
trout&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to understand
changes induced in the gut microbial community and on the host responses by
nanoparticles (NPs). The overall hypothesis is that ingestion of nanomaterials,
especially those that have anti-microbial properties, will change the microbiome
(the community of microorganisms that share the body space) of trout resulting
in adverse health outcomes. The investigators plan to investigate the changes in
the microbiome resulting from the NP challenges, hypothesizing that these
changes would lead to immunosuppression and increased opportunity for pathogen
infection. The hypothesis will be tested with a bacterial pathogen challenge.
The results of this investigation will provide new insights into the impact of
NPs on the gut microbiome, which will have relevance not just for trout, but for
humans and other organisms as well, since these fundamental host-microbiome
interactions are conserved across all vertebrates. The data obtained from the
proposed investigations can also be helpful for both industry and regulators as
industry formulates new NPs with lower toxicity or regulators look to reduce
exposure of humans and wildlife to NPs. The proposal includes excellent outreach
and training of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as the involvement
of high school students, in research. The research results can potentially guide
regulatory agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model used will be the
environmentally relevant and commercially significant rainbow trout,
Oncorhynchus mykiss. The investigators will use high throughput sequencing to
understand the changes in the microbiome, specifically, the effects of dietary
exposure to NPs will be determined by global genomic sequencing of the microbial
communities and quantitative PCR to target specific microbial species. Changes
in abundance of the specific microbes will be evaluated among treatments and
over time. In the same fish, gene expression profiling will be conducted to
identify biomarker genes that respond to alterations in the microbial community
composition. A subset of NP treatments will be selected to conduct longer-term
exposure in fish that will subsequently be exposed to Y. ruckeri and the outcome
of this bacterial challenge will be evaluated.