* 1435709
* Collaborative Research: Modeling, Analysis, and Control of the Spatio-temporal Dynamics of Swarm Robotic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 272,001.00

Massive populations, or swarms, of low-cost autonomous robots have the potential
to collectively perform tasksover very large domains and time scales, succeeding
even in the presence of failures, errors, and disturbances. It is becoming
feasible to create robotic swarms in practice due to ongoing advances in
computing, sensing, actuation, power, control, and 3D printing technologies. In
recent years, the miniaturization of these technologies has led to many novel
robot platforms for swarm applications, including micro aerial vehicles.
However, it remains a challenge to reliably control arbitrary numbers of such
resource-constrained robots in unknown environments where global information and
communication are limited or undependable. This research project aims to
overcome this challenge by developing a rigorous framework for the scalable
control of robotic swarms in realistic environments. The framework combines
techniques from the fields of fluid dynamics, signal reconstruction, control
theory, and optimization. This work provides a theoretically grounded approach
for automatically programming robotic swarms to perform a diverse set of tasks
of wide benefit to society, including environmental monitoring and exploration,
disaster recovery, security operations, and even biomedical imaging and targeted
cancer therapies at the nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops
a formal methodology for analyzing and controlling the spatiotemporal dynamics
of robotic swarms that are to be deployed in complex unknown environments. The
designed robot control policies incorporate stochastic behaviors such as random
encounters with environmental features and produce target collective behaviors
within a specified degree of confidence. The confidence estimates are computed
using a novel application of vortex methods, originally derived for fluid
dynamic models and recently adapted to obtain continuum limits of discrete swarm
models that incorporate pairwise interaction rules for maintenance of group
structure. The control approach uses new computational algorithms for
compressive sensing to reconstruct scalar environmental fields from sparse robot
sensor data and to design efficient strategies for robot data collection. The
methodology is demonstrated with a case study on designing control policies for
micro aerial vehicles that are tasked to pollinate a crop field. Both computer
models and testbed field experiments are used to validate theoretical
predictions for the confidence estimates on system performance. Beyond robotics,
the project provides analytical tools for a deeper understanding of the complex
macroscopic behaviors of systems that can be represented with similar models,
including non-well-mixed chemical reaction networks and natural swarms such as
social insect colonies.