* 1435778
* Collaborative Research: Network Protection under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 140,000.00

This research project focuses on improving the security of the population in the
case of a terrorist threat, and how integrated modeling can be used (1) to
improve scientific understanding of human decision-making in adversarial
contexts, and (2) in the design of allocation policies and best practices for
protection of soft targets, i.e., public transit facilities, places of mass
gathering, and their users. It involves theoretical and computational research
that will explore the foundations of infrastructure protection technologies
through integrated modeling and optimization and will develop new methods and
tools to support real-time emergency management and policy development. The
project has a wide range of applications from homeland security and law
enforcement to military applications. This research is transformational since it
brings a fresh vision to risk management and sensing/control networks for
security. The most significant impact of the research is expected to be to
public facilities, campuses, school buildings and its users by providing support
to first responders in decision making about prevention and deterrence of
terrorist attacks as well as minimization of damage during an attack. Results of
the work will be communicated with the major regional players, including NY/NJ
Port Authority, NJ Transit, NJ Department of Homeland Security and NJDOT. The
adversarial decision making models and virtual game infrastructure that will
result from the research are also applicable to other areas such as training law
enforcement personnel to prevent gang violence and training campus police. This
study also seeks to have a broad impact, especially, in regard to the
integration of research and education; it will provide the basis for a Ph.D.
dissertation and will provide support to mentor a postdoctoral associate in
information sciences and its application to security. The results of the
research will establish the framework for a comprehensive book on infrastructure
protection games to be used by students as well as
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key features of the research project are
(i) closed form analytical solutions, (ii) game models that explore the ways in
which the uncertainty and incomplete information about the adversary type,
attack type and power, can be exploited by the players, (iii) a patrolling game
that incorporates detection probability and a people flow model representing
moving targets, and (iv) a virtual game built inside an immersive virtual world
designed to both collect data about the players' behavior and to validate the
game models using metrics such as the expected damage, the fraction of
unsuccessful attacks, etc. The objectives of the research are to (1) Develop
stochastic network protection game algorithms to be used by the defenders,
together with current technologies, in planning for emergency preparedness, for
prevention of terrorist or cyber attacks to reduce the loss of valuable assets;
(2) Design a virtual game involving the key elements of the above models in
order to collect information about the behavior of various players of the game;
(3) Test models for real player behavior in a controlled setting via virtual
games to verify and refine models for human subject behavior in the stochastic
games. These objectives will be accomplished by adapting resource allocation
game models to the virtual game. Realistic player behavior data will be
collected to validate the models. The anticipated results of this research are
both analytical and relevant to practitioners, such as emergency management
agencies, police, etc. The research makes contributions to i) stochastic
modeling of adversarial policies in man-made emergencies; ii) stochastic game
theory for partially observable systems; iii) decision-making in defending
critical infrastructure; iv) educating future first responders in homeland
security and resource allocation.