* 1435126
* Vertical-Axis Wind Turbine Blade Vibration Modeling for Improved Reliability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Brian Feeny, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Meeting the goal of 20 percent US energy by wind by 2030 will require a diverse
fleet of wind energy harvesters. Wind turbines of various styles and of
increasing size will need to be installed in a variety of environments including
off shore. Maintenance and repair of very large turbines can be costly and
involve significant down time, thereby challenging the development of affordable
wind energy. Currently, horizontal-axis wind turbines (HAWTs) are the most
popular type, with vertical-axis wind turbines (VAWTs) being the next most
common. One thing that has hindered the development of VAWTs is their reputation
for having vibration and fatigue problems. This reputation was established well
before the development of modern blade materials. But VAWTs have some important
advantages. These include independence of wind direction, reduced tower size,
lower center of mass, and lower generator placement. Furthermore, HAWT size may
be limited by gravity. Also, VAWT efficiency improves when placed in wind-farm
arrays. Thus, VAWTs may turn out to be better for some applications, including
large off-shore installations, and are therefore getting renewed interest. To
date, VAWTs have been modeled in much less depth than HAWTs. These circumstances
all converge to the need for better models for VAWTs, including VAWT blade
vibration. The purpose of this work is to develop a model for VAWT blade
vibration, and to use the model to understand the role of VAWT blade parameters
on vibration, to enable the design of reliable VAWTs in the future.

In this work, vibration models of H-rotor VAWT blades will be formulated. The
simple geometry of H-rotor blades allows the work to focus on the complexity of
the mechanics of VAWT function. The model will include nonlinear beam theory and
a semi-empirical model of the nonlinear aerodynamic forces. Preliminary insight
into the model suggests the existence of parametric and direct excitation, and
nonlinearity, all of which together can interact to produce a variety of
resonances and instabilities. Reduced-order modeling and asymptotic analysis
will lead to identification of resonances and instabilities. Critical cases will
be simulated numerically in more depth. The result will be an understanding of
the mechanisms of resonances and instabilities of VAWT blades, as well as the
role of parameters, leading to design recommendations for increased reliability,
reduced maintenance costs, and less down time.