* 1435758
* DMREF/GOALI/Collaborative Research: Computational Design, Rapid Processing and Characterization of Multiple Classes of Materials to Accelerate Materials Innovation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2019
* K. S. Ravi Chandran, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,172,016.00

Science-based design of new materials for mechanical applications in aerospace,
transportation, tooling, energy and biomedical industries is crucial to
continued American economic competitiveness. Breakthrough technologies and
innovative applications are often enabled by new materials science; however, the
timeline from concept to commerce, based on past approaches, has been too long.
Recent advances in computational modeling science and material manufacturing
techniques provide new avenues for discovering, designing and commercializing
new materials at a greatly accelerated pace. This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) collaborative research award supports fundamental
research to enable such discoveries in multiple material classes. The basic
approach is the generation of fundamental materials data regarding the
relationship between chemical composition and mechanical behavior, using a
technologically important material system, titanium-boron, as a basis. The
research involves an integrated effort between academia and industry. It
comprises collaborative computational modeling and discovery, rapid synthesis
and analysis of new material properties, product design, development and
testing, as well as the training of future engineers in advanced manufacturing
settings provided by the industry partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this research is on the development of the CALPHAD-type thermodynamic and phase
data for ternary Ti-B-X (X=Fe/Mo/Nb) materials, and on first-principles modeling
and mechanical property data development for the key phases of these materials'
microstructures. This material system is uniquely versatile, and uncovering its
governing properties and data will enable science-driven material design
spanning the classes of metal-matrix composites, cermets and monolithic
ceramics. Novel material designs will be created using recent advances in
computational techniques that model material behavior on the scale of the atoms
and their crystal lattice structures. Using the models to evaluate multiple
virtual material designs, the research will rapidly optimize boride phase
compositions for hardness, strength and wear resistance, and that of the beta-Ti
metal phase for ductility and toughness, by computing predictions of the solute
partitioning levels and the elastic slip and deformation properties. The
experiments will validate the models and the data set by fully demonstrating
their utility through rapid synthesis and characterization of multiple
compositions of boride ceramics, cermets and metal-boride composites. The
characterization will span three length scales: 1) the phase-scale, by nano-
indentation, 2) the specimen-scale, by tensile, flexure and fracture toughness
testing, and 3) the component-scale, by application-centered testing. A
mechanical property database for each class of materials will be launched,
whereby the data on borides (e.g., hardness, modulus and strength of phases as
functions of composition) and other properties will be disseminated. The GOALI
component includes student-driven Research-in-Industry, Industry-in-Academia,
and timely evaluations by an Industry Advisory Panel formed to support this
research.