* 1435316
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of College Degrees on Health Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Fred Pampel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 6,429.00

SES-1435316 Fred Pampel Elizabeth M. Lawrence University of Colorado at Boulder

Among U.S. adults, college degree earners live much healthier lives than those
with less education, but we know little about why. Further, recent trends show
that health and social disparities across educational levels are widening.
Determining how and why educational attainment influences health behaviors, such
as smoking, exercising, maintenance of healthy weight status, and heavy
drinking, can help us understand how inequality emerges in our society. Health
behaviors are important because they signify social class and shape the health
and longevity of individuals. This project will determine how the effects of
college degrees differ across groups for multiple health behavior outcomes.

Three research questions characterize the study's objectives: (1) What are the
average causal effects of college degrees on multiple indicators of health
behaviors? (2) How do the effects of college degrees on the different health
behavior outcomes differ across the likelihood of achieving the degree, a
person?s race, or a person's gender? (3) What are the mechanisms for the college
degree-health behavior relationship and are they different across groups? To
answer these questions, this study draws on quantitative methods analyzing
survey data from a recent, nationally representative sample. The National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) provides longitudinal data
on education and health behaviors across adolescence and young adulthood for a
cohort of individuals born 1977-1984.

The results will indicate who benefits most from college degrees, whether these
degrees serve to moderate or strengthen existing social inequalities, and what
accounts for the college degree-health behavior relationship overall and within
different subgroups. By revealing the conditions of education's benefits for
health behaviors, this project has the potential to promote the well-being of
individuals nationwide. Tobacco use, poor diet and physical activity, and
alcohol consumption are leading causes of death and improving these behaviors
would enhance the health of U.S. adults. In drawing broad conclusions as to the
source of educational advantages for health, this study will provide useful
information to policymakers interested in reducing social inequality. For
example, by distinguishing the populations that are most and least responsive to
college educations, the project results can be used to identify targets for
intervention.