* 1435526
* Cost-Effective Capacity Planning Involving Differently Sized Capacity Modules
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kiavash Kianfar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 264,990.00

Cost-effective operation of many systems critical to the U.S. economy and
society, such as power grids, data centers, telecommunication networks, medical
facilities, on/off-shore pipelines, transportation, construction, production,
and service systems, is highly dependent on cost-effective planning of capacity
installation/deployment/usage in these systems (e.g., for processing,
transmission, transportation, production, or service capacity). The concept of
capacity in these systems is oftentimes modular, i.e., the total capacity is
composed of identical capacity modules that are installed/deployed/used as
needed. Cost-effective capacity planning in such systems is a challenging
problem that is solved using advanced mathematical techniques. Although in these
systems, the available capacity modules are, almost always, of several different
sizes, the existing mathematical techniques for capacity planning only address
problems in which all capacity modules are of the same size. This is why the
existence of differently sized modules makes cost-effective capacity planning
much more challenging. This award supports fundamental research aimed to address
this gap by developing mathematical methodologies to solve cost-effective
capacity planning problems involving several differently sized capacity modules.
Consequently, it will lead to unprecedented capability to solve large instances
of such problems quickly, which will in turn significantly improve cost-
effective capacity planning capabilities in the aforementioned systems, hence
will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research will also generate
advanced training for students including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mixed integer programming is well suited to model
the problem of interest in this research but to date research on mixed integer
programming cutting plane theory has almost entirely focused on problems with a
single modularity (module size). This research will develop and evaluate cutting
planes to solve mixed integer programs involving multi-modularity capacity
constraints with a particular focus on multi-modularity capacitated lot-sizing,
facility location, and network design. The complex integer rounding
methodologies developed by the investigation team in a previously funded project
provide an appropriate machinery to initiate this research. Cutting planes will
be developed through novel multi-parameter complex integer rounding approaches.
Previously developed kernel facets as well as those resulting from polyhedral
analysis of certain new multi-parameter kernel sets will be used to derive new
cuts. Facet-defining properties of all cuts will be studied. Strong extended
formulations and optimization algorithms will be developed. Efficient separation
methods for the developed cuts will be devised and computational experiments
will be conducted to evaluate the performance of the developed cuts compared to
the state of the art.