* 1435818
* Development of a Low-Cost True-North Seeking Fiber Optic Gyrocompass and Integrated Doppler Navigation System for Precision Navigation of Underwater Vehicles for Ocean Science
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 579,937.00

Ocean scientists are beginning to employ unmanned robotic vehicles to conduct
surveys in oceans, lakes, and estuaries. The goal of these surveys is to provide
a better understanding of underwater biology, ecology, geology, physical
oceanography, and the interaction of air, sea, and ice worldwide. These data
improve scientists' understanding of global ecology and climate that are of
great societal importance. Having the ability to conduct precision near-bottom
oceanographic surveys with unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) is unprecedented,
yet the widespread use of precision navigation techniques on UUVs is limited by
the high cost of true-North attitude sensors. This project seeks to develop a
high-accuracy comparatively low-cost, compact, and low-power true-North seeking
attitude (heading, pitch, and roll) sensor, and to incorporate this new
instrument into a tightly integrated precision Doppler navigation system for
UUVs. The goal is to develop a comparatively low-cost and high-accuracy
navigation system to enable small low-cost UUVs to perform science missions
requiring high-precision navigation (e.g. high precision hydrographic survey,
time-series acoustic and optical survey for environmental assessment) that are
presently considered impractical or infeasible with low-cost UUVs. This project
will enable hands-on research by undergraduate and graduate students and
dissemination of their research results. The instrument design will be made
open-source, including mechanical designs, and electrical designs, and software
algorithms that will be freely available as open-source software
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three technical goals: First,
employ the new class of relatively low-cost commercially-available-off-the-shelf
(COTS) inertial measurement units (IMUs) equipped with integrated 3-axis fiber-
optic gyro (FOG) angular-rate sensors and 3-axis micro-electromechanical systems
(MEMS) accelerometers, together with real-time state estimation methods to
provide accurate estimation of the heading, pitch, and roll of the instrument
relative to true-North and the local gravity field. Second, develop improved
underwater navigation methods employing low-cost FOG IMUs and bottom-lock
Doppler sonars. Third, evaluate these navigation methods in full-scale
experimental trials with UUVs in a test-tank and at sea.