* 1435013
* Using shape to control the orientations and positions of particles in processing flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 313,970.00

PI: Koch, Donald L. Proposal Number: 1435013 Institution: Cornell University
Title: Using shape to control the orientations and positions of particles in
processing flows

Recent advances in the ease of fabricating particles with controlled shape have
fostered excitement about the range of materials that can be created from
assemblies of such particles. While attention has focused primarily on the
influence of shape on the manner in which particles assemble due to random
thermal motion, shape can also have surprising consequences for structure
induced by fluid flows. Until recently, it had been thought that all
axisymmetric, rigid particles rotated continuously in shear flows of viscous
fluids. However, the investigators recently predicted the existence of a class
of non-rotating ring-shaped particles with sharp outer edges. This project will
include the application of computational and theoretical techniques to expand
the range of flow-aligning particle shapes and explore their utility. An
experimental program will explore methods to fabricate the particles and observe
their flow aligning behavior. The fundamental studies will be guided by various
target applications for materials with specific mechanical, rheological or
permeability properties. The students involved in the research will be
encouraged to explore these applications as inventor-scientists. Undergraduate
researchers will aid with theoretical studies of chaotic dynamics and with the
development of fabrication methods. The visually appealing nature of the
research will be exploited in K-12 outreach activities at a local children?s
science museum, the Ithaca Sciencenter.

The behavior of rigid particles that align in a low Reynolds number simple shear
flow will be explored using boundary element method (BEM) computations and
slender-body theory analysis. BEM simulations will be used to: (1) Search for
cross-sectional shapes that are most effective in stopping rotation at moderate
aspect ratios; (2) Explore the possibility that a ring with a filled center (to
impart a gas barrier) can flow align; and (3) Show that rings with both in-out
and fore-aft asymmetry exhibit a steady cross-streamline drift in their flow-
aligned state. Slender-body theory (SBT) will be developed for rings with a
large ratio of ring diameter to thickness. A novel aspect of this SBT is the
need to determine the force per unit circumference induced by the velocity
gradient near the ring cross-section. This cross term has not appeared in
previous SBT for particles with circular or elliptical cross-sections. SBT
simulations will determine whether flow-aligning rings can be induced to flip by
hydrodynamic interactions with other rings and to determine the equilibrium
position a particle with cross-stream drift reaches as it approaches a wall. SBT
calculations will also be used to explore the possibility that slight deviations
from axisymmetry can lead to particles that undergo chaotic rotational and
translational motions in a simple shear flow, leading to a self-dispersive
behavior in the absence of Brownian motion or particle-particle interactions.
Non-fore-aft symmetric rings that flow-align and exhibit cross-stream drift will
be fabricated using photolithography. To produce fore-aft symmetric rings that
align but translate with the fluid motion, the investigators will explore a
hybrid synthesis based on producing toroidal particles in a microfluidic drop
process and subsequently embedding the particles in a film and stretching to
create the sharp outer edge of the ring. The three-dimensional translational and
rotational motion of the particles will be observed in a counter-rotating
Couette device. The rheology of dilute and semi-dilute suspensions will be
measured to reveal the decrease in viscosity due to flow alignment.