* 1435800
* GOALI: Digital Technologies for Manufacturing Production Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Vivek Karandikar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,752.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) award is to develop digital technologies for shop floor planning and
scheduling issues. Collaborating with the industrial partner, Kimberly-Clark,
the PI will investigate plant-wide planning and scheduling models which include
monthly lot-sizing issues, weekly shipment coordination issues, and daily
production scheduling problems. Currently, most shop-floor scheduling is
conducted either manually or using spreadsheets. Such a disconnect between top
floor and shop floor in manufacturing means that people do not understand the
true impact of their decisions on production. That lack of insight typically
leads to significant inefficiencies across the production system. The PI plans
to address this issue by decomposing the enterprise-wide planning problem into
multiple layered models according to the time frame of planning, solve the
models in a coordinated manner, and recompose the solutions to obtain an
integrated plan. The main reason for building coordination from top level
enterprise-wide management to lower level shop-floor scheduling is the need for
feasible scheduling decisions to support and improve the broader operational and
economic objectives. By establishing top floor to shop floor communication,
industries will be able to significantly improve their production efficiency
while achieving a faster response to changes and disturbances in a manufacturing
environment. This research will advance the science of solving shop floor
planning and scheduling optimization. The digital technologies will establish a
connection between shop floor and top floor to align with demand and plan of
inbound supply, production and outbound goods. This methodology is expected to
push the boundaries of solving shop floor planning and scheduling optimization
problems in commercial manufacturing applications. To ensure that this broader
impact is realizable, the PI will collaborate closely with Kimberly-Clark to
validate these technologies.

To solve the planning and scheduling problems, two new optimization methods are
planned: the Nested-Two-Bounds (NTB) and the Peak-Under-Threshold (PUT) method.
The NTB method realizes the benefits of incorporating a lower bound into this
framework while utilizing the expert knowledge of a given domain (upper bounds).
The PUT method utilizes classical extreme value theory which suggests that
exceedance values below a high threshold value can be approximated by a
generalized Pareto distribution. This threshold value contains key information
on the likelihood of the actual lower bound exceeding a certain value. Thus, the
PUT method is expected to be very efficient in finding optimal solutions as
demonstrated in our preliminary work. The PI plans to investigate both NTB and
PUT methods for efficiently solving monthly lot-sizing, weekly shipment
coordination and daily scheduling problems. The NTB and PUT approaches will
significantly advance the understanding of large-scale planning and scheduling
optimization in empirical situations. The research findings in the project have
applications to problems common in many manufacturing production systems and the
resulting methodology will be applicable to plant-wide optimization problems.
The combination of optimization technique and statistical theory is expected to
have a broader impact in the research community as other such combinations may
benefit from this work. This research spans computational and theoretical
aspects in operations research, engineering, computer science and statistics. It
is thus expected that the research will generate significant academic interest
in several communities.