* 1435666
* Can B-vitamins control phyto-and-bacterioplankton successions in a coastal upwelling region?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sergio Sanudo-Wilhelmy, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

B-vitamins (thiamin (B1), biotin (B7), and cobalamin (B12)) are organic
molecules used by all organisms for many biochemical reactions ranging from DNA
and amino acid synthesis to carbon dioxide assimilation. Despite their metabolic
importance, many marine organisms cannot make them and need to obtain them from
the environment. Because the requirement for a specific vitamin is different for
different organisms, changes in the species composition of algae could be
explained by their different B-vitamin requirements. For example, changes in the
biological properties of waters during an algal bloom (removal of needed
vitamins and release of other vitamins) may favor algae that require the vitamin
released by the previous bloom (setting up a floral succession). This selective
preconditioning of the waters may be one factor in the seasonal succession of
algal species. However, evaluating the role of vitamins in marine ecology has
been difficult. No study to date has been comprehensive enough to estimate the
importance of vitamins in primary productivity and species succession. This is
especially true in coastal upwelling regions that although relatively small in
area, are orders of magnitude more productive than their open-ocean
counterparts. In fact, those regions contribute a significant portion of the
world fisheries. Therefore, in order to try to predict future changes in the
world ocean due to human activity, the variables that influence or control the
algal communities that dominate the very productive food chains of upwelling
regions need to be identified. Undergraduate and graduate education will be
furthered through active participation in the joint laboratory experiments and
fieldwork. This project will support the dissertation work of one graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate how the availability
of B-vitamins affects the dynamics of algal- and bacterioplankton population
growth in coastal waters of an upwelling region off Southern California. This
comprehensive field investigation will determine in situ temporal concentrations
of several dissolved and particulate B-vitamins, inorganic micro- and
macronutrients, concurrently with seasonal changes in phytoplankton and
bacterial abundances and species composition at a long-term time series station
within the San Pedro Basin near Los Angeles. Those measurements will be
complemented with field incubation experiments with natural plankton assemblages
to study the effect of organic and inorganic nutrient amendments on
phytoplankton and bacterial community structure. This study will establish for
the first time that the availability of ambient B-vitamins influence algal and
bacterial species succession in a highly productive coastal upwelling region and
that multiple and differing B-vitamin requirements limit growth of some
phytoplankton species in those areas. Furthermore, this study will try to show
that coastal upwelling transports some B-vitamins to the phytoplankton community
in the photic zone from bacterially-influenced source waters within the upper
mesopelagic zone.