* 1435227
* Funding to support the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System Office
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Annette DeSilva, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bauke Houtman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 5,167,602.00

The University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System, (UNOLS) is a consortium
of sixty-one U.S. academic institutions and facilities with research and
educational programs in the ocean sciences. Of these institutions, there are
fifteen institutions which operate the twenty oceanographic research ships which
form the U.S. Academic Research Fleet. This proposal is for the University of
Rhode Island?s Graduate School of Oceanography to host the UNOLS Office for a
second term of five years from 2014 to 2019. The UNOLS Office is comprised of
five full time and two part time employees. Under the guidance and leadership of
the UNOLS Office, much of the work is done through the volunteers from the
scientific community who serve on our nine standing committees. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The UNOLS organization, founded in 1971, has played an important role
in coordinating and improving the operations of the nation?s Academic Research
Fleet. One of the important focus areas for UNOLS is to coordinate and schedule
these national assets, to plan for the future, and to be able to identify and
meet the scientific infrastructure requirements of the U.S. oceanographic
research scientists, students and technicians. This enables the United States to
make advances in science, education, and the public awareness of our natural
environment. One of the critical functions that the UNOLS Office performs,
through broad community involvement, is to assist in prioritizing the resources
within the available budgets to ensure the advancement of the field of
oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is through the UNOLS efforts that we are
able to assist the National Science Foundation and other federal agencies with
providing community feedback and input on the future direction of oceanographic
research in the United States. Through the various UNOLS meetings, workshops,
reports, studies, and daily communication, UNOLS provides a conduit for open
dialog between the agencies supporting this research and the scientific
community being served. The NSF?s mission to ?promote the progress of science;
to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the national
defense? are all aided by the UNOLS Office?s ability to bring together the
scientific minds to identify what are the science questions that need to be
answered, and then to provide the safe platforms to conduct this important work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is through the UNOLS consortium that we are able to
bring together a broad community of scientists, &lt;br/&gt;students, ocean
engineers and technicians; a diverse group of academic research institutions and
our federal partners; and of the greatest importance, the next generation of
early career scientists who will help advance the field of marine science to
meet the challenges which we will face. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System,
(UNOLS) is a consortium of sixty-one U.S. academic institutions and facilities.
Within this consortium there are twenty oceanographic research ships which form
the U.S. Academic Research Fleet. The UNOLS Office serves as a mechanism for the
development and sharing of science mission requirements and the articulation of
the science drivers, which will help determine the direction of the
oceanographic programs within the academic community. The UNOLS Office
facilitates closer collaboration of a diverse group of intellectual talent,
which solves the scientific and technical challenges facing scientific research.
Through the nine standing committees within UNOLS, areas such as data
management, development of tools for deep sea research, Fleet modernization,
safe operation of vessels at sea, working in extreme polar environments, marine
seismic exploration, efficient ship scheduling, and the enhancement of research
through new technology such as unmanned aerial vehicles and deep sea ocean
observatories are all effectively addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is through
the efforts of UNOLS that marine research programs are able to enjoy access to
the sea. From large international, multidisciplinary research programs looking
at biogeochemical cycles and large-scale distribution of trace elements which
are critical for marine life, to near shore studies trying to understand the
effects of pollutants on both human and marine organisms, the UNOLS Office and
our members all work collectively to meet these challenges and advance the field
of oceanographic research.