* 1435073
* Targeted Infusion Project: Building a Learner-centered Cyberlearning Environment in Computer-Aided Design Education
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Chang Duan, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Prairie View A & M University will
implement a project entitled: Building a Learner-centered Cyberlearning
Environment in Computer-Aided Design Education. Engineering students in the 21st
century enter a professional environment where computer-aided design (CAD) tools
are ubiquitous. Today's industries demand that universities graduate engineers
who are prepared with the skills to use modern computer-aided design tools. This
project will enhance students' learning of computer-aided design through
learner-centered strategies. The project will build an electronic library of CAD
software screencast tutorials created by students; teach students CAD with the
screencast tutorials created by their peers; and investigate the effects of the
student generated tutorials on student learning of CAD, as well as their
interest and motivation towards engineering. The screencast tutorials repository
developed through this project will be made publicly accessible through an
Internet website for use by other engineering students and faculty. The
screencast tutorials will also be disseminated through the Partners for the
Advancement of Collaborative Engineering Education program - a collaboration
among 50 universities around the world.

The project will be implemented in the freshman Mechanical Engineering Drawing
lab-based course designed to teach students engineering graphics and 3D modeling
based on computer-aided design. Engineering students will develop and utilize
screencasts, record the supported audio, post the screencasts on an electronic
repository, and organize the peer-to-peer learning process. Screencast is a
digitally recorded playback of a computer screen output which often contains
audio narration, to visually present procedural information. A screencast is a
unique tool for e-learning design because it promotes an affordable way of
producing multimedia instruction that is authentic and motivating and can be
applied in various educational settings. Project efforts will advance the
current state of knowledge on how to effectively utilize cyberlearning in
engineering education. The project will provide students with hands-on
experience on the same advanced computer-aided design software used by industry.