* 1435953
* Collaborative Research: The role of microphysical processes and turbulence intermittency in droplet coalescence in warm cumulus clouds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 247,365.00

PI: Rani, Sarma L. /Koch, Donald L. Proposal Number: 1436100 / 1435953

The goal of the proposed study is to explore the formation of droplets and the
production of rain from a cumulus cloud. This is a topic relevant for the
prediction of rainfall and of hazards such as tornados and flash flooding. Warm
cumulus clouds exert significant influence on the climate system of the earth by
processing atmospheric aerosols, interacting with electromagnetic radiation from
the sun and earth, and redistributing earth's water and energy through the
hydrologic cycle. This study addresses two central outstanding questions in the
current understanding of warm rain production, namely, the mechanisms leading to
the formation of fast-growing 'statistically fortunate' drops, and the growth of
the cloud droplets, both of which hasten the 'colloidal instability' of the
cloud, resulting in precipitation. To understand the effects of turbulence, it
is essential to gain insights into the interactions between large-scale
processes such as turbulent entrainment, mixing and intermittency, and
microscale processes such as particle clustering, droplet relative velocities
and collision efficiency. In terms of outreach and education, it is proposed to
involve graduate and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research at the
confluence of turbulence, cloud and particle physics. The PIs plan to reach out
to students at Alabama A&M University and Huntsville High School to encourage
the students to pursue undergraduate and/or graduate degrees in STEM-related
fields.

The collaborating PIs will conduct a multiscale investigation, in which a Large
Eddy Simulation (LES) will be used to model the whole cloud and to feed energy
to a Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) model, in order to explain how very small
droplets appear and grow in size within a cloud. The hypothesis is that
intermittency in turbulent shear and flow acceleration are driving the formation
and the coalescence of the droplets. The proposed work is for high Reynolds
number cloud turbulence at practical scales. Using the proposed energy transfer
method, inertial-range LES turbulence intermittency information will be included
in the DNS. The theoretical research will focus on developing stochastic models
for both microscale and macroscale cloud physics including: 1) Detailed
microscale models for the local flow field in the vicinity of bidisperse
interacting drops with statistical properties characteristic of cloud Reynolds
numbers; 2) Effects of particle inertia and differential sedimentation on the
stochastic flow field ?seen? by the drops; 3) Effects of non-continuum, van der
Waals and electrostatic interactions between drops on their collision
efficiency; and 4) Macroscale model that accounts for the effects of turbulence
intermittency and eddy mixing on the stochastic kinetics of droplet growth. The
proposed research is expected to shed light on aerosol-cloud interactions that
are important in generating precipitation and in affecting climate patterns.