* 1435222
* Control of Robust Micro-Robots in Uncertain Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kenn Oldham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

Autonomous micro-robots a few millimeters in size have transformative potential
for applications ranging from infrastructure monitoring to disaster response to
exploration of hostile or inaccessible locales. Such tasks will require robots
that can successfully navigate complicated and unpredictable terrain and
environments. Given limitations on moving parts in micro-scale systems, legged
locomotion offers the best combination of adaptability and efficiency. Standard
features of full-scale walking robots, such as motorized and instrumented knee
and ankle joints, are impossible or impractical to realize with current micro-
fabrication techniques, making flexible linkages the most promising approach to
articulated limbs. But, because of differences between the ways that leg
stiffness and body mass scale as robot dimensions decrease, the natural
springiness of the legs cannot be relied on to keep all feet in contact with
uneven ground, which can greatly degrade gait effectiveness. These challenges
make legged locomotion an essentially different and more difficult problem at
the micro-scale. This project will advance the fundamental state of the art
towards high-speed, high-mobility legged micro-robots navigating in an uncertain
environment. It will develop models of the leg-surface interaction, and use
these models to derive efficient and effective walking gaits. To maximize
adaptability in changing conditions, internal sensors capable of monitoring gait
effectiveness will be added to existing micro-robot leg
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the complex contact
interaction of walking micro-robots with multiple feet moving at high-speeds on
varying surfaces. The resulting dynamic models will be used to identify walking
gaits that produce efficient forward motion over a range of environmental
conditions. The investigators have previously combined thin-film lead-zirconate-
titanate (PZT) with resilient polymer materials to demonstrate micro-fabricated
legs with an unusually large range of motion and actuation speed. In this
project, sensing elements will be integrated into the thin-film PZT/polymer legs
to allow basic estimation of robot motion. Actuation and estimator design will
meet constraints imposed by small-scale power sources, through input sequences
based on a limited number of switched input voltages and leg and robot movement
estimates based on limited sensor samples. Once estimation of robot walking
effectiveness has been demonstrated using on-chip measurements, adaptive control
algorithms will be tailored to respond to environmental conditions that change
over time.