* 1435428
* Investigating and Exploiting a New Strengthening Mechanism Found in Biomineralized Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Barton Prorok, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2018
* USD 277,489.00

Many living organisms form biomineralized composites assembled in hierarchical
architectures for protective purposes or structural support (sea shells, bone,
antler, dentin, etc.). These natural composites often have excellent mechanical
properties in contrast to their non-biomineralized forms. This work leverages a
recent discovery by the PI of a new strengthening mechanism found in Abalone
shells. In particular, the influence of periodic growth interruptions found in
the shells from seasonal changes in its natural habitat, analogous to tree
rings. Preliminary results show that the presence of these layers as well as
their thickness and periodicity appear to impart added strength to the shell.
This work is aimed at determining the fundamental mechanism by which these
growth interruptions impart enhanced behavior to the multilayer, composite
shell. In particular, it will culture the Abalone in the lab and use water
temperature to trigger their metabolic system to generate growth interruptions.
The material properties of these interruptions and the nacre will be
characterized (1) on an individual basis, (2) as a two component composite and
(3) as a multilayer composite. Ascertaining how these organisms utilize an
architecture that combines different material properties in the layers would
give engineers with new knowledge on material strength. It also will provide
tools to design new classes of composite architectures possessing enhanced
properties and performance. These undoubtedly would impact applications ranging
from mechanically protective armor to stronger and lighter structural supports
and even to enhanced durability of asphalt roads. The interdisciplinary nature
of the project lies at the interface between physics, biology and engineering,
which is an ideal setting for the education and development of students in
technologies and techniques that have a rapidly growing
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at enabling transformative
advancements in the strength and toughness of multilayer composites by
leveraging architectures and material property combinations found in
biomineralized composites. It focusses on the role that growth interruptions
play in the nacre structure. These interruptions occur when the organism's
metabolic processes are interrupted from seasonal changes in its natural
habitat, analogous to tree rings. This work will involve culturing Abalone in
the laboratory setting, subjecting them to environmental parameters that trigger
their metabolic system to generate a growth interruption. Shell architectures
will be modulated in this way to determine those characteristics (thickness,
periodicity, etc.) that impart maximum strength and toughness. The primary
intellectual merit contributions of this work involve: (1) providing an improved
understanding and measurement of the individual material properties ((elastic
modulus, Poisson's ratio, hardness, etc.) of the nacreous and growth
interruption materials as well as their interplay in determining composite
behavior; (2) providing architectural and combinatory material guidelines for
optimizing the response of multi-layered composites for mechanically protective
applications based upon Poisson's ratio mismatch; and (3) enabling an assessment
as to whether natural selection in mollusk organisms has fully maximized the
toughening mechanisms that these multilayer composite architectures provide.