* 1435683
* Drainage and Dewetting of Stratified Liquid Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Gerald Fuller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Fuller, Gerald G. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1435683&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
explore the wetting and drainage of thin layers of liquid from curved surfaces.
This largely experimental program will provide simultaneous measurements of the
layer thicknesses of an upper, less dense liquid draining atop a second, more
dense liquid that is also undergoing drainage. An example of such a system is an
oil and water system that drains from a curved surface. An important event that
occurring in the environment involving the drainage and dewetting of stratified
liquid films is the interaction of oil slicks at the surface of water with
aquatic life. It is important to understand this example since the coating of
water-based plants, birds, mammals and fish is an unfortunate result of such
spillage. In terms of education and outreach, the PI will develop and
disseminate teaching modules that upgrade and complement existing core chemical
engineering classes by covering new developments and challenges in fluid
mechanics and interface science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The drainage and dewetting
of stratified liquid layers from curved surfaces (e.g., hemispheres will be
examined) is expected to be strongly affected by the viscosity ratio of the two
liquids. It is expected that the drainage dynamics will undergo a number of
transitions, depending on the viscosity ratio. For example, in the limit that
the upper liquid becomes much more viscous, its drainage will transition from a
Reynolds draining response where the thinning of the upper film decreases
algebraically to an exponential decay. The experiments proposed are designed to
measure the morphology of the resulting surface coverage patterns when drainage
has proceeded to sufficiently long times. That is when dewetting of the curved
substrate will ensue. The project will examine these processes as a function of
the viscosity ratio of the two immiscible liquids and the surface energy of the
substrate. In addition, the influence of interfacial viscoelasticity of the
liquid/liquid interface will be examined.