* 1435908
* GOALI: Remediating E-waste Problems by Considering Consumer Behavior in Design for Multiple Life Cycles and Design for Ease of Return
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ann Bisantz, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 279,868.00

Electronic waste (e-waste) is one of the fastest growing pollution problems in
the US and worldwide. With increasing population and increasing per capita
product penetration rates, the e-waste stream continues to grow by close to 5
percent annually, three times faster than any other type of municipal waste. One
solution to this problem is to recover discarded electronics from consumers for
refurbishment or material recovery. However, there are a number of reasons that
make product recovery in the US unprofitable including the cost of collection,
the quality of received products (which may be stored for months, or even years,
in a variety of non-optimal home environments), product obsolescence, and an
inability to plan due to a lack of data about expected number of products being
returned. These problems can be alleviated by having more information about the
number and timing of used products available for collection from end users. This
Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research to quantify the impact of design features and consumer
behavior on the total volume, timing and quality of returned discarded items as
well as the uncertainties in the return flows. Additionally, the research will
assess consumer preferences and changes in consumer interests over time in order
to design sustainable products that not only can meet the needs of the first
consumer but also are re-marketable to satisfy the requirements of future
consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two main objectives. First,
it will provide a fundamental understanding of the role of consumer behavior and
designer decisions on the amount of discarded electronics annually generated
nationwide. More accurate estimation of the amount of discarded devices will
assist in developing systems and infrastructure that facilitate e-waste
collection and recovery processes. Second, the research will create a novel
class of design evaluation techniques with the aim of creating artifacts that
ensure long term solutions to control waste. The research team will use three
groups of methods to accomplish these aims: (1) Design for multiple life cycles:
incorporating preferences of several stakeholders or product owners in the early
stage of design, (2) Design for dynamic preference: modeling market demand of a
specific design alternative based on changes in consumer preferences and choices
over time, and (3) Design for ease of return: Incorporation of the interests of
channel members (e.g., recyclers or collectors), distributors and final
consumers when designing a product.