* 1435946
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: State Capacity and Labor Migration
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2016
* Vivek Chibber, New York University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 10/31/2016
* USD 11,970.00

SES- 1435946 Vivek Chibber Suzy Lee New York University

In recent years, international labor migration has become an increasingly
visible component of overall economic development strategy, promoted by the
World Bank and other international agencies as a potential source of foreign
exchange, with the Philippines often upheld to be a model for how states can
"manage" migration flows. For the past forty years, the Philippines have been
among the top labor exporting countries of the world -- in both absolute numbers
and as a percentage of its population. This project seeks to identify the
factors that explain this rate of migration. The predominant explanation for
this phenomenon, in both policy and scholarly circles, has been to attribute
high rates of migration to migration itself: past migration produces social
networks that facilitate and promote further migration. The problem with this
explanation is that, while it works well to explain migration from certain
countries, such as that of Mexican workers to the U.S., it fails to explain the
Philippine case, which relies less on friends-and-family networks than it does
on a complex state-led bureaucracy that helps coordinate migrants with
international labor markets.

This dissertation will assess the role of the Philippine state, and, more
importantly, to explain the factors that contributed to the development of the
state's labor export system. Among the factors examined will be the role of
elite preference: Did economic and social elites promote the development of a
labor export program as a political "safety valve" -- a means to ameliorate
social and economic conflicts without making the radical changes required for
rapid economic development? If it can be shown that, in the Philippine case, the
very factors that led to the strength of the labor export apparatus were also
the factors that obstructed the development of state capacity in agrarian reform
and industrialization -- two policy areas critical to economic development, it
would suggest that promoting labor migration is unlikely ever to produce the
desired development outcomes. It would suggest that the social costs of such
policies are not likely to be balanced by economic growth, and thus, that the
people of developing countries are better served by policies that do not rely on
large-scale labor migration.

Scholarship on migration, particularly in the U.S., has long been dominated by
the importance of the Mexican-U.S. migration circuit, in which historical links
and strong social networks has played a major causal role, while the sending
states efforts to intervene in migration has been largely nonexistent. In the
past two decades, new research on other labor migrations, notably from the
Philippines, has suggested that states can play a more significant role.
However, migration theory has struggled to incorporate these findings, opting,
for the most part, to see the Philippine state?s activities as an extension of
the social networks theory a more institutional and structured form under which
migration takes place, but both a product of the same forces that produce
migration elsewhere and producing effects that are not very different from what
would occur without state intervention. Demonstrating that a domestic causal
factor, not directly related to migration itself, was key in the development of
the Philippines labor export apparatus, would advance our understanding of
international labor migration and states' role in its growth and globalization.