* 1435809
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Smart Monitoring of Alzheimer's Disease via Data Fusion, Personalized Prognostics, and Selective Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kaibo Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 155,729.00

The objective of this project is to develop a data-driven smart monitoring
methodology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD follows an accelerated degradation
trajectory as compared to normal aging. Accurate monitoring and prognosis of the
disease trajectory is critical for the success of many preventative
interventions. Currently, no first-line screening system for monitoring the
fast-growing preclinical population is available. While emerging personalized
health screening systems provide the infrastructure to routinely screen massive
numbers of individuals, it is an essential challenge to transform the role of
these systems from passive information collection into smart monitoring to
proactively characterize the underlying complex time-varying disease trajectory
shaped by an individual's risk factors. This project aims at developing such a
"smart monitoring" approach that will equip nowadays cyber infrastructure with
powerful data-driven decision-making capabilities for better management of the
preclinical individuals, leading to more efficient targeted screening and
affordable care, better treatment planning and management, and improved quality
of life for both patients and caregivers. Successful implementation will provide
a substantial boost for the detection of the 4.5 million preclinical individuals
anticipated in the next 20 years. Its generic nature will also impact monitoring
of other progressive medical conditions, given the rapid adoption of
personalized screening systems in other areas. The interdisciplinary nature of
this research across data-driven monitoring, prognostics, optimization, and
health care will prepare students a diversified education background. Broader
impacts will be also generated through new curriculum modules, online software
toolkits for implementation, and involving underrepresented undergraduate and
graduate students in research experience programs.

The success of the project will significantly advance the state of the art in
data-driven monitoring, prognostics, and selective sensing, and contribute to
the science base of the emerging personalized screening systems. Specifically,
to model and quantify the disease trajectory, a health index (HI) model will be
constructed by synthesizing the degradation information from multiple biomarkers
via the development of non-parametric and semi-parametric data fusion schemes.
Then, to predict the personalized disease trajectory, personalized prognostics
methodologies will be developed that can offline predict and online update the
personalized HI model via the development of multi-level degradation models and
Bayesian updating approaches. Capitalizing on the personalized prognostics
methodologies, selective sensing methodologies will be developed to adaptively
identify the screening tests that are most informative for the statistical
estimation of the HI via a seamlessly integration of a novel Bayesian network
model with robust optimization techniques. A team of five PIs with diverse but
complementary research backgrounds will be working closely with two leading AD
research institutes in the U.S. to develop, test, and validate the
methodologies.