* 1435920
* Biomimetic Composites With Amorphous Calcium Carbonate: Linking Microstructure to Mechanical Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 399,493.00

Recent discoveries have revealed that many organisms produce amorphous calcium
carbonate not as a precursor for more stable calcite but as a mineral of choice.
The crucial role of amorphous calcium carbonate in morphological and structural
control of biominerals has thus been recognized. However, the determining
factors for the formation, stabilization and transformation of the amorphous
phase are still in debate and the mechanical response of the resulting composite
has not been investigated yet. This award supports fundamental research to
investigate the mechanical response of amorphous-crystalline organic calcium
carbonate composites as a function of the microstructure using a combination of
experimental and modeling work. Tuning and optimizing the mechanical properties
of this material opens new opportunities for the development of biomimetic
materials with superior properties. In parallel, this research addresses major
questions regarding biomineralization, a topic of primary biogeochemical,
environmental, and economic significance. This research involves several
disciplines including mechanics, engineering, materials science, colloidal
science, and chemistry. This multi-disciplinary approach provides a wide range
of research opportunities. It will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups through several undergraduate students in the involved
research groups and a K-12 Outreach program offering introductory lectures,
field trips, and hands on research. The knowledge gained in this project will be
integrated in various lectures and therefore it will positively impact
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biomimetic composites with
amorphous calcium carbonate are synthesized in the laboratory. This research
aims at establishing design parameters to tune their microstructure, to
scrutinize their microstructure-mechanical response relationship, and to study
their failure mechanisms. The experimental work involves adsorption and force
measurements to study mineral formation, nanoindentation to study
microstructure-mechanical response relationship and atomic force microscopy to
investigate interfacial properties and amorphous-to-crystalline transformation.
The modeling work is based on the Shear Transformation Zone Theory, a
statistical thermodynamic framework for modeling failure deformation in
amorphous materials, and cohesive finite element simulations. Correlation
between experiments and modeling will enable to uncover fundamental phenomena
underlying the mechanical response of the novel hybrid composites including (i)
multiscale toughness mechanisms through a combination of hierarchical geometry
and microstructure design, (ii) transition from ductile behavior with
distributed deformation to brittle response and strain localization, (iii) glass
transition, and (iv) interfacial separation and healing.