* 1435950
* 3D Braided Composite Structures - Experimental Characterization and Modeling of Fracturing Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 353,585.00

Three-dimensional (3D) braided composites are a particular kind of composite
materials characterized by yarns oriented not only in-plane, but also in the
through-thickness direction. Thanks to this peculiar three-dimensional
structure, these composites show outstanding mechanical properties making them
excellent candidates for the lightweight components and structures of the
future. Interesting examples of practical use of these materials include, but
are not limited to automotive applications in which they can increase car
crashworthiness while reducing weight and fuel consumption; wind energy
technologies where their outstanding mechanical and fatigue resistance
performances can lead to more durable and efficient turbine blades; and
aerospace structural elements in which they can substitute metallic load bearing
components. However, an efficient use of these materials has been limited by the
lack of data characterizing their mechanical behavior as well as efficient
computational tools for design. The overarching goal of this research project is
to fill this knowledge gap by providing a comprehensive experimental
characterization and by developing, calibrating and validating a multiscale
numerical framework for the design of safe and efficient 3D braided composite
structures. The technical tasks of the project will be complemented by a wide
range of activities aimed at broadening the research impact on education,
promotion of diversity, dissemination of results, and enhancing society
benefits. These will include, but not limited to, group discussions with high
school and graduate students; and visits to high-schools in the Chicagoland
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this research are to
develop an innovative experimental protocol to characterize 3D braided composite
fracture and to introduce an accessible, computationally efficient structural
analysis tool for 3D braided composites to researchers and industry. The
experimental campaign will address the problem of characterizing the softening
behavior of composites and it will provide complete fracture data for model
calibration and validation. The multiscale framework, calibrated and validated
through the experimental investigations, will be used to gain understanding on
the combined effect of the microstructure of the material as well as of
structural size and geometry. Furthermore, this multiscale formulation will
offer the ability to analyze different 3D braided architectures with much less
experimental work, opening avenues for structural optimization. In addition, it
will be able to capture the structural size effect that has been proven to
affect composite material structures and it is usually overlooked by current
design procedures.