* 1435260
* Cement as a Novel Electric Source for Energy-Harvesting Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Kamyar Mahboub, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 309,737.00

This award supports research founded on the basic discovery of an electric
response to mechanical pressure, from rapid strength gain in cement. The data
obtained from this project will not only enable the use of construction
materials as energy harvesting components but will also create a solid
foundation for future electrically responsive cement design. The ability to
produce a renewable energy from mechanical loading of a structural material is
not only fascinating, but it is the type of thinking/research that is in the
forefront of international concern. This research project will leverage a
multidisciplinary relationship between academic departments, centers and
international collaborators that create an exceptional educational environment
where students work on scientifically challenging problems with substantial
potential for innovation. A Civil Engineering Graduate student and a post-
doctoral scholar will benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in
the research. Outreach Programs to three underrepresented, yet motivated,
elementary schools through a 4th-grade science program, will increase minority
participation. The designed hands-on learning experience and exposure to
advanced laboratory applications will increase the interest of domestic students
in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of
this project is to functionalize calcium sulfoaluminate cements for energy
harvesting and as a smart-sensing construction material. By quantitatively and
unambiguously verifying ettringite as a piezoelectric mineral. The aims of the
research are (i) to develop the science base needed for utilization of
ettringite as a piezoelectric mineral, (ii) identify, isolate and evaluate
potential piezoelectric influences within the calcium sulphoaluminate (CSA)
mortar matrix, and (iii) the development of engineering approaches that allow
efficient assessment for ettringite-based energy harvesting piezoelectric
components for civil structures. Key elements of the strategy include (i)
determine the piezoelectric constants of the mineral ettringite, (ii) expand the
view on other potential sources of piezoelectric voltage within the hydrated CSA
cement matrix; such as crystal morphology or alignment, and (iii) fabrication
and piezoelectric testing of large-scale concrete elements optimized for energy
harvesting. If successful, the discovery and characterization of ettringite as a
piezoelectric crystal phase in cement will create new knowledge on energy
harvesting from calcium sulfoaluminate cement materials. The data on material
properties and piezoelectric potential of ettringite-rich cementitious
structural elements will not only enable the functionalization of construction
materials as energy harvesting components but also will lay a solid foundation
for future piezoelectric cementitious design.