* 1435755
* The Role of Distributed Foci of Tissue Stiffness in Cell-Cell Adhesion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Cynthia Reinhart-King, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The tissues of the body stiffen with age and also with the progression of
numerous diseases. It is now known that this change in stiffness can drive
disease by causing cells within the tissue to adopt unhealthy behaviors.
However, tissues do not stiffen uniformly. The tissues can develop numerous
small foci of stiffness so that the stiffness varies markedly throughout. It is
not yet known how cells respond to these distributed foci of stiffness that
develop with age and disease. This award supports the research necessary to
understand how the process of aging contributes to the development of stiffness
foci and how these stiff foci alter cell function. The primary activity in this
work will be on the development of mechanical stiffness foci within blood
vessels and the evaluation of their effects on the cells within the blood vessel
wall. However, this basic research will have a broad impact on current
understanding of physiology and pathology throughout the body, as changes in
tissue stiffness with age can occur in multiple different organ systems. As
such, this work will have broad impact to society. The project involves
techniques from cell biology, materials science, optics, and microfabrication.
This multi-disciplinary approach coupled with research activities designed to
involve diverse sets of researchers and students will help train engineers to
think and work across disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
"heterogeneity" is now appreciated as an important component of biology, the
primary focus to-date has been on cell-to-cell molecular-level heterogeneities.
However, heterogeneities also exist in the extracellular environment and have
been largely overlooked. Many tissues display foci of mechanical stiffness -
heterogeneities in stiffness that exist over just a few microns. This project
will address the stiffness foci that develop in tissue and their effects on
cell-cell adhesion and force generation. In this project, the major research
goal is to characterize these foci and their biophysical effects on endothelial
cell-cell adhesion using state-of-the-art tools including Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM), microfabrication, and ex vivo models. These studies have the
potential to identify a novel mechanism by which age contributes to endothelial
dysfunction. More importantly, this work will bring to light the role of
mechanical heterogeneities within the matrix on cell biophysics. While the
research here will be on the endothelium, it is expected that the results will
be relevant to many tissues and pathologies including cancer and embryonic
development where heterogeneities in mechanical properties also exist.