* 1435228
* Collaborative Proposal: Elucidation and Evaluation of Strategies to Mitigate Secondary Reactions in Cellulose Pyrolysis for Enhanced Production of Hydrolysable Anhydrosugars
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Linda Broadbelt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 160,330.00

1434073 (Garcia-Perez), 1435228 (Broadbelt)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Elucidation and Evaluation of Strategies to Mitigate Secondary Reactions in
Cellulose Pyrolysis for Enhanced production of Hydrolysable
Anhydrosugars&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
production of sugars from forest and agricultural wastes is a critical step for
making bio-fuels and bio-chemicals to replace petroleum. One way to do this is
by using an ancient technique called ?pyrolysis?, which simply involves heating
up this biomass. When cellulose (one of the main components in plant cell
tissues) is heated very fast between 300 and 600 oC (fast pyrolysis) under
vacuum it is possible to convert almost 95 % of it into sugars that can be
easily upgraded into bio-fuels and bio-chemicals. The quantity of sugars
obtained with this process is comparable to other well-developed, more expensive
methods like enzymatic hydrolysis. Unfortunately, when the biomass is heated
very fast at atmospheric pressure in commercial fast pyrolysis reactors, the
production of sugars is much lower than when using vacuum. In fact, we typically
see less than 20 % of the original cellulose. The decreased sugar yield at
atmospheric pressure is due to very poorly understood secondary reactions that
happen during fast pyrolysis on plant cell walls. In this proposal we will
combine laboratory experiments and computer modeling tools to understand the
reasons for the low quantities of sugars obtained at atmospheric pressure. New
practical strategies are proposed to dramatically increase the production of
sugars during fast pyrolysis and in this way reduce the price of bio-fuels
derived from our renewable biomass resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main
practical goal of this proposal is to better understand the role of intermediate
pyrolysis liquid phase oligomeric sugars (cellobiosan, cellotriosan,?) that
typically are lost through undesirable dehydration, cross-linking, and
polycondensation secondary reactions. We will combine innovative experimental
and kinetic modeling tools to better understand these secondary reactions and
the mechanisms by which acids, for example, mitigate some of the undesirable
interactions with the lignocellulosic matrix (or their products). Micro-
explosion enhancers (blowing agents) will be evaluated to promote anhydrosugar
aerosolization to decrease residence time in the pyrolytic liquid intermediate
as well as the probability for undesirable secondary reactions to occur inside
the pyrolysis reactor. We will broaden our impact by working with Walla-Walla
Community College (WWCC) in the development and evaluation of courses for
associate degrees in Bioenergy Operations and in Renewable Resource Recovery
Operations. We will organize an annual workshop between our graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers and WWCC students to exchange ideas and encourage WWCC
students to continue their professional development. This project will also
serve as a platform for undergraduate electrical engineering students to conduct
their Senior Design Project constructing and improving new wire mesh fast
pyrolysis reactors capable of vacuum operation. Results from this project will
be incorporated into lectures in graduate-level courses on kinetics and reaction
engineering at Northwestern University and on biomass thermochemical conversion
at Washington State University. Prof. Broadbelt will participate in a program to
interest girls in science and engineering. Joint collaboration between WSU and
Northwestern University will yield cross-institutional synergy in the future.