* 1435511
* EAGER: Non-invasive Cerbrovascular Regulation Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Kunal Mitra, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2016
* USD 92,802.00

PI: Mitra, Kunal &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1435511&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Florida Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Non-invasive
Cerbrovascular Regulation Assessment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical need exists
for a portable and objective noninvasive tool to evaluate physiological cerebral
dysfunction in patients who have sustained concussive head injury (CHI). CHI is
known to cause disturbances in brain blood flow as well as neuropsychological
(NP) symptoms. Current clinical assessments rely entirely on NP testing, which
lack objective diagnostic criteria and do not indicate the presence of actual
brain injury. Many patients with normal NP test findings are cleared to resume
previous activities, yet are in fact physically impaired and have heightened
vulnerability to repeat injury. The proposed sensors and novel algorithms may
provide crucially needed tools for initial detection, assessment, monitoring,
and rehabilitation of individuals with CHI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concussion
often causes physical brain injury and dysfunctional control of cerebral blood
flow (CBF), which is often undetected by current neuropsychological test
methods. Objective measurement of dysfunction is difficult with currently
available tools. This problem will be investigated by implementing cerebral
oximetry and rheoencephalography (cerebral bioimpedance), together with novel
algorithms, to evaluate mechanisms that control CBF. The primary objective of
this research is to determine whether these two easily implemented noninvasive
devices can be used in combination, without the need for additional sensors, to
assess cerebrovascular function, and to explore experimental protocols that
could be used in clinical evaluations. Healthy volunteers will be used in the
study in order to establish baseline norms and optimize test protocols. The
research methods include inhalation of ambient air and a mixture of air and CO2
at predetermined intervals. Sensor responses to the expected vasodilatory
response from CO2 inhalation will be analyzed for the effects of CO2
concentration, duration of inhalation, and repeated inhalation challenges (i.e.,
trending). The results will be used to develop protocols and adjust the sensor
parameters for future studies in post-concussive individuals with impaired CBF
control.