* 1435407
* Understanding the essential characteristics of surface ocean boundary layer turbulence in frontal zones
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Roger Samelson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 526,318.00

This study is motivated on the observation that ocean mixed layer fronts are
common features throughout the world ocean and are currently ignored in boundary
layer representations. Circulations associated with frontal instabilities are
capable of transporting material from the surface into the ocean interior and
are likely a key element in the ocean general circulation. This research will
yield quantitative estimates of these transport processes that can be used to
improve parameterizations for ocean models used in climate studies.
Participation by a graduate student for the duration of the project is planned
and results will be published in recognized peer-reviewed journals. Elements of
this investigation will be incorporated into Oregon State University graduate
curriculum as well as in public learning efforts through a summer internship
program involving high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on the properties and dynamics of coherent structures in the turbulent
ocean boundary layer and on the conditions that support their development. This
work will extend and complement previous studies that have examined or invoked
Langmuir or symmetric instability processes to explain ocean boundary layer
observations. It is hypothesized that the coherent, large-eddy structures
observed in preliminary large-eddy simulation numerical experiments may be best
understood as non-symmetric linear instabilities of a basic state that
incorporates surface stress and buoyancy flux modification of a geostrophically
balanced, horizontal density gradient. The first goal of this work will be
specifically to address this hypothesis. The second, broader goal is, with the
results of the first part as context, to use the large-eddy simulation to
explore and characterize the dependence of ocean boundary layer turbulent
processes, including especially the vertical fluxes and mixing associated with
coherent structures, on the strength and character of mean horizontal gradients.
A range of large-eddy simulations will be conducted to assess the relative
influence of frontal gradients and surface forcing on coherent structure
development and characteristics. Specific forcing parameters examined will
include surface stress and buoyancy (heat) flux, surface waves (Langmuir
circulation), and frontal (horizontal density or temperature gradient) strength,
including where appropriate the derived Ekman buoyancy flux as a scaling
parameter. The numerical simulations will be complemented by theoretical studies
in the form of linear stability analysis for a generalized basic state that will
provide a conceptual and quantitative framework for characterization of
instabilities in the ocean boundary layer. Specific objectives include: 1)
Development of a generalized linear instability theory for comparison with
large-eddy simulations and testing of the initial hypothesis; 2)
Characterization of the dependence of turbulent structures and flux scaling
regimes on the imposed surface fluxes and mean horizontal gradient, using large-
eddy simulations; 3) Physical interpretation and rationalization of the large-
eddy simulation regimes in terms of the results of the generalized linear
instability theory.