* 1435424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Media Discourse, Social Movements, and the Decline of Lynching in America.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Charles Seguin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 11,782.00

This dissertation investigates how the national news media talked about lynching
in the US between 1880 and 1950. Preliminary results and prior historical work
suggest that lynching was originally discussed by the media as a response to the
crimes supposedly committed by lynching victims. Over time, however, the media
came to discuss lynching as a barbaric and uncivilized practice. This research
asks why such a shift in media discourse took place, and what the consequences
of this change in media discourse were. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do so the Co-PI
is: 1) assembling a national-level dataset on the occurrence of lynching; 2)
gathering text data on the national news media's response to those lynchings; 3)
employing new computer-aided text analytic techniques, alongside more
conventional comparative historical methodologies, to analyze lynching
discourse; 4) analyzing anti-lynching movement campaigns, using comparative
historical methods and; 5) using quantitative methods to analyze how the
probability of future lynchings in specific communities was affected by negative
attention to local lynchings. The proposed research will thus address two
related questions: First, did social movements affect this shift in meanings?
Second, did this shift in meanings have an effect on the actual practice of
lynching? The findings will aid in both understanding the case at hand and the
general impact of media discourse on social movements, particularly relative to
issues of violence and the meaning of justice.