* 1435461
* Collaborative Research: Wetting Phenomena in Particle-Filled Polymers: Multifunctional Composites with Easy Processability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 267,959.00

Fibers are often mixed into plastics to make them stiffer, stronger, or better
electrical conductors. Yet such fiber-containing plastic composites are
difficult to manufacture by standard molding or other processing. Furthermore,
fibers often suffer damage during manufacturing. This project is to create a
bridging system that converts particle fillers into a network of reformable
fibers i.e. fibers that are capable of reassembling after breaking. Composites
with such network can retain the initial design properties (such as high
strength and toughness or high conductivity) without suffering property loss
during processing. The Principle Investigators will conduct scientific outreach
at pre-college level, especially at the Pittsburgh SciTech High School and two
K-8 schools with high minority enrollment, to encourage students to pursue
education in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific hypothesis of
this research is that composites containing a fiber-like labile filler can be
realized by dispersing solid particles into a polymer matrix, and bridging them
together by menisci of a wetting fluid. Since the menisci continuously break and
reform during flow, the composites will have excellent processability. The
properties of the resulting polymer composites may be tailored by suitable
choice of filler, and this project will test fillers that realize composites
with high stiffness, or high toughness, or high electrical conductivity. The
hypothesis will be tested experimentally using polystyrene as the matrix
plastic, and silica or metal particles as the particulate filler. Various
thermoplastic materials will be used as the wetting phase that forms menisci
between particles. Polystyrene, particles, and the wetting phase will be blended
by a melt extrusion process optimized to realize meniscus-bridging of particles.
Characterization includes tensile and impact testing, electrical conductivity
measurements, and morphological studies by scanning electron microscopy. The
intellectual significance of this project is to demonstrate that meniscus-
bridging can be exploited to achieve materials with the processability of
ordinary particle filled polymers, with the mechanical properties of fiber
reinforced composites, or the electrical conductivity approaching metals.
Furthermore, this project will advance the fundamental knowledge of capillary
interactions in filled polymers.