* 1435021
* Collaborative Proposal: Assessment of the Colloidal Iron Size Spectrum in Coastal and Oceanic Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mark Wells, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,334.00

Bioavailable iron is arguably the most important nutrient for shaping the
distribution and composition of marine primary productivity and, in turn, the
magnitude of ocean carbon export. Iron exists in many phases throughout the
world's oceans, and colloidal, or non-soluble, phases comprise a significant
fraction of dissolved iron. However, the size and physical/chemical character of
these phases is presently poorly understood. To better understand this key part
of iron cycling, researchers will use new analytical chemistry methods to
quantitatively separate the colloidal iron sizes present in a sample and measure
the composition of these colloidal portions in shelf and oceanic waters. Results
from this study will help hone future studies to better link the source and fate
of iron in the marine environment. A postdoctoral researcher will serve as a
principal investigator on the project, providing a unique professional
development opportunity. In addition, the project will support the education and
research training of one undergraduate student each year, and the researchers
will conduct outreach activities to K-12 students and teachers.

The colloidal phase of iron may serve as a biological source of stored iron, a
primary conveyance for stripping iron into sinking particulate matter (removing
it from the pelagic biosphere), or, more likely, a dynamic balance of these
roles that fluctuates with the source and character of iron input. The current
methods to investigate marine colloidal matter involve operationally defining
the bulk colloidal phase using single cutoff filters, a practical decision based
on little or no evidence. More problematic, these methods homogenize the
colloidal phase, obscuring what almost certainly is a reactivity spectrum of
colloidal species tied to their size and compositional character. In this study,
the researchers will use Flow Field-Flow Fractionation coupled to Multi-Angle
Laser Light Scattering to make measurements of the uniformity or uniqueness of
the colloidal size spectrum, and the physical/chemical character of these
phases. The findings will have broad implications to the fields of marine
ecology and biogeochemistry and, ultimately, to modeling studies of ocean-
atmospheric coupling and climate change.