* 1435810
* Multiscale Fundamental Investigation of Micromechanisms of Cyclic Deformation and Fatigue in an Ultrafine Grained Aluminum Alloy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rajiv Mishra, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 347,901.00

Advanced materials improve the quality of life and significantly impact the
sustainability of society. The friction stir processing technique can produce
ultrafine-grained aluminum alloys with both higher strength and higher high
cycle fatigue life when compared to conventional alloys. However, how the
improved mechanical properties emerge from the unique microstructure is not well
understood. The microstructure in these new materials consists of grains smaller
than one micrometer and a high fraction of stable high-angle grain boundaries.
These microstructural features strongly influence the dislocation-based
deformation mechanisms. This award supports fundamental research on advanced
computational modeling of cyclic deformation mechanisms as well as experimental
investigations and characterization to establish microstructure-property
relationship for an ultrafine-grained aluminum alloy system. The research will
generate knowledge in advancing computational materials engineering for the
selected alloy system but will be broadly applicable to similar engineering
materials. Results from this research will contribute to the national goal of
accelerating the insertion of new materials in the engineering practice. This
work will support graduate student research and also help incorporate new
understanding of deformation mechanisms into undergraduate courses such as
mechanical behavior of materials and advanced materials by microstructural
design.

This award supports an integrated computational and experimental approach to
systematically study the correlation between cyclic deformation and
heterogeneous microstructures of dispersion containing ultrafine-grained alloys.
Well-proven concepts of persistent slip bands and extrusion/intrusion in
microcrystalline alloys do not apply directly to ultrafine-grained materials
because their smaller grain sizes and more high-angle grain boundaries change
dislocation micromechanisms of multiplication, recovery and substructure
formation. A multi-grain modeling strategy with three-dimensional discrete
dislocation dynamics will be used to predict mesoscale dislocation processes and
the initiation of slip localization at early stages of cyclic deformation.
Specifically, this strategy will use information generated by atomistic
simulations to create dislocation-grain boundary models for the discrete
dislocation dynamics method. Incorporating dislocation-grain boundary and
dislocation-precipitate models, the dislocation dynamics simulations will
provide insights into dislocation-based damage accumulation processes in
heterogeneous alloy systems. Experimental activities involve performing
interrupted mini-fatigue tests and microstructure characterizations using
orientation imaging microscopy and transmission electron microscopy to obtain
cyclical stress/strain curves, grain size distributions and dislocation
arrangements at various stages of high cycle fatigue. These efforts will provide
insights into damage accumulation and evolution, help verify computational
prediction with early stage data, and build a database of the entire fatigue
behavior of the ultrafine-grained alloys.