* 1435177
* 3D-Printed Porous Structure and Polymer Infiltration for Fabrication of Functionally Gradient Material with Complex Shape
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/28/2015
* USD 294,495.00

Additive manufacturing includes a variety of 3D fabrication technologies.
Starting from early powder-based 3D printing, commercial machines are now
capable of producing thermoplastics using fused deposition modeling, ultraviolet
curable polymers using stereolithography, and metals using laser sintering
techniques. However, additive manufacturing of composites or bi-materials
remains challenging, particularly for two materials with significantly different
properties that can be combined in various ratios to create different mechanical
behaviors. This research aims to develop a manufacturing method, in which 3D
printing is utilized to make specific scaffold structures, allowing polymer to
infiltrate and reinforce the part. This new method will enable development of
functionally gradient materials, light-weight design, and reinforced structures
for applications of additive manufacturing in rapid prototyping, healthcare,
automotive and aerospace. Outcomes of this research will stimulate the next-
generation additive manufacturing technology and provide education and research
opportunities for students of many different backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on understanding the infiltration
mechanism of the polymer through certain parameters, such as viscosity and
surface tension, and mechanical behaviors of the polymer infiltrated composite
in order to customize material properties, including stiffness, hardness,
strength, and isotropy or anisotropy. To this end, this research includes two
tasks. First, the research team will study and simulate the infiltration
phenomenon using computational fluid dynamics and validate with design of
experiments. The results will define the structural limits to capsulate or drain
liquid polymers prior to solidification. In the second task, they will
investigate the rule of mixtures for composite mechanics under a variety of
scaffold structures and the non-linear behavior of the composite under extreme
loads. Results from this research can be used to establish a material
decomposition algorithm. This algorithm can thus be used to define scaffold
structure and polymer selection given a set of desired material properties.