* 1436296
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Cultural Development And Divergence In The Maritime Northeast
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Kevin McBride, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 17,719.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Kevin McBride, Martin Hrynick will conduct excavations
at the Devil's Head site located in Calais, Maine. The research has significance
for two basic reasons. The first is that it provides insight into a poorly known
aspect of US prehistory. Secondly the work has important methodological
implications. While a central archaeological goal is to reconstruct as many
aspects as possible of past human existence, one is constrained by the very
limited nature of the archaeological record which consists largely of discarded
waste materials and the spatial relationships among them. Through an analysis of
the Devil's Head site and comparison with an already excavated counterpart Mr.
Hrynick will explore ways to increase the amount of information which can be
extracted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Devil's Head is an eroding shell-
bearing site located on the St. Croix Estuary of the Western Quoddy Region. The
site includes components dating to the Middle (2200-1350 BP) and Late (1350-550
BP) Maritime Woodland periods. The transition from the Middle to Late Maritime
Woodland period is not well understood, but may be marked by ethnic divergence
and increasing hunter-gatherer sedentism. To date, studies of this transition
have focused on economics and site structure. To approach this transition, Mr.
Hrynick will excavate and analyze dwelling features at the Devil's Head site to
form a comparative to a temporally and environmentally similar dataset from Port
Joli Harbour, Nova Scotia. No such high-resolution view of dwelling features
from two parts of the Maritime Peninsula presently exists. Both sites are within
the Wabanaki homeland, which was, during the Middle and Late Woodland period,
home to closely related groups of Algonquian hunter-gatherers. This offers a
singular opportunity to consider ethnic divergence alongside changing mobility
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this program will be
developed via collaboration with local stakeholders, including the Passamaquoddy
Tribe and the City of Calais. The project will include educational programs for
youth and a public archaeology program to build capacity for future public
archaeological projects in the region. The eroding nature of the Devil's Head
site offers a relatable record of rising sea-level related to climate change,
offering particular value for educational initiatives. Research from this
project will be disseminated in both public and professional publications and
conferences, including a series of public lectures in the Western Quoddy Region.