* 1436827
* Accelerator-Rich Architectures with Applications to Healthcare
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Eleazar Eskin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 899,999.00

Many healthcare applications present significant computational challenges. For
example, the computational demand for personalized cancer treatment is
prohibitively high for the general-purpose computing technologies, as tumor
heterogeneity requires great sequencing depths, structural aberrations are
difficult to detect with today's methods, and the tumor has the ability to
evolve i.e., the same tumor might be assayed a great many times during the
course of treatment. The goal of this project is to apply the domain-specific
customized computing techniques developed by the Center for Domain-Specific
Computing (CDSC) at UCLA to greatly accelerate computation for some key
healthcare applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CDSC, established in 2009
with the support of the NSF, looks beyond parallelization, and focuses on
domain-specific customization as the next disruptive technology for power-
performance efficiency improvement. In the past four years, CDSC has
demonstrated significant performance and energy efficiency with innovation in
developing customizable heterogeneous computing technologies. The current
proposal under the NSF Innovation Transition program leverages the research
results from CDSC, and focuses on key research problems and solutions to make
domain-specific customizable computing feasible and practical for innovation
transition to the industry, Specifically, the project will develop accelerator-
rich architectures along with unified adaptive runtime systems for personalized
cancer treatment, medical image processing, and will enable deployment in
several energy efficient programmable platforms capable of handling huge volumes
of state of the art real time patient data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center
will continue its already successful outreach program, through a partnership
with the UCLA Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity, to involve
highly diversified high school and undergraduate students for summer research.
The success of our project will enable significant advances in medical imaging
analysis and personalized cancer treatment, which will greatly improve
healthcare quality while reducing cost. The participation of the industrial
partner in this InTrans project will greatly facilitate the innovation
transition of research results from this project to industry for energy-
efficient computing.