* 1436545
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Impacts of size-selective mortality on sex-changing fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Scott Hamilton, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2019
* USD 207,252.00

Many marine fish species change sex during their lifetimes, and many of them are
targets of commercial and recreational fishing. The timing of sex change in
these animals is often related to body size, so populations typically consist of
many small fish of the initial sex (usually female) and few large fish of the
other sex (usually male). In nature, smaller fish are at a greater risk of
mortality due to predation, but fishermen tend to seek larger fish. Thus fishing
that targets larger individuals may skew sex ratios, removing enough of the
larger sex to hinder reproduction. However, the extent to which size-selective
mortality affects sex-changing fishes is poorly understood. This research will
explore the effects of size-selective mortality on the population dynamics of
sex-changing species using an integrated set of field experiments and
mathematical models. It will provide the first experimental exploration of the
sensitivity of different sex-change patterns and reproductive strategies to
selective mortality. The results will advance our knowledge of the
susceptibility and resilience of sex-changing organisms to different types of
size-selective mortality and will reveal how sex-changing species can recover
after size-selection ceases, as in populations within marine reserves where
fishing is suddenly prohibited. The findings will inform fisheries management
policies, which do not currently consider the ability of a species to change sex
in setting fisheries regulations. The project will provide professional training
and research support for three graduate students and multiple undergraduates
from California State University Northridge, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories,
and University of North Carolina Wilmington. The research findings will be
communicated with fisheries managers, via national and international scientific
meetings, posted on institutional websites and social media, and through
publicly available modeling exercises.

This project will consist of a three-year study of the effects of size-specific
mortality on sex-changing fishes. Field experiments will use three closely
related rocky-reef fishes that differ in sex-change pattern and are amenable to
field manipulation and direct measurement of reproductive output. The species
include a protogynous hermaphrodite (a female-to-male sex-change pattern common
among harvested species) and two simultaneous hermaphrodites that differ in
their ability to switch between male and female. Two types of experiments will
be conducted on populations established on replicate patch reefs at Santa
Catalina Island, California: (1) sex ratios will be manipulated to determine
when the scarcity of males limits population-level reproductive output; and (2)
experiments cross-factoring the intensity of mortality with the form of size-
selection (i.e., higher mortality of large or small individuals) will test the
demographic consequences of size-selective mortality. In concert with the field
experiments, size- and sex-structured population models (integral projection
models) will be developed for use in three ways: (1) to evaluate how different
types of selective mortality should affect population dynamics; (2) to predict
outcomes of the field experiments, testing/validating the model and allowing
direct prediction of the ecological significance of short-term selection; and
(3) to fit to existing survey data for a fourth species, a widely fished, sex-
changing fish, inside and outside of marine reserves. Part (3) will evaluate
whether and how quickly the mating system and reproductive output of that
species (not directly measurable in the field) is recovering inside reserves.
This integrated set of field experiments and models will yield novel insight
into the effects of size-selective mortality on the population dynamics of sex-
changing marine species.