* 1436018
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Design of Smart Damping for Structural Systems to Mitigate the Impacts of Natural Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Erik Johnson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 206,107.00

Our nation's aging infrastructure presents a significant engineering and public
policy challenge, particularly given that projected financial resources will not
be adequate to fund the requisite structural system repairs and replacements to
stem this infrastructure deterioration. The inevitable result is that buildings,
bridges, roads, tunnels and other structural systems will frequently remain in
service past their initial design lifetimes and design loads. Consequently,
novel cost-effective solutions must be pursued to ensure the structural
integrity of such systems, particularly when subjected to natural hazards such
as earthquakes and strong winds. Structural systems equipped with smart damping
systems, whose properties can be adapted to their changing environments, are one
promising solution. This award supports fundamental research to enable design
methods to incorporate dissipative and nonlinear nature of controllable dampers
yielding smart damper designs with increasing performance at reduced cost. This
will benefit the U.S. society by making controllable dampers a realistic
approach for addressing the dilemma of aging infrastructure. The research
involves disciplines of structural mechanics, control theory and computational
science. This multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional project will help
broaden participation by students from groups traditionally underrepresented in
engineering research and will positively impact engineering education at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid Model
Predictive Control can affect a significant advancement in controllable damping
capabilities to reduce structural response and improve structural safety. The
damper design will incorporate the physical dissipative limitations of the
dampers through the use of hybrid system models to capture the on-off switching
and to model predictive control for nonlinear or constrained dynamical systems.
While the promise of this approach for controllable damping design has been
established, several barriers must be overcome before wider implementation is
possible. Using a set of bridge and building testbed structural systems and
several models of controllable damping devices, this project will investigate
learning-based methods and parallel computing techniques. The result will reduce
the often prohibitive computational expense of repeatedly solving the high-order
mixed integer-quadratic programming problems that arise from application to
realistic structure models. Critical numerical and laboratory experiments will
validate the efficacy of these nonlinear controllable damping approaches and
establish that the resulting designs are robust to uncertainties and errors in
the structural model, sensor noise and hardware limitations that challenge
implementation.