* 1436343
* Targeted Infusion Project: Prompting Effective Active Learning through Implementing Self-Regulated Learning Assessment in Diverse STEM Learning Settings
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Gordon Skelton, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2020
* USD 399,996.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Jackson State University
seeks to improve African American students' academic performance and retention
in STEM fields through enhancing their awareness of their own abilities to learn
complex STEM subjects, improving their ability for selecting and using cognitive
and metacognitive strategies, monitoring their learning process and making
necessary adjustment in their learning efforts. The findings from the project
can be used to inform future practice in and research on developing expertise of
STEM faculty and assisting students to acquire self-regulated learning
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the following three objectives: 1)
To provide STEM faculty members with professional development opportunities for
obtaining skills and knowledge in educational theories through implementing the
self-regulated learning assessment and by participating in a teaching community
with learning scientists; 2) To provide African American students with
deliberate training opportunities in multiple STEM courses for improving their
skills for effectively managing their STEM learning efforts and obtaining a
deeper understanding of the subject through implementing the self-regulated
learning assessment in their STEM courses; and 3) To provide evidence-based data
to confirm the effectiveness of proposed faculty professional development model
and student skill training model and to identify factors that can facilitate
obtaining desirable outcomes from the two models. The proposed activities and
strategies are evidence-based and the implementation is guided by an evaluation.