* 1436040
* Collaborative Research:  Development of an In Situ Porewater Sampler Coupled to an Underwater Mass Spectrometer for High-Resolution Biogenic Gas Measurements in Permeable Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Robert Short, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 378,454.00

Continental shelves are known as rich fishing grounds but they also provide a
suite of less constrained, valuable ecosystem services. In particular, these
borderlands between the near shore environment and open ocean, are
biogeochemical "hot spots" mediating fluxes carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) to the
deep sea. The tight coupling between C and N has important implications for
ocean productivity, atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels, and ultimately
global climate. Because continental shelves are broad and shallow, much of the C
and N cycling occurs within their sediments - approximately 70% of which are
covered with permeable sands. Traditionally, it was thought the sandy sediments
were unimportant in C and N cycling but, over the last two decades research has
revealed that sandy sediments may be key players in marine biogeochemical
cycles. However, the ability to quantify the contributions of sandy shelf
environments has been limited by the absence of effective methods for sampling
these environments on appropriate time. In this research the investigators will
develop a novel field-deployable porewater sampling device coupled to an
underwater mass spectrometer. This system will measure a full suite of biogenic
gases (e.g., O2, CO2, N2, Ar, CH4, H2S) across a vertical gradient and calculate
in situ reaction rates based on simultaneous estimates of gas concentrations and
vertical advective porewater exchange. Along with the development of this
instrument the investigators will also create an online instruction manual with
videos explaining how to build the porewater sampling system, how to calibrate
and test the mass spectrometer, etc., with the goal of propagating this
technology the wider community. Successful completion of this work will produce
a flexible porewater sampling and analysis platform that can be reproduced by
scientists and engineers using off the shelf components. The research proposed
here employs membrane inlet mass spectrometer analysis of the porewater, but
this sampling platform could be used with other in situ analytical
instrumentation as well. Importantly, this instrumentation will broadly expand
our capabilities to measure C and N cycling in permeable marine sediments, and,
in doing so, will provide relevant data for biogeochemical and global climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators (PIs) will design,
build, and field test a novel porewater sampling interface for integration with
an underwater membrane introduction mass spectrometer. The device will allow
highly resolved, real-time measurements, with minimal sampling artifacts, of
biogeochemically important gases (e.g., O2, CH4, N2, H2S) as well as total DIC
(as CO2) in porewater of permeable sediments. Included in the system are sensors
that allow vertical advection within porewater to be inferred from heat
transport, thus permitting both in situ gas concentrations and reaction rates to
be calculated in real time. This system will represent a major advance in the
ability to measure coupled biogeochemical processes within permeable sediments
and will contribute to a better understanding of the biogeochemistry of
continental shelves. Continental shelf sediments process much of the carbon and
nitrogen exported from land or fixed in overlying waters. Approximately, 70% of
the shelf seafloor is characterized by permeable sandy sediments. Lab-scale
experiments indicate that organic matter processing within permeable sediments
is rapid and efficient. Additionally, it appears that diagenesis and nutrient
recycling are controlled by advection of bottom water through the pore space of
these permeable surficial sediments. Advection determines the rate of particle
capture (by bed filtration), the rate and pathways of mineralization (by oxidant
flux), and the rate of return of remineralized nutrients to the water column. At
present there is a disconnect between what we understand about permeable
sediment biogeochemistry from small-scale manipulations and how we represent
continental shelf biogeochemistry in a modeling framework. The "missing link" is
a set of reliable tools to measure dynamic processes in the field, and thus to
provide good data and a basis for appropriate parameterization for modeling. The
instrumentation to be built by the PIs and their students will overcome several
of the present limitations of porewater sampling in permeable sediment
environments. The system is designed to operate in situ without enclosure
artifacts. It is designed to sample over extended time periods, making it more
likely to capture transient events that may dominate sediment-water exchange.
Because the sampling interface is coupled to a mass spectrometer, the system can
collect accurate and precise data for multiple chemical species simultaneously.
The proposed mass spectrometer and porewater sampling interface will represent a
major step forward in the ability to measure biogeochemical properties in
permeable sediment environments. Data from this instrument system will allow
researchers to address fundamental uncertainties about the roles of sandy
sediments in global biogeochemistry such as the efficiency of denitrification or
the production and consumption of greenhouse gases such as CH4 and N2O within
sediments. To assist the transfer of knowledge gained here to the wider
community, a website for this instrument with part lists, and a blog where
interested scientists can hold discussions on the instrument and potential
broader applications of the technology. Additionally, instructional videos on
relevant topics (e.g., construction, calibration, troubleshooting, field
deployment) will be hosted via a YouTube channel dedicated to this project. One
Ph.D. student will receive interdisciplinary research training at the junctures
between engineering, oceanography, and biogeochemistry. Undergraduate students
will be trained in field and laboratory methods and a concerted effort to
attract women and minorities will be made using resources available at BU (e.g.,
BU Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship recruits minority students) and at
the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography.