* 1436255
* Collaborative Research: Identification of Fundamental Processing-Structure-Property Relationships for Scalable Manufacturing of Self-Assembled Block Polymer Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Bryan Boudouris, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Membrane-based chemical separations are essential to the production of food, the
purification of drinking water, and the development of therapeutic medicine.
However, advanced technologies must be employed to lower the costs of many
current membrane purification procedures. For example, reverse osmosis
separation technology used for seawater desalination was once prohibitively
expensive in terms of cost and energy consumption. However in recent decades,
optimization of the reverse osmosis membrane material and structure made it a
competitive technology for water treatment. Similar opportunities exist for
advanced membrane separations to replace other well-established processes that
are energy inefficient and environmentally-taxing such as chromatography and
extraction. However, doing so will require transitioning to designer, self-
assembled nanomaterials in order to produce next-generation membranes with well-
defined and tunable nanostructures. This award will study the fabrication of
block copolymer-based membranes and evaluate their structure and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
identify the key material relationships that control the interplay between
processing, nanostructure, and performance of block-polymer-based membranes
created using self-assembly and non-solvent induced phase separation coating
process. Membranes will be prepared at the laboratory-scale initially using
custom synthesized triblock molecules. Separation performance will be correlated
with the nanostructure of the membrane and physicochemical properties of the
self-assembled triblock polymer molecule. Evaporation-controlled rheological
measurements will be performed to quantify the mechanical properties and
assembly kinetics during the early-stage formation of the active layer. This
will allow for the determination of the optimum casting solution concentration,
solvent evaporation rate, and evaporation period required to fully translate the
lab-scale coating process to scalable manufacturing of high-performance
membranes using a roll-to-roll coater. The primary outcome of this research
project will be the large-scale fabrication and demonstration of a high-
performance membrane with tunable separation performance and selectivity that
can be processed with modern high-throughput manufacturing technology. The
fundamental processing-structure-property relationships identified here will
lead to advances in membrane design and fabrication in addition to providing new
avenues of exploration within macromolecular processing science.