* 1436444
* RUI: Multi-Scale Analysis of Catalytically Grown Carbon Nanofibers and Bulk Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mark Atwater, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2018
* USD 291,178.00

Nanomaterials are advanced materials which have at least one dimension below 100
nanometers, or about one one-thousandth the width of a human hair. The most
widely studied nanomaterials are based on carbon, as these materials have the
potential to transform society by allowing stronger, lighter structures, more
efficient computing and advanced medical applications. The drawback is that they
often require specialized processing which is difficult to scale up
economically. A critical transition must be made to convert their theoretical
potential into real-world performance. This award enables fundamental research
into a new process which efficiently produces bulk components made entirely of
carbon nanofibers. This highly versatile material has the potential to broadly
impact society and the economy by enabling applications in transportation,
energy, environmental and medical disciplines. This research will use multi-
scale analysis to understand how the fibers form (nanoscale), how they interact
(microscale) and how they behave collectively as a bulk component (macroscale).
Such diverse topics require a multi-disciplinary approach to holistically unite
nanoscale materials science, chemical engineering and advanced manufacturing.
The project will engage these diverse groups at the professional and educational
levels and demonstrate the importance of preparing science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) students for a multi-disciplinary
workplace.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The direct synthesis of bulk components
comprised entirely of carbon nanofibers creates a stand-alone embodiment for the
application of nanoscale carbon. Carbon nanofibers are formed during the
decomposition of a carbon-containing gas over a suitable catalyst. The catalyst
is placed within a constrained environment (a mold), which the nanofibers fill
during growth. After sufficient growth, the fibers form a highly entangled, bulk
component which is mechanically robust. There are many factors which can alter
the properties of the three-dimensional fiber collection, and the objective of
this research is to understand the governing factors from fiber formation at the
catalyst to fiber interaction in the bulk. An important understanding of fiber
growth using low-cost, bulk catalysts will be attained by uniquely controlling
composition and microstructure through mechanical alloying. Foundational metrics
will be established for this brand-new process in the areas of kinetics,
morphology and long-range response of fiber growth to constraint. The bulk
properties will also be identified as a function of those structural
characteristics. This multi-scale approach is critical to accurately couple
processing, properties and performance.