* 1436560
* Collaborative Research: Processing and Assembly of Devices with Tailored Magnetic Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Thomas Crawford, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 263,348.00

Nanomaterials, materials with features ranging from 1-100 nm, have been
developed with many unique properties, and a variety of techniques have been
developed to produce these materials in large volumes at low cost. However to
date, we lack commercial methods to incorporate these materials and their unique
properties into novel devices, or to build these functions into materials over
larger length scales. One particularly exciting collection of nanomaterials are
composites that can use electricity to change magnetic properties and vice-
versa. These materials could lead to the realization of new types of electronic
devices, including new types of memory and data storage. In this project we seek
to develop novel methods for synthesizing and assembling these materials into
larger-scale optical devices that could find application in sensors, optical
integrated circuits, and in data transmission and storage. Importantly, this
effort includes research to measure and verify that these materials behave as
designed once integrated into a manufactured device. Such quality control,
especially monitoring during manufacturing, is critical to enable
commercialization of these materials. This project combines the efforts of
materials scientists at the University of Florida and physicists at the
University of South Carolina to provide a unique interdisciplinary research
environment for student researchers, critical for not only discovery but for
future societal benefit for materials with properties that span multiple
traditional scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
synthesis and assembly of devices built from multiferroic composite materials,
i.e. materials that exhibit at least two, and sometimes three types of ferroic
ordering in the same phase. In this project, activities center on biphasic
fibers that combine a piezoelectric and a magnetostrictive material. The figure
of merit for these multiferroics is the magnetoelectric coefficient, which
measures the magnitude of the electric field generated when the multiferroic
material is placed in an applied magnetic field. Using magnetic annealing and
magnetic-field-directed self-assembly, research efforts will develop materials
with enhanced magnetoelectric coefficients and assemble them into novel optical
devices. In parallel, novel process metrologies will be implemented to
characterize the properties of the fibers and devices built from them. These
measurements will identify systematics and quantify magnetoelectric coupling in
materials that are not amenable to more established characterization
methodologies.