* 1436658
* Multidimensional Network Analysis for Analyzing and Predicting Complex Customer-Product Relations in Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 501,444.00

Understanding customer preferences and needs is critically important in
developing successful products. This award supports an interdisciplinary
research to develop a data-driven mathematical approach for analyzing and
predicting consumer preferences in design of sustainable engineering products,
such as alternative fuel vehicles and smart appliances. The relations among
customers and products are conceptualized as a complex network and analyzed
using network theory and techniques. This study will help industry produce more
competitive products in shorter time to market. The findings will contribute to
the development of new techniques for analyzing large complex networks. Workshop
and panel sessions on analyzing customers and products as networks will be
organized for dissemination to a broader community. Research will be integrated
with education through interdisciplinary undergraduate Design Certificate and
graduate Design Cluster programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Analytical modeling of
customer preferences in product design is inherently difficult as it faces
challenges in modeling heterogeneous human behavior and product offerings. The
novelty of the research lies in the employment of a Multidimensional Customer-
Product Network (MCPN) framework, where separate networks of "customers" and
"products" are simultaneously modeled, and multiple types of relations, such as
consideration and purchase, product associations, and customer social networks
are considered. The research will extend the Exponential Random Graph Model
(ERGM) as a unified statistical inference framework for analyzing
multidimensional customer-product relations and predicting unknown customer
preferences (consideration or choice) under new design scenarios. Social
influences on adopting "green" technology are analyzed in the same framework.
Our approach overcomes the limitations of the traditional statistical analysis
and utility-based preference modeling by considering the dependency among
product choices and the social influence induced "irrationality" of customer
behavior. We will also explore the use of text analysis of customer-generated
data in social media thereby creating crowdsourced "virtual labs" for advancing
data analytics and computational social science in product design.