* 1436903
* Linking magnetic and isotopic data from Gulf of Alaska deep-sea cores: understanding the region's contribution to global oceanographic variability and the earth's magnetic field
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 379,999.00

Developing a robust timescale of geologic events in key geographic areas is
essential for understanding the global system and its record of change. The
high-latitude North Pacific is under-sampled, poorly understood, and filled with
controversy. This study, using material from new deep-sea sediment cores
collected during Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expedition 341 in the
Gulf of Alaska, will provide the first high-quality, high-resolution isotopic
and magnetic data needed to understand the contribution of this region to global
oceanographic and glacial dynamics, biogeochemical cycles, and fundamental
properties of the earth's magnetic field. Results of this study will be of keen
interest to the public, for example, by relating variations in the earth's
magnetic field to shielding of cosmic rays, a phenomenon which impacts global
telecommunications and businesses that rely on tourism related to the Aurora
Borealis. In addition, results from this work could have implications for
environmental and biological exposure to radiation.

Great sedimentation rates in the Gulf of Alaska are supported by a glaciated,
tectonically active margin that ensures an almost continuous supply of fine-
grained lithogenic material. These high sedimentation rates support a strong
record of paleomagnetic variations and enhance preservation of calcareous
microfossils suitable for isotopic analysis. Such rapidly accumulating sediments
are only accessible through drilling. Three sites (U1417, U1418, U1419) drilled
during IODP Expedition 341 (Southern Alaska Margin Tectonic, Climate and
Sedimentation) provide, for the first time, the high-quality materials needed to
assess globally important climatic, glacial, and paleomagnetic variability in
the North Pacific. The PIs will use a tandem stable isotopic and paleomagnetic
approach to develop robust, high-resolution chronostratigraphies in the
Expedition 341 sites. The primary focus is on the past ~ 1 Ma, at submillenial
resolution for sites U1417 and U1418; and will focus on the last glacial cycle
(~0-50 ka) at subcentury resolution for site U1419.