* 1436426
* Targeted Infusion Project-Promoting Minority Students' Participation in STEM-Undergraduate Degree Programs
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Teferi Tsegaye, Kentucky State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Kentucky State University
seeks to undertake institutional reform and establish transformational
strategies to strengthen and enhance STEM teaching, learning, and research and
to improve students' access to and retention in STEM programs. Kentucky State
University enrolls a significant number of students from groups underrepresented
in STEM - minority students, low-income students, and non-traditional students,
such as home-schooled students and students returning to college.

The project seeks to enhance the teaching pedagogies and research capacity in
STEM fields, fostering a competitive learning and research environment, and
developing new project-based and inquiry-based curricula and programs that will
provide academic support to the students. The specific objectives of the project
are to: 1) increase the enrollment of students into the STEM programs; 2)
develop experiential research projects to enhance students' opportunities in a
broad range of scientific inquiry; 3) enhance STEM curricula to address the
diverse backgrounds and learning styles of the students; and 4) develop student
retention, faculty development, and research enhancement programs. The project
is projected to impact 250 students at Kentucky State University, as well as 60
pre-college or high school students.