* 1436381
* Broadening Participation Research Project:  Effect of Self-Regulated Learning Development on Student Success in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Caesar Jackson, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,989.00

North Carolina Central University (NCCU) proposes to examine the effect of self-
regulated learning training and development on student success in STEM. The
researchers propose to structure an intervention around units of a physics,
chemistry, and calculus course and conduct a three-phase research project. Phase
I will entail a pilot study to determine what learning strategies the STEM
students currently use and a detailed analysis of the pilot data to identify
gaps in effective self-regulated learning development. In Phase II, the
researchers will develop and adapt a self-regulated learning training system for
the students. Phase III will be an experimental study to investigate the effect
of self-regulated learning training on student outcomes. Currently, little is
known about the extent to which STEM students at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) use self-regulated learning strategies or develop the
skills and competencies to do so. The proposed project will contribute knowledge
to gain a better understanding of that phenomenon in the context of HBCUs with
broader implications for minority students in STEM generally.

The fundamental aim of the research is to determine if improving self-regulated
learning results in improved academic achievement in STEM at NCCU. A quasi-
experimental design will be used to answer three research questions: (1) What
learning strategies are NCCU STEM students currently using? The Motivated
Strategies for Learning Questionnaire will be used to collect student motivation
and self-regulated learning strategy data at the course/subject-specific level.
(2) What gaps in effective self-regulated learning development exist for NCCU
STEM students? The Pintrich model of self-regulated learning will be used to
analyze the data collected in response to the first question to answer the
second research question. Researchers will use the results of a synthesis of
relevant literature to determine the best methodology and instructional
strategies for conducting the self-regulated training - inside or outside the
regular classroom. (3) Does self-regulated learning training enhance NCCU
students' effective use of self-regulated strategies and change academic
performance outcomes? Researchers will conduct a pre-post comparison of trait-
oriented measures of self-regulated learning strategies using a questionnaire.
The treatment group will complete surveys about their learning behavior during
the study by receiving messages on their smartphones from SurveySignalÂ®. This
research will produce data-driven information to create intervention models
based on literature specific to the effects of self-regulation and motivation on
student performance.