* 1436450
* Thermal Decomposition/incineration of Nano-Enabled Products (NEPs): Environmental Health and Safety Implications
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Philip Demokritou, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 11/30/2018
* USD 375,001.00

PI: Philip K. Demokritou&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET - 1436450&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-sized materials have enabled an increasing number of
new materials to be produced. These manufactured products are called Nano-
Enabled Products (NEPs). Because of the extremely small sizes of the nano-
material components, there are additional physical, chemical, and physiological
hazards not attributed to their bulk counterparts. The proliferation of NEPs
thus poses potential environmental health and safety (EHS) risks during their
life cycle, including their disposal at the end of their life-cycle.
Specifically, NEPs decompose and release nano-materials under elevated
temperatures when they are incinerated for their final disposal or under
incidental fires. The proposed study is to generate a data base and to provide
knowledge on the fundamentals of how such thermal decomposition takes place.
With this knowledge it should be possible to design safer NEPs. That is, the
"safer-by-design" capability will help to remove risk-uncertainties of NEPs and
contribute to the sustainability of the nano-technology industry. Besides
contributions to industry, the proposed study will involve students in research
and train K-12 teachers and students in Boston area public schools and the
Edward M. Kennedy Academy of Health Careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal
decomposition of NEPs, either in incineration facilities or in incidental fires,
may release nano-scale materials used in their synthesis and produce air and
soil hazards and potential threats and risks to the environmental and human
health. There is a major knowledge gap on the fundamentals of thermal
decomposition of widely used families of NEPs, potential nano-release
mechanisms, and characteristics of byproducts and potential nano-EHS
implications. In order to fill this large knowledge gap, a new methodological
approach, using both in-vitro and in-vivo experiments, is proposed to the
current nano-risk assessment paradigm to address EHS implications of NEPs during
incineration: 1) Develop "best practice" methods suitable for the generation,
physico-chemical and toxicological characterization of realistic exposures
associated with thermal decomposition of NEPs; 2) Demonstrate the
reproducibility of these methods and build our knowledge on factors influencing
nano-release for representative classes of NEPs currently in the market; and 3)
Utilize the developed methods and knowledge to generate "safer by design" NEPs
and exposure control strategies.