* 1436613
* HBCU UP TARGETED INFUSION PROJECT: HI-TECH STUDIO CLASSROOM AT FAYETTEVILLE STATE UNIVERSITY
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Cevdet Akbay, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,985.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Fayetteville State
University (FSU) seeks to adapt a Student-Centered Active Learning Environment
with Upside-down Pedagogies (SCALE-UP) and establish a Hi-Tech Studio classroom
as an active and collaborative learning environment to enhance the quality of
undergraduate STEM education and to stimulate students' learning in STEM fields.
The goals of the project are to: (1) implement SCALE-UP and Flipped Education in
a technology-rich, highly collaborative, hands-on, interactive learning
environment; (2) reduce students' failure rate and increase student interest in
STEM courses; and(3) build a community of STEM educators at FSU to replicate Hi-
Tech Studio Classrooms in other STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCALE-UP
will be implemented in the Hi-Tech Studio Classroom at FSU where about 90% of
class time is spent in student-led and hands-on activities. Through a
partnership with Norh Carolina State University and the Vernier Company, faculty
will be trained in implementing this learning approach during the three-year
project. Numerous research studies have shown that if students are more engaged
in the learning process, their problem-solving ability and understanding of
material are improved. Through this project, technology and hands-on activities
in the classroom will engage students and enhance their learning in STEM fields.
Additionally, the inquiry-led approach will increase their problem-solving and
critical thinking skills. One of the project outcomes is that students will
obtain a sense of discovery that motivates them to remain in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FSU is an HBCU with a student body that is 66% African
American. Females make up 70% of the student population. By summer 2017, more
than 1000 students (50 class sections) will be impacted by the project. Even
more students will benefit from the project by further implementation of the Hi-
Tech Studio classroom in other STEM and non-STEM courses on campus in the near
future. In addition, one Postdoctoral Teaching Associate and at least 50
Learning Assistants will be mentored. The project will be evaluated both
formatively and summatively to assess the effectiveness of the implementation at
FSU. Evaluation results and lessons learned will be disseminated through
published papers, presentations, and seminars through linkages to other STEM
institutions, including area K-12 schools. Potentially, the results of the
evaluation and dissemination activities will further contribute to the current
body of literature on the SCALE-UP/Flipped Classroom pedagogy, particularly at
minority-serving institutions, in addition to producing highly engaged
undergraduate STEM students in chemistry and physics classes.