* 1436236
* Collaborative Research: Visual Analytics for Creation of Value Functions in Complex Systems Design Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 184,767.00

Value-driven design represents a new way of designing large scale complex
engineered systems, such as those found in automobile, aerospace, and energy
industries. In value-driven design, a value function is created that captures
the preferences of the stakeholders. The value function comprises all the
attributes that are important for the system being designed, such as weight,
performance characteristics, and manufacturing concerns, amongst others. The
value function is then used by all the participants in the design process to aid
in their decision making, so that all participants use the same basis for their
design decisions. This is extremely different from the present systems
engineering process in which requirements are used to force design decisions
among subsystems and components, leading to suboptimal designs. The creation of
a value function, however, is very challenging for complex systems, particularly
in light of the uncertainties that exist in the design variables, attributes,
and ultimately, the value of the system itself. This award supports fundamental
research to provide needed knowledge for the creation of value functions when
designing complex systems under uncertainty. A key component of this research
focuses on enabling the easy understanding of the complex relationships between
design variables, attributes, and value functions using visualization tools.
Results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy as well as the national
defense, given the extensive reliance on large-scale systems by both military
and commercial applications. This research is inherently multidisciplinary, not
only providing a way to design in a multidisciplinary environment, but also
through using multiple disciplines to address the fundamental issues related to
value function creation for complex systems. The multidisciplinary nature of the
research will lend itself to broadening participation of under-represented
groups in this research.

The value-driven design approach can overcome numerous limitations associated
with present systems engineering processes. In the present systems engineering
approach, requirements are developed in an attempt to capture the preferences of
stakeholders. These requirements are then decomposed and passed to lower-level
groups who then design subsystems and ultimately the components in the system.
Problematically, these requirements over-restrict the design space, create
difficulties in incorporating uncertainty, and provide little to no guidance in
terms of what is actually desired by the stakeholders. While value-driven design
has the potential to overcome these barriers, knowledge gaps exist. This
research will address the knowledge gap related to formation of the value
function under uncertainty. The research team will identify the impact of
uncertainty in design variables and attributes on value functions. The team will
develop a structured approach for forming a value function to ensure appropriate
rank ordering of alternative solutions according to the preference of the
stakeholder. The impact of risk preference (i.e., risk seeking, risk neutral,
and risk averse) will be explored to determine relationships between risk
preference and value-function formation. Visualization tools will be developed
to aid in the understanding of relationships between attributes and the value
function and to provide designers with decision aids for using value functions.
The research team will also work with industrial partners to validate the
methods and tools developed.