* 1436344
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the processes controlling the distribution of the biogenic trace gas dimethylsulfide and related compounds in the Subarctic NE Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* John W Dacey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2020
* USD 509,159.00

Researchers from the University of South Alabama and Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution will use a new method to quantify the cycling of dimethylsulfide
(DMS) and its related compounds in the Subarctic Northeast Pacific Ocean. DMS is
a sulfur-containing gas that is abundant in the world's oceans. Oceanic DMS
emissions are the largest source of biologically-produced sulfur to the
atmosphere, with important implications for atmospheric chemistry and the
world's climate. Research over the last two decades has revealed that a complex
web of processes is involved in the cycling of DMS in the ocean. However, many
of these processes remain poorly understood. Results from this research will
provide key information to a broad range of disciplines from microbiology to
Earth-system science, and further develop methods and technologies useful to the
broader research community. The study will also provide educational
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, K-12 students, and high school
teachers. In addition, results from the study will be communicated to the
general public through podcasts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dimethylsulfide (DMS),
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) play critical
roles in marine microbial ecology as metabolic substrates and as essential
components of the oceanic sulfur cycle. Moreover, oceanic DMS emissions are
geochemically important as the largest source of biogenic sulfur to the
atmosphere and have been implicated as a contributing factor for the atmospheric
radiative balance, with important climate implications. The researchers will
study the dynamics of the biogenic trace gas DMS, and the related compounds DMSP
and DMSO in the Subarctic Northeastern Pacific, a high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll
(HNLC) region with exceptionally high DMS concentrations. They will use a novel
isotope tracer method to quantify the in-situ turnover rates of these compounds
in different surface water masses across frontal boundaries with contrasting
DMS/phosphorus/oxygen and nutrient concentrations, and in Lagrangian experiments
to investigate temporal evolution of cycling rates. Using newly-developed
methods for automated underway sampling, researchers will map the surface
distributions of DMS, DMSP and DMSO at unprecedented spatial resolution. Results
from this study will improve our understanding of the spatial variability in
oceanic DMS, DMSP, and DMSO concentrations in surface waters by accurately
measuring the cycling rates of these compounds.