* 1436496
* Collaborative Research: Testing Hypotheses About Fire Using Data Syntheses and Fire Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Magi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 118,336.00

This research project will investigate how changes in environmental and human
activities have influenced fires over time, using a combination of datasets that
describe past and present variations in fire. The project also will develop a
global fire model to help test hypotheses about the roles that environmental
factors and humans have played in controlling the location, size, and frequency
of fires at regional-to-global scales. The project will provide new information
and insights about relationships among fire, climate and other environmental
factors, and human activities. The project will contribute to broader scientific
advances in knowledge regarding Earth system processes, and the project will
enhance the quality of Earth system models that now are incorporating fire in
simulations of the global environment. Knowledge of the ways that human
activity, climate, and other environmental factors have affected fires in the
past at both regional and global scales is critical to understanding how fires
will behave in the future. Given the threats that fires pose for humans and the
critical role that fires play in the functioning of many ecosystems, increased
awareness of the dynamics of fire behavior has considerable practical utility.
Project findings will facilitate enable improved representations of the
processes that control fire in models across a variety of climate and land-use
conditions, thereby informing decisions about natural resource and fire
management efforts. The project will provide education and training
opportunities for graduate students, and it will assist in the development of
curricular materials dealing with the interactions among fire, natural systems,
and human activities for use in elementary and secondary schools.

This project will use satellite-based reconstructions of fire activity to
validate modern-day simulations, and it will advance collection of data to study
the factors that have influenced the dynamics and impact of fire in the past.
The investigators will combine information from a still-expanding global
database of fire over the last millennium with the outputs from global fire
modeling. Past fire activity will be estimated from charcoal particles in lake
sediments at a given depth as well as the time when the charcoal was deposited
as determined through the use of radiocarbon dating. The charcoal records will
be used to reconstruct past levels of fire activity under a range of climate and
land-use conditions, and the reconstructions will be compared with various
simulations of past global fire activity. Combining past and present datasets
with model simulations of past climate will provide a more rigorous basis for
understanding the specific processes that produce reconstructed and observed
changes in fire activity than modern-day (satellite) datasets alone.