* 1436666
* Collaborative Research:  US GEOTRACES Arctic Section - Water mass composition, circulation and mean residence times derived from measurements of natural and manmade tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,140,095.00

In this project, investigators participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will measure six oceanic tracers in order to better understand
oceanic water movement in the Arctic Ocean. With this information in-hand, it
will be much easier for other investigators to interpret their own seawater
chemistry data. In common with other national initiatives in the International
GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify
processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace
elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these
distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements are
essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. The tracers to be measured as
part of this study have proven their value for studies of water mass
composition, circulation, and mean residence times on short to long time scales.
This project will also provide training for two high school teachers, and
develop curriculum for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is
presently undergoing system-scale environmental change at a pace not seen
elsewhere on the globe. Thus, it is essential to establish a baseline of the
distributions of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) for future reference and to
begin understanding the processes that determine the TEI distributions in the
Arctic Ocean. Particularly with respect to the receding sea ice cover, it is
imperative to understand how TEIs impact vital functions of the Arctic system,
such as primary productivity or, more generally, the cycling of carbon under
these rapidly changing environmental conditions. To further understanding on
water movement and thus trace element distributions in the Arctic, this team of
researchers will measure chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6),
tritium, helium isotopes, stable isotopes of water and C-14 along the transect.
These tracers have been used successfully in past studies for determination of
water mass composition, circulation pathways, and mean residence times on time
scales from less than one year (CFCs/SF6 and tritium/He-3) to several hundred
years (C-14). The researchers plan to make underway measurements of the
saturations of CFCs and SF6 in partially and totally ice covered waters along
the cruise track, and will also calculate forward and backward sea ice
trajectories at all station locations to determine sources of sea ice samples.
These trajectories will be used as a first step towards understanding the
pathways of waters in the surface mixed layer.