* 1436414
* Creating Chip-Scale Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ronald Reano, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 283,577.00

Mid-infrared spectroscopy is a technique that is used to identify molecular
constituents based on the interactions of light with matter. Current system
implementations require large, bulky, and discrete optical and electronic
components, inherently limiting sensitivity, power efficiency, functionality,
stability, reproducibility, compactness, and economies of scale. This award
supports research to overcome these fundamental limits by realizing a complete
mid-infrared spectroscopic sensor system fully integrated on an optoelectronic
integrated circuit at the micrometer scale. The research brings together
concepts from optical physics, material science, and electrical engineering
allowing for both fundamental science and technological applications to be
advanced in tandem. Opportunities are created for chemical and biological
sensing with societally important applications including medical sensing, bio-
agent defense, environmental process control, and atmospheric chemistry. In
addition to specific applications, the convergence of photonics and electronics
broadly impacts the optical networking, computing, and sensing industries. The
cross-disciplinary nature of the research drives the focus of the integrated
educational plan that responds to the challenge of preparing students to be
successful in an increasingly interdisciplinary and global environment. Graduate
students, undergraduate students, underrepresented groups, and minorities are
engaged in a curriculum that fosters integrative research thinking and links
societal issues to science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Silicon is the
established material of choice for the microelectronics industry and is
attractive for integrated electronic and optical systems on a chip. The lack of
second order susceptibility in silicon is, however, a major obstacle to
achieving chip-scale mid-infrared spectroscopy. The objective of this research
is to overcome this barrier by hybridizing the silicon platform with lithium
niobate, a ferroelectric material exhibiting second order susceptibility. New
horizons become apparent when exploiting the capability of silicon to provide
submicrometer spatial confinement of light and the ability of lithium niobate to
mediate strong second order nonlinear optical effects. The research team will
perform design, modeling, fabrication, and test to create chip-scale mid-
infrared spectroscopy for the first time. The design and modeling approach is
based on numerical solutions to nonlinear coupled amplitude equations based on
Maxwell's equations. The chip will be physically realized using nanometer scale
fabrication techniques. Species will be measured for the purpose of test,
measurement, and validation. Results will be compared with the high-resolution
transmission molecular absorption database. These concepts provide a new method
of attack to achieve complete chip-scale functionalities in hybrid-monolithic
silicon and lithium niobate photonic integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;