* 1436088
* Establishing universal scaling laws for pressure fluctuations in high Reynolds number rough wall turbulent boundary layers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* William Devenport, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 228,300.00

PI: Devenport, William J&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1436088&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
investigate experimentally and theoretically the scaling of pressure
fluctuations in high Reynolds number boundary layers over rough walls. The focus
of the work will be on practically and scientifically-relevant conditions at
which most vehicles operate and at which universal behaviors are most likely to
be observed. Results from the proposed research could have a strong impact on
engineering for prediction of sound and vibration produced by boundary layers,
and on scientific understanding of pressure effects with the development of a
predictive function for rough-wall boundary layer pressure
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is based on recent findings that
pressure fluctuations within turbulent boundary layers over rough surfaces
behave differently that velocity fluctuations, and this different behavior is
important. The PI proposes to conduct experiments in a rather unique facility at
Virginia Tech to explore the wall-pressure spectrum and the turbulence scales
that it reveals. Prior results indicate that there are three different scaling
regions (low, medium and high frequency), and the proposed experiments aim to
establish the persistence of these scalings, and the physical processes they
imply, as the geometry and density of the roughness elements is varied. Proposed
are also experiments on a two-scale surface that could lead to the development
of an interpolation function for rough-wall boundary layer pressure spectra. The
proposed work would be important for the theory of boundary layer turbulence
with engineering applications where noise is a concern, such as vehicle design
(cars, planes, helicopters) and wind turbines. The proposal also offers a plan
to integrate research with education. High school, undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in designing and building parts of the wind tunnel as
well as manufacturing of the new rough surfaces, providing a complete hands-on,
engineering experience.