* 1436642
* Two Phase Flow Modeling of  Wind Influences on  Wave Breaking
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Qingping Zou, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 213,940.00

Wave-breaking is of critical importance for transferring energy from wind into
the ocean, and for dissipating some of the energy contained in the wave field.
However, the detailed, three-dimensional dynamics involved in this process is
poorly resolved in numerical models. This project will improve a high-resolution
modeling approach in which the motions in both the air and water side are
represented in the same modeling framework, and the instantaneous location of
the interface between the two sides is accurately captured as the wave evolves.
This model will be applied to shoaling waves for the first time. The results
from this study will lead to a fundamental understanding of the two-way coupling
between air and water during wave breaking in the open ocean and the surf zone.
It will significantly advance our understanding of the effect of oblique and
opposing wind on breaking waves. The project will also include outreach efforts
to students and general public about coastal issues and STEM areas.

The research objective of this proposal is to investigate the energy dissipation
during wave breaking with special attention to the influences of wind. The
effect of oblique and opposing wind on breaking is currently poorly understood
and will be examined in this study. Building upon the investigators previous
experience in computational fluid dynamics modeling of violent free surface
flow, a three-dimensional two-phase flow Navier Stokes Solver with a novel
interface capturing scheme and Large Eddy Simulation model will be used to
resolve the fully coupled dynamics of air and water at the interface of a
breaking wave. This work will be the first attempt to investigate the evolution
of air-sea interaction during wave breaking from deep to shallow water using a
three-dimensional two-phase flow and a Large Eddy Simulation model. It will also
be the first comprehensive study of air-sea interaction within the surf and
swash zone and the effect of oblique and opposing wind on breaking waves. The
results from this study will improve the parameterization of breaking induced
energy dissipation, momentum and energy exchange between wind and waves and
storm surge. The project will engage middle- and high-school girls, from rural
areas of Maine and encourage them to careers in science and engineering through
an established outreach program at University of Maine.