* 1436436
* Multi-scale Characteristics of Bone Toughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Marilyn Minus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 383,558.00

Bone is both strong and tough because of its unique composition and structure.
Bone is composed of two main building blocks: a hard mineral and a soft protein.
These building blocks are organized in distinct ways from the molecular level up
to the whole bone level, forming a hierarchical composite. Alterations of the
composition or organization of the building blocks results in bones that are
weak or brittle, but the specific way this happens is not known. The objective
of our research is to understand how alterations across levels of hierarchy
affect the strength and toughness of bone. The insights gained will help define
the critical characteristics of bone toughness, from which we can determine why
bone fails in aging and disease. In the scope of this project we will bring the
excitement of bones and materials research to the public through 1) adult
community education outreach seminars, 2) involving high school summer students
in the research, and 3) developing an elementary school science module on "why
things break." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
determine the structural, compositional, and mechanical properties of bones at
the whole bone (mm), tissue (micron), fibril (nm), and molecular (Angstrom)
length scales. We will examine various mouse strains that have altered proteins
(transgenic, genetic mutations, and knock-out models) compared to wild type
mice. The altered proteins may be the building blocks themselves (such as
collagen defects in brittle bone disease) or proteins that are essential to
organization and mineralization processes (such as crosslinking proteins) that
affect strength and toughness of the bone. At the whole bone level we will
determine resistance curves, which characterize both initiation and propagation
toughness, from notched 3-point bending. At the tissue level we will examine
mineral density with quantitative backscatter scanning electron microscopy and
map the elastic modulus to define heterogeneity of material properties. At the
fibril level we will examine the mechanics of unmineralized collagen (from tail
tendon of the same mice) with dynamic mechanical analysis and mineralized
collagen fibrils with small angle x-ray scattering. At the molecular level we
will measure crosslinking and non-collagenous proteins. This multi-scale
analysis of mechanical, structural, and compositional properties will identify
the factors contributing to bone strength and toughness.