* 1436003
* Collaborative research:  Patterns of diversity in planktonic ciliates ? spatio-temporal scales and community assembly in the coastal ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Laura Katz, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2019
* USD 472,730.00

Most of the biomass, productivity, and overall metabolism in the ocean are due
to microbes, including bacteria, single-celled algae and protozoa. Oxygen
depletion, harmful blooms, and other ocean ills are all attributable to these
smallest members of the plankton. Their production and processing of organic
matter, however, form the basis of the ocean's food web and thus determine the
amount of food humans can harvest from the sea. Due to their small size, it is
more difficult to assess the biological diversity of microbes than it is for
larger organisms, such as the ocean's fish and mammal populations, yet because
of their high abundance and dominance of ocean metabolism it is critical that we
are able to measure microbial diversity and to understand how it changes over
different time and space scales in response to changes in the environment. This
project will make an important step forward in helping us to understand
microbial biodiversity and set a baseline for changes that are expected in
coming decades. In carrying out this research, undergraduate and graduate
students as well as post-doctoral scholars will obtain training in the latest
sequencing and data-processing technologies, an important goal for maintaining
US leadership in biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use DNA-
based methods to measure microbial diversity in the coastal ocean, employing the
deep-sequencing technology to sample hundreds of thousands of microbial species
simultaneously. To enable the deepest possible sampling, it will focus on a
single group of microbes, the ciliates, using them as a model for similar
microbes. Previous use of such methods has revealed a common pattern in which a
small group of common ciliate species is accompanied by a very large group of
rare ones. Because the new sequencing technologies provide so much information
about microbial communities from each sample, this project will be able to
evaluate how both the common and rare parts of the community (the latter is
often referred to as the "rare biosphere") change with seasons, distance from
shore, climate zone, etc. The technical goals for this project are to evaluate
how ciliate diversity varies over time and space in the ocean, to evaluate
environmental factors, both abiotic and biotic, that drive this variation, and
to perform experiments under controlled conditions to test hypotheses about the
relationship between diversity and these factors.