* 1436574
* A Methodology for Reliable Risk Assessment with Error-prone Electronic Medical Records Using Optimal Design of Experiments Concepts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,999.00

Enormous healthcare resources are devoted to compiling electronic medical record
(EMR) databases that are increasingly integrated and rich in patient population
and that offer potential for identifying disease risk factors via statistical
analyses to predict the disease risk as a function of various factors (e.g.,
clinical and demographic) for that patient. Unfortunately, the disease event
data may have high miscoding error rates, due to the fact that clerical
personnel with limited training are employed to enter their codes. For example,
in one EMR database of patients with cardiac workup, after reviewing a random
sample of cases recorded as sudden cardiac arrest events, the error rate was
found to be 75 percent. In order to take such errors into account and avoid
developing unreliable risk assessment models, it is imperative that a doctor
perform chart reviews to validate a sample of cases and determine whether the
events were true events. However, the number of chart reviews is limited due to
the high cost of doctors' time. The objective of this research is to develop a
methodology for judiciously and efficiently selecting validation cases for
maximum information content, which will allow reliable disease risk assessment
even with highly error-prone EMR data. The anticipated benefits to the health
and well-being of society are substantial, as this research will allow the
enormous untapped potential of large EMR databases to be more fully utilized for
discovering new disease risk factors. It is also anticipated that this research
can be extended to other big-data application domains for extracting reliable
information from large quantities of data that are of questionable quality.

Large electronic medical record (EMR) databases offer potential for developing
clinical hypotheses and identifying disease risk associations by fitting
statistical models that predict the likelihood that a patient develops a
particular condition as a function of various predictor variables (e.g.,
clinical, phenotypical, and demographic data) for that patient. Although the
predictor variable data are often recorded reliably, the event data may have
high error rates due to ICD-9 disease miscoding. To avoid developing unreliable
risk assessment models, previous research used random validation sampling to
estimate error probabilities for correcting biases in logistic regression models
fit to the entire data, which is both inefficient and unreliable with high error
rates. In contrast, this research will develop a validation sampling and
reliable risk assessment (VSRRA) methodology for judiciously designing a
validation sample. The intellectual underpinning is the observed analogy between
VSRRA and traditional design of experiments (DOE), whereby validating the
response for one error-prone case in VSRRA corresponds to conducting one
experimental run in DOE. In light of this analogy, this research will develop
(i) suitable VSRRA design criteria based on the Fisher information matrix for
the model parameters and Bayesian counterparts such as posterior and
preposterior parameter covariance matrices, applicable to a broad class of
generalized linear models commonly used in medical risk studies; (ii) heuristic
and more exact hybrid algorithms for selecting the validation sample to optimize
the design criteria; (iii) multistage, sequential versions of the VSRRA sampling
strategies that refine the designs based on information that is learned along
the way, as new cases are validated; and (iv) methods that determine whether and
how the full set of unvalidated data can be reliably included, along with the
validated data, in the final model fitting. A fundamental tenet of data analysis
is that carefully designed experimental studies produce far more reliable
statistical conclusions than observational studies. Likewise, it is anticipated
that the DOE-based VSRRA methodology will allow far more reliable disease risk
assessment and hypotheses generation.