* 1436871
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Data-Enabled Active Learning in Mathematics and Statistics Courses
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Asheber Abebe, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,976.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Recent advances in technology are
generating data on a scale never seen before - a phenomenon known as "big data".
Industry demands workers that can retrieve useful information from very complex,
unstructured data. Alabama State University will implement a Targeted Infusion
Project entitled: Infusing Data-Enabled Active Learning in Mathematics and
Statistics Courses. Project objectives are to adapt methods for big data
analytics in mathematics courses; integrate big data analytics in existing
courses; create a stand-alone course dedicated to the mathematics of big data
analytics; develop and test instructional materials; collect and analyze
achievement of outcomes based on student and industry feedback; and disseminate
materials to other HBCUs and to the mathematical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a better understanding
of how big data analytics can be integrated within a classroom environment. The
results obtained will translate into a framework of pedagogy and materials
required for teaching big data analytics in mathematics courses. Several issues
will be addressed that can add to the knowledge base in the field. These include
the need for integrating big data analytics in mathematics courses; the need for
support materials that can be used with a variety of textbooks; the impact of
courses that include big data analytics on student learning and employment; and
the impact of involving students in cross-disciplinary research teams to solve
real big data problems. An online community portal will provide a means of
dissemination, communication, and community involvement.