* 1436347
* Graded-Index Metamaterial Waveguides: An Innovative Approach to Acoustic Wave Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Miao Yu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Acoustic waves play an important role in many applications, such as homeland
security (e.g. sonar systems), healthcare (e.g. ultrasound imaging), and
industry (e.g., non-destructive damage detections). However, there are currently
limited functional acoustic materials that can effectively control and
manipulate acoustic waves and be employed for next-generation acoustic-based
devices. This award supports fundamental research on guiding, compression,
amplification, and localization of acoustic waves through novel artificial
acoustic materials (i.e., acoustic metamaterials). These engineered materials
possess unique properties that are unachievable in natural materials. This work
will open up new avenues towards the development of novel functional acoustic
devices, which can potentially overcome the fundamental limitations encountered
in conventional acoustic technologies. Various disciplines including physics,
material science, medicine, measurement science, and energy sciences will
benefit from different facets of this research. This award will also help
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and enrich the
learning experience of students with innovative projects in an interdisciplinary
curriculum integrated with the research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
combined analytical, numerical, and experimental studies, the goal of this work
is to achieve a fundamental understanding of the acoustic wave propagation and
guiding mechanisms, material dispersion, effective refractive indices in various
graded-index metamaterial waveguides. The largely unexplored properties of these
acoustic metamaterials, including the remarkable wave compression and field
amplification properties, will be investigated. This research will enrich the
knowledge in the growing field of anisotropic metamaterials and lead to new
methodologies for control and manipulation of acoustic fields with
metamaterials. Furthermore, a novel experimental approach based on a fiber optic
acoustic scanning system with graphene based fiber optic probes will be
developed, which will offer an entirely new way for mapping and visualization of
wave propagation properties in acoustic metamaterials. In addition, this award
can also lead to the discovery of fundamentally new physical phenomena in
graded-index metamaterial waveguides arrays (bulk graded index metamaterials) in
terms of energy coupling, scattering, and localization.