* 1436532
* Production and Characterization of Block Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Brian Grady, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2018
* USD 414,812.00

The unique mechanical and electronic properties of carbon nanotubes result in
their use in many important current and potential applications. Many of these
applications rely on the chemical functionalization of the outer surface of the
nanotubes to modify their properties. All previous methods involved
functionalization of the entire nanotube. Here, we are establishing
commercially-scalable procedures to modify segments of the nanotube resulting in
what are referred to as block nanotubes. The lack of a large-volume
manufacturing technique has prevented the realization of mass production of
block nanotubes. We will demonstrate the potential for block nanotubes to be
used in various applications such as polymer recycling, oil recovery, and
biomass fuel production. Other applications including microelectronics, solar
energy and biomaterials could also be impacted. The research project will
involve participation of underrepresented groups, primarily Native Americans. A
unique blog will be created to document graduate students' experiences working
on the project and present a human face of scientists to the broad public. By
presenting how the research is carried out from "start-to-finish," the blog is
expected to stimulate students into undertaking a career in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to synthesize block nanotubes in a
commercially-scalable fashion; for example a diblock nanotube would have one
fraction of the nanotube with one chemistry and the other fraction with a second
chemistry. Two scalable methods to manufacture block nanotubes will be
developed. In one case, carbon nanotubes will be used as interfacial stabilizers
(e.g. Pickering emulsions) and only those tube parts on the outside of the
particles will be functionalized. In the other case, synthesis conditions in a
fluidized bed containing flat surfaces impregnated with nanotube growth catalyst
will be altered to change the surface chemistry as the tubes grow. Fundamental
aspects to be studied in the former include tube length relative to droplet size
and tube chemistry prior to modification; for the latter, fundamental aspects
include reaction conditions and feed gas composition. Characterizing the spatial
variation of nanotube surface chemistry will be performed via transmission
electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. We will test these tubes as
interfacial stabilizers in polymer/polymer and oil/water systems, as well as
biphasic catalyst supports under higher temperatures and pressures.