* 1436636
* Dynamic Modeling and Identification of Human Metabolic Energy Expenditure with Applications to Prosthetic Gait
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2022
* Howard Hillstrom, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 474,271.00

Metabolic energy expenditure is a critical performance measure of human motion,
and its implication has a broad range of scientific, clinical, and engineering
applications. In particular, assessing metabolic cost of prosthetic gait is
important for diagnosis, design, and usability tests. This award supports
establishing a novel joint-based model that evaluates metabolic energy
expenditure without the limitations inherent in common experimental measurements
(time delays, limited task and range of motion due to equipment) or traditional
muscle-based models (excessive number of unknown parameters, complex
interactions between muscles and the surroundings, reliance on non-active human
parameters). Given the increasing demand and large number of people (more than
173,000 users in the U.S.) who would benefit from lower-limb prostheses, the
model implementation into prosthetic design optimization will have broad social
impacts by resolving the major hurdles to their wide-spread use through reduced
metabolic cost and fatigue. Also, the reduced development cost due to reduced
usability tests will make products available to more economically diverse
communities. The collaborations between engineering and clinical disciplines
will be mutually beneficial and enhance networks and partnerships for research
and education, which will involve underrepresented (race, gender, disability)
groups at various stages. The calculation algorithm will be open-sourced for the
prostheses developers in industry and academia. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this project are to establish a joint-space dynamic model of metabolic energy
expenditure by integrating the laws of thermodynamics and the principles of
multibody system dynamics, and implement the model for energy-efficient
prosthetic gait. Specific objectives are to: (1) derive a general dynamic model
of metabolic energy expenditure and identify and validate the joint-space model
parameters from experiments; (2) introduce a modeling and identification
framework of metabolic cost for locomotion of individuals with transtibial
prostheses and experimentally validate; and (3) implement the models into a
nonlinear programming algorithm to optimize the lower-limb prosthetic alignment
for minimum metabolic cost of prosthetic gait, and experimentally demonstrate
proof-of-concept. The muscle energetic properties will be mapped to the joint
space, and the energetic effects of negative work, intra/inter-joint coupling,
and muscle co-contraction will be modeled. The joint-space parameters estimated
from active human subjects will provide the model with improved accuracy and
efficient calculations, which can be used to evaluate metabolic cost for complex
non-periodic functional tasks that may not be experimentally verifiable by
traditional means. The model also enables real-time calculations of
instantaneous metabolic rate as a function of time.