* 1436169
* Exploring the physiological and ecological basis of mixotrophy in marine food webs
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Matthew Johnson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2018
* USD 618,488.00

Marine phytoplankton are responsible for about half of global primary production
despite being seasonally or chronically nutrient limited. To cope with this,
many phytoplankton supplement their nutritional needs through mixotrophy, which
involves feeding on bacteria or other algae. These microscopic Venus Fly Traps
of the ocean are major players in marine microbial food webs, yet we know so
little about when they feed and how their eating is balanced with
photosynthesis. This research will shed light on how environmental and cellular
factors control mixotrophy, and how mixotrophy and photosynthesis are integrated
in the overall metabolism. While understanding the ecological role of mixotrophy
in ocean food webs is center to this work, results from this study will also
shed light on the evolution of mixotrophy by identifying potential tradeoffs
between feeding and photosynthesis. This work will involve collaboration with
The Zephyr Education Foundation, a marine science literacy and education
program, to design an educational unit to emphasize the importance of mixotrophy
in marine microbial food webs, and will utilize boat trips and classroom
activities in order to communicate these concepts. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be trained at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (minority fellowship program), as well as local high school summer
students, to perform lab research on mixotrophs. This research will also provide
training and career development for a postdoctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Mixotrophy refers to species that combine some level of phagotrophy
and phototrophy, and represents a diverse array of ecological interactions and
cellular and metabolic adaptations. While often perceived as an exception to the
norm, mixotrophy is commonplace in marine food webs, affording phytoplankton
greater ecological fitness during periods of low or limiting nutrients while
stabilizing food webs. Many mixotrophs have a low chlorophyll: carbon ratio,
which tends to make them poor phototrophic competitors. In turn, feeding allows
these species to achieve maximum growth while in some cases also eliminating
their competitors. Other mixotrophs are strong phototrophic competitors, and
only feed when severely nutrient limited. This research will determine the
cellular and environmental factors that lead to feeding by marine phytoplankton,
and how the contrasting metabolisms of heterotrophy and photosynthesis are
integrated within a cell. This research will involve laboratory-based
experiments on model dinoflagellate and chrysophyte cultures. Using microscopy,
physiology, proteomics and metabolomics approaches, this work will test
hypotheses about the ultimate causes and consequences of mixotrophy. The major
objectives are to determine 1) environmental controls for inducing mixotrophy,
2) the role of prey quality on predator selection, 3) cellular and molecular
controls of mixotrophy, and 4) nutrient assimilation and integrated metabolism.
Using these various research approaches, this work will produce a comprehensive
view of several mixotrophs and provide new insights into cellular, ecological,
and evolutionary aspects of mixotrophy. Results from this research will improve
our understanding of the physiological and ecological role of mixotrophy in
marine phytoplankton, and provide much needed molecular markers for studying
this process in both the laboratory and field.