* 1436365
* GOALI: Robust Quality Control Tools for Cyber-Physical Manufacturing Systems: Assessing and Eliminating Cyber-Attack Vulnerabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,08/31/2018
* William Woodall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 398,930.00

As the information age progresses, cyber-attacks have become increasingly
malicious while decreasing in visibility. At the same time, advanced
manufacturing systems rely heavily on new cyber-technologies, such as internet-
based computer aided engineering support tools and networked manufacturing and
inspection equipment. While the resulting data connectivity has accelerated the
product/process design-cycle and allowed for extensive analytical capabilities,
it has also resulted in an increase of digital entry points into a manufacturing
system. Therefore, it is no longer a question of if, but rather when, our
manufacturing infrastructure will become the victim of cyber-attacks. For over a
century manufacturing has relied heavily upon the use of quality control (QC)
systems to detect quality losses and ensure the production of high-quality
parts. However, current QC approaches are not designed to detect the effects of
a cyber-attack. An undetectable change in a manufacturing system can adversely
affect a product's design intent, performance, quality, or perceived quality.
The results could be financially devastating by delaying a product's launch,
ruining equipment, increasing warranty costs, or losing customer trust. More
importantly, attacks pose a risk to human safety as operators and consumers
could be using faulty equipment and products. QC systems are based upon
assumptions that may no longer be valid under the presence of an attack. In
essence, these assumptions become vulnerabilities that can be used to make an
attack undetectable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Grant Opportunity
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project is to identify
vulnerabilities that exist in current QC systems and to develop new tools that
significantly reduce or eliminate these vulnerabilities. The focus of this
research is to approach the quality monitoring-detection-diagnosis cycle as an
integrated cyber-physical security problem. A hybrid information technology (IT)
and quality control system capable of detecting and compensating for quality
losses caused by either physical or cyber process shifts will be investigated.
The work focuses on statistical process control (SPC). For this endeavor,
vulnerabilities will be identified across the three distinct phases of SPC,
using a vulnerability identification study approach that takes the perspective
of an attacker to understand what information could be used to identify and
exploit vulnerabilities. Once these vulnerabilities are identified, new hybrid
IT/QC tools will be created to supplement and/or replace currently used SPC
approaches to significantly reduce or eliminate their weaknesses to cyber-
attacks. Furthermore, these new tools will be developed considering multiple
vulnerability levels, based on the type of information used to exploit the
system.