* 1436079
* Thermohaline Circulation and Deep Ocean Carbonate Chemistry across the Mid-Pleistocene Transition
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 696,199.00

The "Mid-Pleistocene Transition" (MPT) was the biggest reorganization of the
global climate system in the recent geological past. It refers to the interval,
occurring roughly a million years ago, when the lengths of ice age cycles
shifted from ~40,000 to 100,000 years and ice ages became more extreme. During
the MPT, atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) shifted significantly towards lower
values, which would enhance climate cooling. Since the missing CO2 would have
been stored in the ocean, it has been inferred that the decrease is a response
to changes in the deep-ocean's circulation (also known as "thermohaline
circulation"). This shift in the mode of climate variability occurred without
significant change in the system's energy inputs (i.e., astronomical forcing),
thus implying that non-linear responses of the climate system and/or internal
changes within the ocean-atmosphere-cryosphere were ultimately responsible. This
research will help quantify the interaction between deep-ocean circulation, the
carbon cycle, and global climate change during this critical climatic period.
Because the pre-MPT reflects a climate state characterized by elevated glacial
atmospheric CO2 and smaller ice sheets, improving understanding of this
transition will help scientists and policy makers to better predict and prepare
for predicted high atmospheric CO2 levels in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research explores geological
archives of past deep-ocean circulation and carbonate chemistry to help
elucidate the history of ocean circulation and CO2 over the MPT. The work
applies novel geochemical proxies (Nd isotopes, B isotopes and B/Ca ratios) to
(1) reconstruct and quantify thermohaline circulation and CO2 changes in the
deep-ocean and (2) apply these indicators to establish the nature and timing of
this major climatic transition. Using sediment cores from different water depths
in the northern, tropical, and south Atlantic will allow the research team to
track lateral and vertical changes in the thermohaline circulation before,
during and after the MPT. The Nd isotope data will complement the published
benthic carbon stable isotope data, which also reflect thermohaline circulation
but are also affected by biology (productivity), air-sea equilibration and
changes in the global carbon budget. The project will also investigate deep-
ocean CO2 storage by estimating seawater-pH and carbonate saturation from boron
isotopes and B/Ca ratios in benthic foraminifers. Paired analysis of these
proxies provides the opportunity to address the hypothesis that deep-ocean
circulation facilitated the coeval drawdown of atmospheric pCO2 during glacial
periods, which in turn enhanced high-latitude ice sheet growth, and established
the boundary conditions for the development of 100-kyr cycles. Funding supports
graduate and undergraduate research, and public outreach via the Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory Annual Open House.