* 1436565
* Photo-Aligning Molecular Orientations in Liquid Crystal Polymers into Complex Patterns for Programmable Origami
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Qihuo Wei, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2018
* USD 305,000.00

As inspired by the Japanese art of paper folding, programmed origami is emerging
as a new avenue towards manufacturing three-dimensional objects via autonomous
folding of two-dimensional sheets of materials. To realize the programmed
origami, a programmable folding mechanism at the small length scales is the key
and thus in high demand. Liquid crystal polymers are weakly cross-linked
polymers incorporated with rod or disk-like molecular units. When these
molecular units are aligned in non-uniform directional patterns, the liquid
crystal polymers can be triggered to self-deform by external stimuli such as
temperature and light. This award supports fundamental research to develop the
needed technology for aligning the molecular orientations in complex patterns in
small length scales and to gain basic understanding on how to design molecular
orientation patterns to achieve desired three-dimensional microstructures.
Three-dimensional microstructures are highly desired in a variety of industrial
applications such as sensors, actuators, drug delivery and photonic devices. The
outcome from this research should contribute to the U.S. economy and benefit
society. This multidisciplinary research provides a great opportunity to educate
graduate and undergraduate students with knowledge and skills in photonics,
liquid crystal science and technology, nanomanufacturing and numerical modeling,
and to enhance diversity by involving minority and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmed origami promises manufacturing of
exotic three-dimensional micro and nanostructures by self-folding of two-
dimensional materials or structures. This project aims to develop capabilities
to imprint folding trajectories of liquid crystal polymer films in their
molecular orientation fields. It will study a novel photo-patterning technique
for defining complex molecular orientation order. It will develop a basic
understanding of the relationship between molecular orientation and self-folding
processes. The research team will (1) design, simulate, fabricate and
characterize plasmonic photomasks for desired molecular orientation patterns;
(2) develop an optical exposure system for exposing photoalignment materials;
and (3) design, model and fabricate liquid crystal polymer films or
microstructures with embedded molecular orientational orders and characterize
their shape evolution under external stimuli. The proposed photopatterning
technique is advantageous in several aspects: capability of large scale
patterning, single exposure and scaling-up feasibility. This research will yield
both fundamental understanding and new technologies to produce self-folding and
twisting microstructures and programmable three-dimensional
micro/nanomanufacturing.