* 1436958
* GEOTRACES Arctic Section:   Actinium-227 as a Naturally-occurring Tracer of Dissolved Material Transport in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2018
* USD 135,464.00

In this project, a group of investigators participating in the 2015 U.S.
GEOTRACES Arctic expedition will measure profiles of actinium-227, a naturally-
occurring radioisotope that can be used as a tracer of oceanic water movement,
in the Arctic Ocean. In common with other multinational initiatives in the
International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements
are essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. The isotope measured as part of
this study, actinium-227, has a 22 year half-life, making it well-suited as a
tracer of mixing and solute transport in the Arctic Ocean. This study will
involve educational opportunities in scientific research for high school and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the biogeochemical
dynamics of the deep sea is necessary to understand the ocean carbon cycle.
Despite having a half-life that is well suited for the study of both vertical
and lateral transport in the deep ocean, few actinium-227 measurements have been
made in the deep sea. Recent advances in instrumentation facilitate this
analysis, and the synergy provided by the GEOTRACES program will provide an
ideal opportunity to obtain additional data that will serve two purposes. The
measurements of actinium-227 from this study will aid in defining the rates of
boundary exchange, particularly when combined with estimates based on radium-228
(measured as part of a separate award) and will be useful for deducing the
transport and the dynamics of other solutes measured by GEOTRACES in deep
waters. By using multiple tracers with different half-lives, the separate roles
of these processes may be distinguished, allowing a more complete understanding
of the dynamics of solute behaviors.