* 1436631
* Cochlea-inspired Wireless Compressive Sensing Architectures for Real-time Feedback Control Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Victoria Booth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 345,000.00

Feedback control systems are widely used to control the performance of dynamic
systems found in mechanical (e.g., flight control of aircraft) and civil
engineering (e.g., response mitigation of buildings during earthquakes).
Wireless communication has been proposed as a communication medium for the
sensors, actuators and controllers that make up the feedback control system.
While wireless communication may dramatically reduce the costs associated with
the manufacture of control systems, they simultaneously introduce a new set of
technical challenges including power limitations, lower communication speeds and
reduced system robustness. This project studies how the human cochlea and the
auditory nervous system acquires, communicates and processes acoustic
information with the aim of emulating its operational principles in wireless
feedback control systems. The power-efficient and real-time processing
architectures found in biological neural circuits promise to resolve the long-
standing performance bottlenecks associated with wireless telemetry in feedback
control applications. The impact this research would have on the US economy is
enormous given the prevalence of feedback control systems used daily by society.
In addition, the project introduces innovative engineering coursework in bio-
inspired engineering and engages middle-school students from underrepresented
groups to motivate them to pursue STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the research effort is to apply the methods of neural pulse
train coding from the field of neurobiology to resolve the power consumption,
speed, and robustness challenges associated with wireless communication in
networked feedback control systems. The team will study the sensory neural
principles of the mammalian cochlea and will use these principles as the
functional basis of an energy-efficient wireless sensor that modulates sensor
data into digital pulse train signals communicated directly to the radio
frequency spectrum using a code division multiple access (CDMA) communication
scheme. The project will also study common neural motifs to serve as functional
blocks for the mapping of feedback control laws into complex neural circuits
that process the spike train signals generated by the cochlea-inspired wireless
sensor nodes. The result will be a biologically inspired wireless feedback
control system that implements a compressive sensing strategy at the sensing
front-end and processes spike train signals in real-time on the system back-end
using neural circuits trained to implement desired feedback control laws. The
intellectual significance of the work is that it breaks new ground by adopting
the operational principles of biological neural circuits to formalize a new
design paradigm for engineered feedback control systems.