* 1436014
* North Atlantic Bottom Water Temperature and Ice Volume Records from the Mid-Pleistocene Transition
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Maureen Raymo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2016
* USD 221,274.00

Understanding the effects of solar strength, global ice volume and carbon
dioxide levels on the global climate system is essential for climate models'
ability to reconstruct past and future climate. In particular, studying past ice
volume variations are of vital importance to predicting ice sheet stability and
sea level change. During the mid-Pleistocene transition (~600,000 to 1,200,000
years ago), the climate's response to solar strength changed dramatically and
variations in ice volume and carbon dioxide levels may have contributed to this
transition. This project aims to resolve changes in ocean bottom water
temperature and circulation to evaluate global ice volume variability as a
potential driving factor for the mid-Pleistocene transition. The broader impacts
include support for a female postdoctoral scientist, undergraduate research
experiences, and educational displays designed for the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory Core Repository in New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most climate
interpretations for the mid-Pleistocene transition come from oxygen isotope
records from benthic foraminifera, which record a combination of temperature and
ice volume signals. The Mg/Ca ratio of benthic foraminifera may serve as an
independent proxy of ocean bottom water temperature and has been used to
separate ocean bottom water temperature and ice volume components in the oxygen
isotope records from benthic foraminifera. Currently there are only two high-
resolution records of ocean bottom water temperature and seawater oxygen isotope
composition (as a proxy for ice volume) during the mid-Pleistocene transition.
However, these studies record fundamentally different trends, suggesting
different mechanisms for the mid-Pleistocene transition. This project will use
coupled Mg/Ca and oxygen-isotope values of benthic foraminifera to evaluate
regional and global signals in ocean bottom water temperature and ice volume
signals from the North Atlantic. These data will be used to assess any changes
in ocean bottom water temperature, the timing of ice volume growth and the
magnitude of sea level variation during the mid-Pleistocene transition. This
will aid climate modelers in setting boundary conditions for the mid-Pleistocene
transition and in identifying the key factors influencing global climate.