* 1436729
* GOALI: Swellable Superhydrophobic Organosilica Materials as a Novel Catalyst Support for Water Purification Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Umit Ozkan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2018
* USD 362,520.00

1436729 (Ozkan)

This project is a collaboration between The Ohio State University and
ABSMaterials, which is a company located in Wooster, Ohio. ABSMaterials, founded
in 2009, specializes in the development of novel organosilica materials, and
employs 28 people. The total sales the company had in 2013 was $2.1 million. A
unique class of materials developed by ABS materials are swellable
organosilicate frameworks. These materials, commercialized as Osorb® and
manufactured on a ton/month scale, have the capability to swell to 3-4 times
their original volume in the presence of organics. Another important
characteristic are their high hydrophobicity. The primary application of these
materials to date has been their use to clean out organic impurities in water by
absorption. While this application has large commercialization potential in
water purification, another potential application is their use as catalyst
scaffolds that can be used in reactions where water and/or common solutes have a
hindrance or deactivation effect on the catalytic rate. This potential
application is what brought the Ozkan group at Ohio State Chemical Engineering
and the scientists at ABSMaterials together. While the Ozkan group has over 30
years of experience in heterogeneous catalysis, ABS Materials have the know-how
for manufacturing these materials on a large scale, exploring the markets for
applications, and commercializing different processes that will be based on the
unique characteristics of these materials.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed work will investigate novel catalyst systems to transform water
contaminants into environmentally acceptable compounds. Focus will be placed on
hydrodechlorination of chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as trichloroethylene, and
hydrogenation of aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzene. Catalytic systems to be
developed will make use of highly hydrophobic swellable organosilica materials
as catalyst scaffolds. Swellable organosilica have unique properties that
differentiate them from traditional catalyst supports, including high
hydrophobicity and the ability to reversibly expand and contract upon absorption
and desorption of organic liquids. The materials do not absorb water, but the
porous media extract organic solutes from water with high affinity and capacity.
Due to the novelty of swellable organosilica, their use as catalyst scaffolds
has not been thoroughly explored. This research will study: (i) methods to
incorporate metals into the porous architecture, (ii) the kinetics of
hydrodechlorination and hydrogenation reactions by metal catalysts supported on
SOMS; (iii) mass transfer limitations in swellable hydrophobic media, and (iv)
deactivation characteristics of metal catalysts sequestered in a porous
hydrophobic matrix. The work will combine expertise from the fields of material
science, catalysis, kinetics and transport phenomena. Experiments will be
conducted to provide the knowledge base needed for the commercial development of
a water purification system designed to treat EPA-regulated organic contaminants
in water.

Broader Impact

Development of catalytic systems to address water contamination issues have been
previously studied with the path to commercialization hindered by the limited
lifetime of catalyst beds due to poisoning. A key working hypothesis here is
that catalyst poisoning by water solutes will be prevented by sequestering metal
catalysts in a porous hydrophobic matrix. The GOALI partnership integrates the
company's material science innovation with expertise from the academic
participants to solve a commercially important problems in a multi-billion
dollar industry. Treatment of waters contaminated by chlorinated hydrocarbons
and aromatics, both known carcinogens, represents a major challenge in ensuring
a safe drinking water supply for U.S. citizens. The findings of the project,
which will combine the fundamental aspects of academic research with real-life
applications driven by industry are likely to be translated to commercial
processes as there exist market pulls for such remediation technologies. This
catalysis-based technology is expected to lead to a much more cost efficient
solution to a large water treatment industry. The project will also have an
impact in enhancing the educational infrastructure and helping to develop the
human resources. The PI has developed a course titled "Catalysis and Catalytic
Processes". The industrial collaborators will be guest lecturers for the course,
bringing their industrial expertise and experience directly to the classroom. In
terms of the impact on the human resources development, the PI has well-
established partnerships with two local high schools to provide research
internship experiences to senior high school students prior to graduation.