* 1436173
* Endothelial to Mesenchymal Transformation Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bruce Murray, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 320,799.00

A developing heart valve, the generation of fibrotic heart tissue, and the
formation of calcified aortic valve nodules all share a common component -
activated fibroblasts. One source of activated fibroblasts is endothelial to
mesenchymal transformation (EndMT), which is the differentiation of mature
endothelial cells into mesenchymal cells. EndMT was first observed in embryonic
heart valve development, but recent studies have shown that mesenchymal
transformation can also occur in wound healing, cancer, cardiac fibrosis, and
calcific aortic valve disease. The mechanisms and functional role of EndMT in
adult applications, especially in response to tissue mechanics, have not been
fully investigated. This award supports fundamental research on the role of
mechanobiology on EndMT in aortic heart valves. Determining the cellular and
tissue-level conditions that lead to EndMT, and how mesenchymally transformed
cells promote disease, will provide an understanding of how aortic valves
calcify and fill an unmet need in cardiovascular medicine. More broadly, this
work will provide better methods for understanding fibrotic disease, cancer
metastasis, and biomaterial design. This research requires expertise from
several fields including tissue engineering, biomechanics, and computational
biology; and this multidisciplinary approach will be integrated to promote
graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EndMT has been observed in human valves near
calcified nodules, and factors present in aortic valve disease including
inflammatory cytokines, pathological cyclic strain, and altered shear stress
have individually been shown to induce cell transformation in adult aortic valve
endothelial cells. Preliminary work has also shown that extracellular matrix
composition mimicking diseased valve conditions strongly stimulates mesenchymal
transformation and calcification. No studies to date have linked the degree of
EndMT to valve calcification. The research team will engineer novel cell culture
models and hybrid stochastic/continuum computational models to test the
hypothesis that the activated fibroblasts generated from EndMT promote valve
matrix remodeling, inflammatory cytokine release, and calcified nodule
formation. The research objectives are to characterize the extracellular matrix-
aortic valve endothelial cell interactions that impact EndMT and determine if
mesenchymally transformed cells promote calcification, and to predict
mesenchymally transformed cell evolution and growth using hybrid computational
models. The long-term goal of this research program is to develop tools that can
(1) determine the factors that promote or inhibit EndMT and its subsequent
effects and (2) provide a platform for investigating therapeutic interventions,
which could have a major impact on the technology available to scientists and
lead to novel treatments for human disease.