* 1436759
* Implementation Project: Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CURE) Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Mark Lee, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,754,807.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research. This
implementation project at Spelman College seeks to increase the number of
African American women who pursue STEM-related advanced degrees and fields,
particularly in PhD programs, while at the same time addressing the quality of
the educational experience. Preliminary data from other work at Spelman College
reveal an increase in the number of students identifying interest in earning
advanced STEM degrees following course-based research experiences and summer
research experiences. The project is guided and informed by an on-going
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New insights on integrating teaching and
research in undergraduate STEM education could work to foster success for
student retention and faculty productivity, especially at small liberal arts and
minority-serving institutions. This project is designed to provide relatively
novel undergraduate development activities that will enhance the undergraduate
student research experience by expanding the ways Spelman College STEM
undergraduate students gain research experiences through directed-supplemental
instruction, investigative laboratories, course-based and summer research
experiences. One key factor in implementing this program is a small cohort of
postdoctoral fellows gaining both extensive research experiences and teaching
experiences in pedagogy, course design and student mentoring. This project will
use undergraduate research experiences as a means to address the transition from
undergraduate to graduate STEM programs, ultimately leading to advanced degrees.
It is proposed that through curricular research opportunities, faculty at
minority serving institutions or small liberal arts colleges seeking to achieve
excellence in teaching and research could improve the efficiency of their effort
by conducting a single activity with multiple beneficial outcomes.