* 1436503
* Collaborative Research - Sediment pathways, sedimentation processes, and structural growth along the Tohoku segment of the Japan subduction margin: Role of megathrust earthquakes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* John King, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 82,530.00

While tectonic activity, climate, sea-level fluctuations, and anthropogenic
activity are most often cited as important agents that control sediment
transport and depositions, the role of earthquakes as agents of sediment
dispersal and accumulation at active margins may be underappreciated. The 2011
Tohoku earthquake at the Japan Trench was one of the largest megathrust ruptures
this century. Because the Japanese subduction system is exceptionally well
instrumented, an unprecedented wealth of data are accumulating that document
pre-seismic, co-seismic, and post-seismic conditions, providing the first
opportunity to quantify environmental changes resulting from a megathrust
earthquake. This project will integrate the analysis of existing sediment cores
and geophysical data collected in the rupture area of the 2011 earthquake to
unravel the contributions of coseismic sedimentation to the stratigraphy of the
Japan Trench slope. The Japan Trench is the focus of a coordinated, long-term
research program in Japan, and results from this study will contribute usefully
to future investigations as well as strengthen an existing international
collaboration. Japanese colleagues have already provided the Principle
Investigators with recently acquired geophysical data and invited one of them to
participate in two coring cruises. This project will further the development of
underwater paleoseismology, an emerging field compared to land-based
paleoseismology. Results from this study will be highly societally relevant as
they are expected to contribute to the assessment of seismic hazards at the
Japan Trench. They will also be applicable to the assessment of seismic hazards
at other oceanic trenches, including three GeoPRISMS's focus sites (Cascadia,
Aleutian, and New Zealand trenches) and the deep Puerto Rico
Trench.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principle Investigators have already initiated
collaboration with Japanese scientists to investigate the 2011 event, due to a
previously funded NSF-RAPID grant. One of the Principle Investigators
participated in two sediment sampling expeditions to the Japan Trench in 2013
aboard the R/V NATSUSHIMA. The preliminary analysis of 31 piston cores collected
across the trench slope suggests that some of them sampled deposits from the
2011 event and from prior events. Close inspection of multibeam bathymetric data
also suggests that variations in sediment characteristics along the trench are
systematically correlated with variations in the morphology of the small frontal
prism, the feature at the lower trench slope that absorbs most of the tectonic
deformation. This project aims to further explore these results. Specifically,
the combined analysis will address the following two
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What are the sedimentary signatures of great
earthquakes across a trench slope?&lt;br/&gt;- How do seafloor morphology and
tectonic structures affect coseismic sediment dispersal and
deposition?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By analyzing the sedimentary record of past
earthquakes and their relation to seafloor morphology and tectonic structures,
this project will contribute simultaneously to two distinct fields of
geoscience: the characterization of coseismic sedimentary processes at active
margins and submarine paleoseismology.