* 1436976
* DMREF: Design of Sodium-Ion Solid Electrolytes through Calculations, Data Mining and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jian Luo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,320,000.00

Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries are today the dominant form of energy storage
in consumer electronics, and are increasingly finding applications in
automotive, grid storage and other large-scale applications. In recent years,
concerns about the potential abundance and cost of lithium, as well as the
exciting possibilities of novel materials discovery, have led to a revival of
interest in sodium-ion batteries as a potentially cheaper and more earth-
abundant alternative. However, the commercial viability of sodium-ion technology
still hinges on the discovery of suitable electrolytes. This Designing Materials
to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports an integrated
materials design effort aimed at finding suitable sodium-ion solid electrolytes
that can enable a safer, cheaper energy storage alternative. This research is a
multi-disciplinary effort combining quantum mechanics, software engineering,
data mining, manufacturing, electrochemistry, and materials science. The
research will also create open scientific software to spur materials innovation,
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sodium-ion rechargeable
batteries are a potentially cheaper and more abundant alternative to lithium-ion
batteries. However, significant challenges in electrolyte development must still
be surmounted before sodium-ion chemistry is commercially viable. This aim of
this research is to design and optimize novel sodium superionic conductor
electrolytes that can enable cheaper, safer rechargeable batteries. The research
will develop a high-throughput computational framework to automate first
principles calculations of properties of interest, including Na+ conductivity
and electrochemical stability, and a data management strategy to handle truly
"big" materials data. Data mining techniques will be used to elucidate
structure-chemistry-property relationships and to identify structures and
chemistries that support fast Na+ conduction. Novel sodium superionic conductors
identified will then be synthesized and characterized using electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy, pair distribution function analysis and other methods.
Finally, as the intergranular interface and electrode-electrolyte interface can
have a significant impact on electrolyte performance, a model-guided interfacial
engineering effort will be conducted to optimize the most promising sodium
superionic conductor candidates.