* 1436329
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Economic Consequences of "Minor" Contacts with the Criminal Justice System
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Becky Pettit, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 5,099.00

SES-1436329&lt;br/&gt;Robert Crutchfield&lt;br/&gt;April
Fernandes&lt;br/&gt;University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid and
steady increase of incarceration has had substantial consequences on essential
life events such as employment, housing and health. While studies have
concentrated on the detrimental effects of imprisonment, lower level forms of
criminal justice contact can also have a significant impact. The conditions and
circumstances that render long-term incarceration influential over the life
course are also present for arrests, convictions and jail stays. The separation
from society and the stigma that accompanies these less severe forms of contact
can hinder the attainment and maintenance of employment and quality housing. The
incapacitation from an arrest or jail stay can also affect human and social
capital acquisition needed to obtain future employment and housing. The stigma
from a criminal or arrest record can inhibit employment and housing prospects
due to the ubiquity of background checks for potential employees and tenants.
Furthermore, low-level criminal justice contact can affect both physical and
mental health outcomes due to the exposure to individuals with communicable
diseases, which facilitates the transmission of disease while the stress of
incarceration and lack of adequate medical facilities assist in exacerbating
existing conditions. Given that the jail population grew in line with prison
incarceration during this period, the effects of less severe forms of criminal
justice contact should be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship
between criminal justice contact and employment and housing are hypothesized to
produce detrimental effects, whether from losing a job or a home or inhibiting
future prospects. The effect on health, however, is expected to be more
complicated; the potential effects of criminal justice contact on health may be
ameliorative given the possible benefits of state-mandated health care services
available for those incarcerated. However, the effect on mental health is
hypothesized to be detrimental given the increased level of stressors present
during incarceration. &lt;br/&gt;Using the NLSY97 (National Longitudinal Study
of Youth, 1997), this project explores employment, housing and physical and
mental health outcomes as a result of arrests, convictions and short jail stays.
To determine the nature of these relationships, the data will be analyzed using
fixed and random effects regression models in Stata. Exploring lower levels of
criminal justice contact contributes to the substantial literature on the
effects of imprisonment and offers a window into the cumulative impact of less
severe forms of contact on the individual and their life prospects. Expanding
empirical analysis to these forms of contact can provide a more comprehensive
assessment of the potential consequences of criminal justice contact in all of
its varied forms and how these effects impact levels of societal stratification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the penal
expansion of the prison boom, there has been an increase in the number of people
who have contact with the system in the form of an arrest, conviction or
imprisonment. The potential ramifications of such contact can delay or derail
the occupational and social mobility of the populations affected. These outcomes
have substantial implications not only for the individual, but their families
and communities that are collaterally affected by increased barriers to
financial, occupational and physical wellbeing. This research could affect
future work in the field and the growing literature centered on the collateral
consequences of imprisonment.