* 1436922
* Inferring large-scale patterns of nutrient regeneration in the ocean using a global biogeochemical inverse model
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Francois Primeau, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 384,895.00

Sustained biological production in the world ocean is heavily dependent on the
recycling of the decomposition products of pre-existing organisms. In particular
for the microscopic algae (phytoplankton) at the base of the marine food chain,
the decomposition products (for example, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, and
silicon) of pre-existing organisms become the fertilizer (or nutrient materials)
that nourishes later generations. But dead particles that fall out of the sunlit
surface ocean where photosynthesis takes place do not necessarily have the same
proportions of nutrient elements as that required for making a living algal
cell. To understand how this system manages to keep going as well as how it can
vary during global climatic change, the research team on this project will use a
set of sophisticated mathematical models that account for biological production,
regeneration of nutrients, and ocean circulation patterns to create a global
model relating production in the surface ocean to the elemental composition of
regenerated nutrients. A postdoctoral researcher will be trained in advanced
modeling techniques during this study. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The stoichiometric
ratios of biological export production are critical to our understanding of the
major biogeochemical cycles of the ocean. Limited measurements of the elemental
composition in phytoplankton and in sinking particulate organic matter suggest
that the ratios can vary significantly in space and time. However the number of
direct measurements is inadequate to reliably determine coherent large-scale
patterns. As a result most global ecosystem and biogeochemical models assume a
fixed stoichiometry - an assumption that may limit their ability to correctly
simulate changes in ecosystem dynamics in response to climate change. In this
study, a small research team will conduct an inverse modeling study using a
global ocean circulation model and a global database of hydrographic
measurements of dissolved inorganic carbon, nitrate, phosphate, silicic acid and
oxygen concentrations together with abiotic tracers including temperature,
salinity, chlorofluorocarbons, and radiocarbon to jointly estimate the global
ocean circulation and spatially varying elemental ratios (carbon : nitrogen :
phosphorous : silicon : oxygen) of the organic matter exported from the euphotic
zone. The proposed work has a high intellectual merit because of the innovative
computational and inverse modeling strategies that will make it possible to
jointly assimilate biotic and abiotic tracer information to estimate the ocean
circulation and the major marine biogeochemical cycles. A global database with
maps of export production stoichiometry and three-dimensional gridded fields of
regeneration ratios will be made available to the community, which will help
guide the development of global marine ecosystem and biogeochemical modules used
in Earth System Models.