* 1436617
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Sampling and Characterization of Intermediate Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ross Boulanger, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 310,001.00

Intermediate soils, which consist of varying mixtures of silts, clays, and
sands, are common, naturally occurring deposits that can create design
challenges for infrastructure projects involving dams, levees, highways, and
building and bridge foundations. Geotechnical engineering practice is able to
characterize clays and sands well, but it is the mixture of these two materials
in combination with silt that can be particularly problematic. In some cases
intermediate soils behave like clays and in others the behavior is like sands,
and this uncertain transitional behavior violates the well-established knowledge
base and standard of engineering practice used for clays and sands. The
uncertainty in the characterization of intermediate soils forces engineers to be
overly conservative (i.e., uneconomical) in the design of infrastructure
projects to ensure the safety of society. This award supports research that will
develop new methodologies for collecting intermediate soil samples by drilling
and sampling, evaluating the quality of soil samples obtained, and accurately
measuring their engineering properties in the laboratory for design of
infrastructure. Outcomes from the research will provide practical guidance to
the engineering profession leading to more reliable and economical design of
infrastructure built upon intermediate soils. The project will also result in
workforce development through the education and training of students and
practicing engineers by incorporation of project findings into the classroom and
professional short courses.

The primary objective of this collaborative research project is to improve the
understanding of how sampling influences the measured behavior of intermediate
soils. The scope involves advanced triaxial testing that will simulate the
sampling process, numerical modeling of the influence of various sampler
geometries on sample state, creation of a conceptual sample disturbance
framework, and implementation and validation of research findings at two field
sites. The intellectual merit originates from three aspects: (1) research data
and findings that will expand our knowledge of the effects of sampling on
intermediate soils and their measured behavior; (2) formulation of a new
conceptual framework that tracks the effect of sample disturbance on
intermediate soils and creation of a corresponding new sample quality "index"
parameter; and (3) development and validation via field testing of practice
guidelines. The project will provide new scientific understanding and practical
guidance that is urgently needed by the geotechnical engineering community. It
is also anticipated that the research findings will be applicable to a broader
range of materials, most notably fly ash, dredge materials, and mine tailings.