* 1436305
* Prediction and Control of Tungsten and Titanium Dioxide Sintering and Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jian Luo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2018
* USD 361,755.00

Sintering, or consolidating powders to useful parts by firing, is one of the
oldest and most commonly-used materials processing and fabrication methods. Yet,
much is unknown about the physical processes that control sintering mechanisms.
Using tungsten and titanium dioxide as the initial model systems, this award
supports fundamental research of sintering and materials processing. The
knowledge generated from this research will help to predict and control the
fabrication processing of both structural alloys and functional ceramics, with
applications in energy, aerospace, automotive, and other industries. Education
and outreach activities are integrated with the research to inspire and mentor
students at various levels, while promoting education diversity by engaging
students with different backgrounds and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to achieve fundamental
understandings of the solid-state activated sintering phenomenon. It has been
known for more than half a century that adding a small amount of certain
sintering aids can help to substantially enhance the densification rates in the
solid state, similar to the well-understood phenomenon of liquid-phase
sintering. However, the exact mechanism for this so-called "solid-state
activated sintering" is not fully understood. A series of recent studies
suggests that this phenomenon is due to enhanced mass transport in the
sintering-aid induced (based), premelting-like, intergranular films that are
thermodynamically stabilized below the bulk solidus lines. Using tungsten and
titanium dioxide as the initial model metallic and ceramic systems, fundamental
understandings of this phenomenon are achieved via a combination of sintering
experiments, materials characterization, and thermodynamic modeling.
Furthermore, a novel type of lambda-diagrams are developed and further extended
to predict the thermodynamic tendency for general grain boundaries in
polycrystalline materials to disorder at high temperatures; such diagrams can be
used to forecast sintering behaviors, as well as other materials fabrication
processing and properties.