* 1436219
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Acoustically Transformative Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Many studies have focused on developing
materials for conventional acoustic applications, such as ultrasound imaging,
sound insulation, and geological logging. However, the design of materials that
actively respond to sound and concurrently shift their acoustic and optical
characteristics remains in its infancy. The goal of this project is to design
acoustically responsive materials that alter their chemical structure, physical
properties, and object shapes whenever they interact with sound waves enabling
active modulation of acoustic properties including speed of sound, attenuation,
and phononic band gaps. If compared to electromagnetic radiation, sound waves
possess unique physical characteristics as they readily propagate through
optically non-transparent materials, including liquids, solids, and gels (e.g.,
human body), where direct application of conventional stimuli, such as light and
electric fields, is either physically or physiologically prohibited. This
enables non-invasive interrogation of a wide range of materials properties and
remote activation of various mechanochemical processes. Moreover, similar to
electromagnetic radiation, sound can be focused both in space and in time. This
opens intriguing opportunities to perform local modifications in a time-
controlled, sequential manner. These materials may be utilized both in materials
engineering for acoustic lithography and self-healing and in biomedical
applications including non-invasive surgery, diagnostics, and drug-delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is
to develop a new direction in materials design wherein fundamental changes in
materials properties are activated by sound waves that concurrently shift
acoustic, optical, and geometric characteristics of macroscopic objects. The
research activities pursue three strategic objectives. First, develop
fundamental understanding of hierarchic correlations between the multi-scale
architecture of complex macromolecules and mechanical properties of materials
assembled of these molecular mesoblocks. Theoretical studies will provide
guidelines for synthesis of materials with an extraordinarily broad range of
elasticity, strength, and toughness that are currently not available in
conventional polymer systems. Second, study the interaction of sound waves with
stimuli responsive polymer systems and explore different activation mechanisms
that shift density, modulus, compressibility, and shape. Understanding the
feedback between acoustically triggered changes in materials properties and the
corresponding shifts in acoustic characteristics represents an intellectual
challenge of this proposal. Third, create a novel class of materials that can be
activated, actuated, and navigated remotely using acoustic fields in a
programmable and time-resolved manner. An anticipated culmination of this
project is acoustically transformative materials that not only respond to sound
but also fundamentally change their physical properties, object dimensions, and
acoustic and optical characteristics. The collaborative nature of this project
will ensure interdisciplinary training of junior researchers in polymer
synthesis, physical experiments, and theory. The project also provides
opportunity for broadening participation of underrepresented groups and
fostering infrastructure for collaborative research.