* 1436385
* DMREF:SusChEM:Collaborative Research: Design and Synthesis of Novel Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* David Sellmyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eva Campo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 461,154.00

Non-Technical Description: This collaborative research project will implement
new, transformative strategies for the design of novel magnetic materials, with
special focus on sustainable materials containing earth-abundant and inexpensive
elements. The project will couple a strong experimental effort with recent
theoretical advances in quantum modeling algorithms and software, data-mining
techniques, and high-performance hardware to accomplish its objectives. Magnets
play a crucial role in contemporary technologies. They are essential components
in generators, computer hard drives, mobile devices, and in all electric motors.
Because of their role in such devices, our economy depends largely on the
creation of better magnetic materials. This research will focus on the discovery
of new phases with anisotropic structures, high magnetization, high Curie
temperatures, high spin polarization and high magnetic anisotropy. Materials
with these properties will have important applications in ultra-small
spintronics devices, new high-density data-storage schemes and high-energy-
product permanent-magnet materials. The broader impact activities of the project
will involve graduate education, maintaining contact with the private sector,
and outreach to underrepresented groups and middle-school students. Specially
crafted activities will include the Alice in Wonderland, Nanocamp and STEM
after-school, and summer-intern programs. The algorithms, code and databases
created in this research will be made available to other accelerated materials-
discovery efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The technical
design and synthesis of new magnetic materials is a formidable problem,
especially so given the myriads of possible combinations of composition and
structure. This research will use computationally driven phase-diagram
explorations and materials-structure prediction coupled with experiment to
identify materials with desirable properties for magnetic applications. A new
adaptive genetic algorithm coupled to first-principle codes will be used for
structure and property searches. The algorithm will possess the speed and
efficiency of classical simulations, while maintaining the accuracy of quantum-
based simulations. Concurrent, experimental research will involve novel
synthetic techniques and a comprehensive set of characterization methods. With
guidance from theory, nonequilibrium processes will be employed to generate rich
(stable and metastable) material phases, including inert-gas condensation
techniques, sputtering and pulsed-laser-deposition methods to synthesize
nanoscale clusters and particles, and ultra-fast quenching from the melt to
produce bulk materials. Comprehensive structural characterization of these
material phases will be performed with x-ray and neutron diffraction, and high-
resolution electron microscopy; magnetic and electronic-structure studies will
be pursued with magnetization, x-ray magnetic circular dichroism and other
methods. The characterization of these material phases is key for constructing
and understanding experimental phase diagrams that will be used to validate and
verify theoretical work, and provide strategies for the synthesis of new
materials.