* 1436775
* Laser Processing Method to Reduce Solar Cell Manufacturing Cost and Enhancement of Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mool Gupta, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 305,000.00

Silicon based solar cells continue to dominate the solar-energy market,
accounting for over 85 percent of all solar cell products in the world. The
decrease in manufacturing cost of silicon solar cells is extremely important in
order for solar-energy technology to be a viable alternative energy source.
High-power lasers provide an attractive method to lower the cost of solar cell
manufacturing. However, further research is required in order to make high-power
laser-based processing viable for solar cell manufacturing and to be adapted by
industry. This research focuses on scientific understanding of the high-power
laser processes so that high solar cell performance can be achieved at reduced
manufacturing cost. Research results will allow the solar industry to easily
adapt laser-based processes for the manufacturing of high performance, low-cost
solar cells. The growth of alternative energy sources will have an important
impact on the society to meet its energy needs and will lower the nation?s
dependence on foreign oil.

A combined experimental and computational investigation will be carried out on
the laser-induced defects generation during silicon solar cell fabrication
processes and ways to mitigate their effect through control of laser process
parameters. Technical objectives of the research include: experimental
examination of laser-induced material modification and atomistic modeling of
laser interactions with silicon substrate; control of defects through
optimization of laser processing parameters such as laser beam profile, laser
power, and laser repetition rate; and understanding the effect of post
processing steps on defect recovery as well as on solar cell device performance.
Education will be an integral part of the effort by involvement of undergraduate
and graduate students. Research results will be included in the lectures on
solar energy and photonics. Also, the Principal Investigators plan to develop an
educational module in photovoltaics and laser applications area, which will
target seniors and first-year graduate students. The goal will be to grow this
activity further by involvement of teachers and students, as well as display of
materials at Science Museum of Virginia and Charlottesville local library.