* 1436423
* Bulk Turbulence in Polymer Solutions: Beyond Friction Drag Reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Nicholas Ouellette, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 11/30/2015
* USD 279,774.00

PI: Ouellette, Nicholas&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1436423&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to explore the
effects of adding polymers in the bulk of turbulent flows. When small amounts of
additives, including long-chain polymers, surfactants, or microbubbles, are
added to a turbulent flow, the structure and dynamics of the flow can change
dramatically. The most celebrated effect of additives is skin-friction drag
reduction: tiny amounts of polymers or surfactants can reduce the drag in a
turbulent wall-bounded flow by up to 80%. After years of research, the
scientific community is beginning to reach consensus on the fundamental physics
of this drag reduction. Skin friction, however, is only a part of the total
fluid drag experienced by ships or other objects immersed in a fluid. Separation
of the boundary layer and the dynamics of turbulent wakes lead to energy losses
that frequently dominate the frictional losses over the object. Understanding
how additives affect these other types of drag requires the study of the
modification of bulk turbulence, far from any walls, in the presence of
additives. Although it is known that bulk turbulence does change with additives,
current models cannot explain the experimental observations. The research
proposed here will address this gap via detailed experimental measurements of
bulk turbulence in polymer solutions. In terms of education and outreach, a new
module for an undergraduate laboratory class based on non-Newtonian turbulence,
will be developed. In addition, the PI will develop movies about the research
results that will be displayed in an on-campus coffee shop and on YouTube, and
will participate in K-12 outreach via a local science-fair
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to understand
what aspects of the modification of the turbulent dynamics by polymers is
dependent on the presence of a wall, and what aspects are more universal. To
address this question, the rates of energy injection, scale-to-scale transfer,
and dissipation will be measured as a function of polymer concentration, and
modification to the decay of turbulence will be studied. In addition,
measurements will be made of the spatial structure of the flow, in order to test
the common hypothesis that polymers interact with and suppress small-scale
vorticity. The experimental measurements will be made in the Lagrangian
framework, using Lagrangian particle tracking, where a multicamera stereoimaging
setup is used to follow the motion of small tracer particles in three dimensions
and in time as they are advected by the flow.