* 1436720
* Multidisciplinary Design of Microvascular Composites Based on a Hierarchical Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Philippe Geubelle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Inspired by the circulatory systems present in a wide range of living organisms,
microvascular composites are a new class of fiber-reinforced polymers that
possess a network of embedded microchannels. The focus of this work is placed on
circulating a coolant through these microchannels to allow for the use of
composite components in high temperature conditions, well beyond their
traditional use. The design of these materials naturally leads to a
multidisciplinary optimization problem: from a thermal point of view, more
efficient active cooling can be achieved by multiplying the number of
microchannels in which flows the coolant. But from a structural point of view,
every channel represents a small void that may lead to stress concentration and
negatively affect the stiffness and strength of the composite. Although the
multidisciplinary computational design method to be developed as part of this
project focuses on high temperature applications, microvascular composites are
being considered for a wide range of multidisciplinary applications, including
new electrical, electromagnetic or sensing properties. The combined
computational and experimental research project will provide a unique
multidisciplinary training experience for two graduate students and one summer
undergraduate research assistant.

The hierarchical computational design method to be developed in this project
will lead to important advances in the efficient and accurate modeling of
heterogeneous materials, and in the formulation of a robust gradient-based shape
optimization approach that eludes issues associated with mesh distortion often
associated with conventional finite element methods. At the heart of the
modeling effort is an isogeometric interface-enriched generalized finite element
method (IIGFEM) that allows for the thermal and structural modeling of
microvascular composites with finite element discretizations that do not conform
to the embedded microchannel network and the composite microstructure. The
IIGFEM is then combined with a hierarchical, gradient-based shape optimization
scheme to compute the optimal shape of the microchannel network based on a set
of objective functions and constraints associated with the thermal performance
and flow efficiency of the embedded network, and its impact on the structural
properties of the microvascular composite. Building on state-of-the-art
computational and experimental tools, this top-down design method, which relies
on a hierarchy of thermo-mechanical models and length scales, offers an
efficient approach to tackle the size and complexity of a design process
characterized by multiple, conflicting, multi-disciplinary objective functions
and constraints.