* 1436566
* The importance of sulfurized sugars for organic carbon burial: Testing the model in Santa Barbara Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alex Sessions, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 354,959.00

When organic matter is deposited in sediments, it undergoes a series of
reactions that condense and transform the original organic molecules into a
denser, more resistant set of compounds that form a material called kerogen: the
material from which petroleum is formed. Our present understanding of how the
original organic molecules change and crosslink (i.e., polymerize) to form
kerogen during burial in sediments is poor. It has been hypothesized that the
element sulfur plays a large role in the crosslinking; however, so far there is
little direct evidence due to the absence of analytical techniques that can
appropriately study the role of sulfur in this process. This research uses a
newly developed, novel, analytical technique to measure the sulfur isotopic
composition of individual molecular compounds in organic matter. This will allow
the identification of the origin of the organic-bound sulfur and has the
potential to revolutionize our understanding of the polymerization of natural
organic matter, and hence formation of kerogen. Broader impacts of the project
include determining fundamental physical and chemical relationships that allow
better understanding of the carbon cycle, which has implications for the
formation of kerogen and petroleum; building infrastructure for science via the
development and refinement of a new and potentially powerful analytical
technique and methodology; and graduate student training. It will engage under-
represented minority undergraduate students via the California Institute of
Technology Minority Undergraduate Research Fellowship program in order to help
broaden participation of minority students in state-of-the-art research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The condensation and polymerization of biologically
generated organic matter into kerogen is one of the key steps in the global
carbon cycle because it determines whether organic matter will be remineralized
(dissolved) or preserved and buried (turned into kerogen). Although sulfur is
thought to play an important role in this process by crosslinking organic
monomers, the precise mechanistic details of how this happens is unknown. This
research uses a newly developed technique that couples gas chromatography with
multi-collector inductively-coupled-plasma-mass-spectrometry (ICPMS). This
allows analysis of the isotopes of sulfur of individual organic compounds. Using
this technique it is possible to document compounds resulting from: (1) the
reaction of lipids with hydrogen sulfide (HS-) in sediment porewaters over long
timescales, and (2) the reaction of carbohydrates with polysulfide in the
euxinic water column on very short timescales. Because these two processes have
sulfur isotope (S-34) signatures that differ by almost 30 permil, the two
different processes can be easily distinguished. Organic-rich sediments
deposited in the Santa Barbara Basin will be analyzed and the results compared
to those from sediments in the Cariaco Basin to see if the pilot study in the
Cariaco, which is a sulfide-rich water column environment, hold true in more
normal organic depocenters. Goals of the research include: (1) understanding how
sulfurization, a main process in the cross-linking of organic molecules to form
kerogen, works and how it relates to organic carbon preservation (2) seeing if
the results from the Cariaco Basin are generalizable to other organic carbon
depocenters, (3) examining whether the abundance of disulfide-bound compounds
relate to the presence or absence of water column exunia, (4) determining
whether disulfide-bound organic sulfur is always enriched in S-34 compared to
unbound sulfurized lipids, and (5) seeing if the sulfur isotope values of
individual organic sulfur molecules are representative of bulk organic sulfur.