* 1436082
* Cell distribution and segregation phenomena in blood flow: biomechanical aspects and impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 356,770.00

CBET 1436082&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use numerical methods and
computer simulation to examine blood flow in the vascular system and in
extracorporeal channels, including microfluidic devices that process blood for
diagnostic purposes. The project will focus on analyzing and predicting the
migration of cells during flow. Red blood cells tend to migrate toward the
center of a vessel or channel, while white blood cells and platelets are
displaced toward vessel or channel walls. The project will investigate how cell
migration is affected by the geometry of the vessel cross-section, hematocrit,
flow rate through the vessel, and interactions among the cells. In addition, the
proposal will consider the effects of small amount of polymers added to the
blood. These polymers are known to reduce energy losses in turbulent flow, but
recent evidence suggests they may also affect laminar blood flow in ways that
have physiological benefits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A computational and
mathematical framework will be developed for predicting migration of blood cells
during flow through a vessel. Red blood cell margination and the formation of
cell free layers at the vessel walls will be examined for flow geometries
characteristic of the circulation and microfluidic devices. The role of long-
chain drag reducing polymers will be examined to resolve the mechanism by which
they affect margination and the development of a cell free layer. The results of
the computer simulations will be compared with experiments carried out by the
investigator?s colleagues. The results will improve our understanding of the
biomechanical aspects of various hematological disorders.