* 1436850
* Integrated Structural and Ventilation System for Buildings through Biomimicry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Andrea Surovek, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 318,723.00

Current estimates suggest that buildings are responsible for about 40 percent of
U.S. energy usage. Nature has potential solutions for energy efficiency by
integrating systems. Specifically, insects such as termites construct habitats
that are structurally stable, regulate internal temperature and provide
ventilation through the form of the structure. By computationally mimicking the
bottom-up building processes of integrating structural system with ventilation,
this study intends to develop a new paradigm for building design. The resulting
forms can provide an avenue for new solutions in construction of habitats that
require little to no external energy for ventilation, particularly in developing
areas where the cost of energy is prohibitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research looks at structural forms and building systems from a new perspective.
Rather than focusing on traditional top-down design based on generalized and
codified environmental inputs, the research aims to consider the integration of
the structural system as part of a responsive habitat modeled on biomimicry of
nature. Agent-based modeling is a computational approach by which predictions
can be made on complex systems controlled by rules of behavior of individual
agent. This can be extended to the physical manifestation of agent movement and
include constraints to ensure structural stability. By considering local
environmental inputs and adaptable agent based algorithms, a platform will be
developed in which structural forms and systems are developed that consider
buildings more naturally as an extended physiology of the inhabitants,
responding to both local environmental stimuli and intended structural function.
This multi-disciplinary effort will build on the current state of the art in
engineering, atmospheric science and entomology. In structures, it will employ
biomimicry and agent-based modeling to create new paradigms for bottom-up
development of section and member topologies that are integrated with
environmental function. In atmospheric science, feedbacks between built
environments and models of local microclimate will be explored. Numerical
simulation will contribute to the state of the art in the understanding of
natural ventilation. The developed topologies intend to serve as a proof of
concept for fully integrated structural / mechanical building systems.