* 1436010
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Social Policies and Healthcare Implementation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Stefan Timmermans, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 11,966.00

SES-1436010 Stefan Timmermans Amy Zhou University of California Los Angeles

The project contributes to research on global policy diffusion by examining how
and when developing countries challenge global policy prescriptions. In
addition, by operating at both the state and local levels, the project shows how
national policies are improvised and re-interpreted in their implementation.
This dissertation project traces the uneven diffusion of global health
priorities to national policy and implementation. International organizations
and states exert influence in shaping the policy decisions of developing
countries. Yet developing countries vary in their responses to global policy
prescriptions. Under what conditions do developing states diverge from policy
prescriptions? How are new policies implemented and improvised upon in resource-
constrained settings? This project focuses on a unique case of policy divergence
from Malawi, one of the poorest countries in sub-Saharan Africa. In 2011, Malawi
went against WHO guidelines and became the first country to adopt an HIV policy
called ?Option B+?. The policy significantly expanded access to HIV treatment by
providing pregnant and breastfeeding women immediate and lifelong access to
treatment upon testing positive. This project examines why Malawi diverged from
WHO guidelines to adopt Option B+, and how Malawian healthcare providers and
patients understand and act upon this new policy.

Data for the project comes from ethnographic observations and interviews with
actors at both the state and local level. At the state level, interviews with
members of state agencies and international organizations involved in the Option
B+ discussion specifies the unique roles that state and non-state actors have in
developing policy. At the local level, interviews and observations at health
care centers highlights if and when providers and patients deviate from
treatment procedures and the logic that underpins their decisions. Broader
Impacts:

Since Malawi's adoption of Option B+, the WHO revised their recommendation in
2012 to include Option B+ as an advantageous third option and several countries
in the region are considering the policy change. Because the policy is new and
untested, there are key concerns regarding barriers to care, adherence to
treatment, and possible tensions between partners and community members. This
project can create interdisciplinary dialogue. Sociological insights and the
richness of qualitative data can inform public health professionals on the
unintended consequences of the policy and possible ways to increase uptake and
adherence to HIV medication.