* 1436774
* Collaborative Research: Robustness of Networked Model Predictive Control Satisfying Critical Timing Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Malisoff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 160,928.00

Connecting multiple actuators, controllers, and sensors over shared data
networks is a common means of reducing cost and increasing maintainability in
modern industrial applications, including automobiles, aircraft, and
manufacturing facilities. In most of these applications precise timing is
necessary for proper system function, and timing deviations have the potential
to cause detrimental and even life-threatening deterioration of performance.
However it is inherent to shared networks that contention may occur, meaning
that more than one connected device wants to transmit data over the network at
the same time. This project will develop real-time networked controllers that
resolve contention while achieving desired control objectives. Furthermore, they
will be robust to perturbations of the physical system and the network itself.
The focus of the project is on network architectures that are common in
industry, and the results will apply particularly to automotive control and
robotic applications. As reflected in the expertise of the PIs, the project
combines insightful engineering with sophisticated mathematics, towards the goal
of producing practically useful controllers that have rigorous performance
guarantees. Through a series of outreach activities, the project will help
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address among the most
challenging and important networked systems problems. It will entail fundamental
research to overcome current limitations of model-based control of industrial
networks. The project will use a new robust model predictive control framework
and event-triggered timing model that combines the strengths of autonomous
control and optimization. The work will develop an event-triggered timing model
for receding horizon model predictive control of a real-time network, that will
handle task dependency and timing variations and adaptively compensate for
contentions and time delays. This will allow multiple sensor and actuator nodes
for each control loop, a necessity for state-of-the-art networked industrial
applications. The controller will respect state and input constraints, optimize
cost criteria, predict timing variations, and ensure robustness to
perturbations. It will provide least-conservative estimates of robust positive
invariant sets in the workspace, and overcome the conservativeness of the best
existing results, where the state space is usually chosen to be a sublevel set
of a Lyapunov function whose boundary is determined by the supremum of the
perturbations. Instead, the controller will seek maximal perturbation bounds
that can be allowed before state constraints are violated. Much of the specific
implementation, as well as the experimental validation, will emphasize CANbus
networks. Because CANbus is popular for real-time industrial control
applications, and is the standard protocol for the automotive industry, this
will maximize the immediate impact of the results.