* 1436585
* Correlating Grain Boundary Character to Micro-Fracture in Transparent Ceramic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Animesh Kundu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 402,267.00

Transparent spinel is an advanced ceramic material that has great potential for
use as a highly damage-resistant window material. It is fabricated by pressing
individual grains of ceramic powder together at elevated temperature until they
fuse to form a solid with excellent optical transparency and extreme hardness.
Unfortunately, forming windows of practical size at an affordable cost is a
significant challenge. This award supports fundamental research focused on a new
approach to understanding and controlling the characteristics of a ceramic
material. In particular, the work will explore the way that atoms arrange
themselves at the boundaries between the individual grains during and after
processing, and how different arrangements affect the material's strength.
Improvements in spinel processing will benefit aerospace and military
applications by providing a cost-effective solution when damage-resistant
windows are needed. Such windows will offer improved protection for soldiers,
sailors, pilots, and astronauts. Two female graduate students will be trained to
work with cutting-edge techniques and tools. Undergraduate students will be
engaged through academic-year and summer research projects. Benefits to the
local community will take place through outreach events aimed at K-8
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques such as aberration-corrected electron
microscopy are now revealing that grain boundaries and interfaces constitute
distinct thermodynamic states of matter that have consistent three-dimensional
structures at the atomic level. These structures, termed complexions, are
defined by thermodynamic variables such as chemical potential, temperature,
pressure, and crystallography of the abutting grains. Furthermore, there are
strong indications that control of boundary complexions is a method by which
bulk properties may be controlled. In order to accelerate the use of complexion
engineering as a tool for improving material properties, this research project
is focused on the creation and validation of interface complexion time-
temperature-transformation diagrams. These diagrams will be used to relate
complexion types to interface fracture behavior. Aberration-corrected electron
microscopy and small-scale mechanical test techniques will be used to shed light
on the character and behavior of individual pure and doped boundaries. The
demonstration that it is feasible to create and utilize boundary transformation
diagrams, and that controlling complexions can also control boundary fracture
behavior, will provide the ceramics community with a new means of engineering
bulk material behavior.