* 1436133
* GOALI: Scaling-up Electronic Purification of Single Wall Carbon Nanotubes via Nanoscale Thermocapillary Flows for High Performance Transistors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* John Rogers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,000.00

Historically the microelectronics industry has been driving integrated circuit
technology development, shrinking silicon transistor sizes, reducing their power
consumption and lowering their cost. For strategic electronic applications like
satellite technologies, advanced materials development is essential. Single Wall
Carbon Nanotubes have emerged as an important material candidate for these
applications. The industry believes that electronic devices fabricated using
nanotubes may eventually replace silicon-based devices for logic applications;
but it is also well known that nanotube-based radiofrequency transistors are
important as high-performance analog components in wireless systems. Key to the
advance of high performance is the availability of aligned films of
semiconducting nanotubes with high purity (&gt;99.999 percent semiconducting
nanotubes) at the wafer scale. Scaling-up electronic purification of nanotubes
is the key challenge. Recently the Illinois team developed a path to
purification for grown aligned nanotubes at levels that meet these daunting
requirements. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
award will support the work needed to scale this purification process to the
wafer-scale, and integrate it into the process of record for nanotube field
effect transistors in collaboration with Northrup Grumman Corporation. This work
will have a great societal benefit, impacting power consumption and performance
in wireless technologies, and will serve as one of the first scalable
nanomanufacturing development efforts in the area. The work will provide a
training platform for future engineers in this new manufacturing paradigm.
Moreover this interdisciplinary effort will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the research through use of the Summer Research
Programs at Illinois and Northrup Grumman Corporation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aligned sub-monolayer films of single walled carbon
nanotubes grown by chemical vapor deposition represent a promising materials
platform for high-performance electronic applications. However, film electronic
purity is a critical issue. Recently the Illinois team developed a path to
purification for as-grown aligned materials based on utilization of a thermal
resist which serves as an etch barrier for semiconducting nanotubes during
processing. The process uses nanoscale thermocapillary flows in thin organic
films as a processing strategy for complete, selective removal of metallic
nanotubes from aligned arrays of single walled nanotubes. Compatibility with
current microelectronics fabrication tools suggests it can serve as a scalable
technique for nanotube substrate purification. Microwave excitation leads to
efficient, selective removal of metallic tubes via this process, enabling 100
percent purity. The research team will scale-up thermocapillary purification
methods for wafer-scale manufacture and will introduce them into the transistor
processing workflow at Northrup Grumman. A high volume microwave reactor will be
designed, assembled, and developed. Ultimately high-performance, low-power, low
noise linear carbon nanotube amplifiers will be fabricated at the wafer-scale.