* 1436865
* Dissolved Organic Carbon Cycling by SAR11 Marine Bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2019
* USD 712,231.00

SAR11 (Pelagibacterales) are the most abundant group of bacterioplankton in the
oceans. Globally, they are estimated to oxidize to carbon dioxide (CO2) between
5 and 22% of all the organic carbon produced by photosynthesis each day. The
activities of bacterioplankton such as SAR11 determine the residence times of
different forms of organic carbon, and ultimately shape the composition of
dissolved organic pools in the oceans, which rival atmospheric CO2 in mass.
Accurate and detailed information about the oceanic carbon cycle is used in
models that are valued for their potential to predict and understand future
changes in ocean ecosystems. This grant supports analyses of genomic data that
predict the carbon oxidation functions of SAR11 cells, and supports experiments
with cells in culture, where high-resolution mass spectrometry technology is
applied to discover new organic carbon oxidation biochemistry. To assess the
importance of SAR11 carbon oxidation functions in ocean ecosystems, this project
includes four short oceanographic cruises to the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series
Study (BATS) site, in the western Sargasso Sea. On these cruises the
concentrations and oxidation rates of organic compounds will be measured, and
linked to variation in planktonic SAR11 populations. This grant also supports
teacher professional development training on the topic of Carbon Cycling by
Marine Microorganisms, in Oregon State University's Science & Math Investigative
Learning Experiences (SMILE) program. This program prepares minority, low-
income, historically underrepresented, and other educationally underserved
students from rural areas to graduate from high school, enroll and succeed in
higher education, and pursue science, technology, engineering or mathematics
careers.

It is a paradox that SAR11 cells are the most abundant in the oceans, but also
have among the smallest genomes known. The central goal of this proposal is to
understand what types of dissolved organic matter (DOM) are oxidized to CO2 by
SAR11. Implicit to this approach is the perspective that some abundant
chemoheterotrophic bacterioplankton taxa, particularly those with small genomes,
have evolved specialist strategies for oxidizing organic matter. Understanding
these strategies can lead to a more detailed and accurate understanding of the
biological processes that recycle biological production to CO2. Major project
aims are: 1) investigate SAR11 genomes and assay cells in culture with high-
resolution mass spectrometry approaches and isotopic labeling to identify the
range of compounds these cells can oxidize to CO2; 2) at BATS, measure
biological oxidation rates of DOM compounds used by SAR11; 3) link
spatiotemporal SAR11 genome variation to patterns of DOM oxidation in the ocean
surface layer (0-300 m). This projects includes four short cruises to BATS that
target the four microbial plankton community types at this site: upper euphotic
zone, deep chlorophyll maximum, spring bloom and upper mesopelagic. Products of
this activity will include new information about variation in labile DOM
oxidation across the surface layer, and specific links to genome features that
will improve the accuracy of interpretation of global ocean metagenomic data.