* 1436312
* GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Methane, vanadium, barium, and gallium as process indicators in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2018
* USD 303,214.00

In this project, an investigator participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will make measurements of methane, a dissolved trace gas, as well as
the dissolved trace elements of gallium, barium, and vanadium in the Arctic
Ocean. In common with other multinational initiatives in the International
GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify
processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace
elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these
distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements are
essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. The trace elements and gas
measured as part of this project will be used as tracers for a variety of
processes such as river and atmospheric inputs to the Arctic Ocean, as well as
circulation in the region. The knowledge and experience gained from this project
will be incorporated into courses in oceanography and marine chemistry, as well
as be shared through public outreach activities. The project will support the
scientific training of a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tracers to
be measured as part of this study, methane, gallium, barium, and vanadium, will
provide important information about oceanic circulation and water inputs to the
Arctic. Gallium is likely to prove a sensitive tracer for Atlantic versus
Pacific water components in the western Arctic Ocean, an issue of interest in
circulation studies and also relevant to projections of the stability of methane
hydrates on the Arctic shelves. Barium is of interest because it has been shown
to be an indicator of fluvial inputs and contributions to the halocline. This is
pertinent to understanding upper ocean circulation in the Arctic as well as to
freshwater contributions to the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation. For
vanadium, the large proportion of shelf area in the Arctic makes this an ideal
region to examine whether shelf sediment uptake determines surface ocean
vanadium depletion. For methane, Arctic waters are a significant source of this
Greenhouse Gas to the atmosphere and global change is likely exacerbating its
release. Determination of the methane distribution will therefore be of interest
in and of itself, although it is also a potentially valuable indicator of
interactions with the shelf as well as of river inputs. Overall, results from
this study will lead to an increased understanding of key ocean biogeochemical
and physical processes including cross margin exchange of materials, sources of
water in the Arctic Ocean, and fluxes of methane to the atmosphere.