* 1436141
* Exploiting Noise for Response Control: From Simple Nonlinear Systems to Slender Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Random fluctuations, which are called noise, occur naturally in many systems,
and in many biological and chemical systems, noise is utilized to engender a
large change in the system response. However, the use of noise to beneficially
influence the response of an engineering system has received only limited
attention. As the operating environments of engineering systems become extreme,
both at the small scales as well as the large scales, the influence of
nonlinearities, uncertainties, and noise gain increased importance. The study,
and possible exploitation, of these usually ignored elements may allow for
breakthrough advances in design and control of systems and help extend the
frontiers of engineering and science. Through support of this award, fundamental
studies will be pursued to develop a knowledge base for the use of combined
deterministic and noise inputs to realize desired response changes in nonlinear
systems. A salient impact is expected to be the advancement of our understanding
of noise based schemes for control of nonlinear systems and extension of the
application realm of these schemes from simple systems to complex systems. By
experimentally demonstrating the feasibility of these schemes, it is expected
that one can construct schemes for practical applications where slender,
rotating structures are used, such as drilling and mining operations and
subtractive manufacturing operations such as milling operations. This work will
usher in a new generation of researchers trained to use tools suited for
nonlinear systems with noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior efforts on
noise-influenced responses of nonlinear oscillators and investigations into
whirling motions of rotary systems carried out at the University of Maryland, a
research team will pursue the common goal of understanding how mechanical and
structural system responses may be altered by exercising partial control with
noise. The group will conduct original experiments to explore the applicability
of partial control schemes developed for HÃ©non maps and Duffing oscillators to
an experimental prototype of a bi-stable Duffing oscillator. Informed by the
experimental findings, analytical and numerical studies will be initiated with
modified Jeffcott rotor systems to construct appropriate partial control
algorithms and these findings will be extended to control the dynamics of
slender, rotating structures. The findings are expected to open the doors to the
combined use of noise and deterministic inputs for control of nonlinear
mechanical systems that exhibit escape dynamics and steer responses of rotary
systems away from states such as whirling motions, which can be detrimental to a
system.