* 1436265
* Targeted Infusion Proposal: Course-embedded Model Utilizing Nanoscience and Nanotechnology to Integrate Research based Projects into the Science Curriculum
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Yixuan Wang, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2019
* USD 505,645.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Albany State University will implement a
project entitled: Course-embedded Model Utilizing Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
to Integrate Research based Projects into the Science Curriculum. The project
will transform the undergraduate science curriculum at the institution by
infusing nanotechnology based research in the laboratory. Project objectives
include the infusion of research experiences in chemistry, biology and physics
courses; enhancement of students' content knowledge of the field of nanoscience
and technology; and, enhancement of students' research and critical thinking
skills. The broader impacts of the project are in the training of undergraduate
students for interdisciplinary research, as well as outreach programs to K-12
students and professional development workshops for high school teachers to
develop or adapt activities in nanotechnology for implementation into the K-12
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integratation of research into the
curriculum is accomplished by concentrating on three tracks of research in
nanotechnology. The tracks are: the biomedical application of carbon
nanomaterials, where synthesis, functionalization, characterization, wave-
nanoparticle interactions and delivery applications of graphene and ferrite
nanoparticles are investigated; the study of nanoparticles on living organisms
where the focus is on the effect of nanoparticles on human cells, plants, and
microorganisms and biological macromolecules; and an introduction of
nanotechnology where students prepare gold nanoparticles under varying
conditions and characterize and study their catalytic properties. This project
connects the disciplines of chemistry, biology and physics using nanotechnology
as the central theme for the integration of the research into the curriculum.