* 1436518
* Service Systems with Outbound Work and Blending
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ohad Perry, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 296,011.00

The research objective of this award is to develop new models and control
mechanisms that faithfully describe contemporary service systems, such as
contact centers and healthcare systems, which handle inbound and outbound work
simultaneously. Special attention will be given to systems that process the two
types of jobs by the same group of agents, a process referred to as "blending,"
in time-varying or random environments. The most significant difference between
the two types of jobs is that inbound work typically arrives exogenously, so
that management has no direct control on the arrival rate, whereas the arrival
process of outbound work is generated by the system itself, and its arrival rate
is therefore mostly controlled. The flexibility in scheduling outbound arrivals
can be exploited to improve performance, and in particular, to reduce the
variability associated with the arrival process of inbound work. However,
outbound work also introduces new types of practical and analytical challenges
that do not exist in systems that are dedicated to serving inbound work. For
example, modern contact centers employ automatic dialers to generate outbound
calls. In a blended service pool, it is then highly possible that all agents are
busy by the time a called customer replies, so that the call is dropped. In
healthcare settings, a clinic that accepts walk-ins (inbound patients) in
addition to scheduled appointments (outbound patients), must take into account
no-shows and late arrivals of outbound patients when making staffing and
scheduling decisions. Therefore, existing results and insights that are known
for systems that handle only inbound work, do not directly extend to systems
that process also outbound work. Specific questions that will be addressed are:
1) How to design a system that processes the two types of jobs, e.g., when is it
better to use blending, and when is it preferable to handle each type of work by
a dedicated service pool. 2) How to best utilize the flexibility in face of
time-dependent, or stochastic arrival rates of inbound work. 3) How to staff
blended service pools so as to achieve a desired throughput rate of outbound
work, subject to given service-level constraints for both inbound and outbound
customers. 4) How to route customers and schedule agents in real time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will develop new methods and
tools to design and control large service systems with outbound work and
blending in non-stationary settings. Since exact analysis is prohibitively hard,
novel many-server heavy-traffic limits will be proved and shown to provide
effective approximations. A challenging characteristic of the asymptotic
analysis is that the generation of outbound work takes place in a fast time
scale, therefore requiring refined heavy-traffic analysis. This property, in
addition to the non-stationarity and uncertainty regarding inbound arrival
rates, presents technical complications that make limiting arguments hard to
derive. Successful results will lead to new types of useful asymptotic
techniques and insights which can potentially be applied in other settings as
well.