* 1436872
* Sustainable Scale-Up of Nanoparticle Manufacturing Using Microreactors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* James Haw, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Nanoparticles made of precious metals (gold, silver, platinum, etc.) are useful
for biomedical therapies, energy generation, and improving the efficiency of
chemical reactions. Current techniques for manufacturing these nanoparticles,
however, rely on slow and costly laboratory-scale chemical reactions, making
metal nanoparticles cost-prohibitive for their most promising applications.
Reactions performed in small batches in the lab guarantee high particle quality
and uniformity. This quality and uniformity would be lost if the reaction
volumes were increased to the industrial scale. This award supports research in
the development of microfluidic chemical reactors for generating nanoparticles.
Microfluidic chemical reactors handle very small volumes of chemicals in
channels that are smaller than a millimeter across. Because of their small size,
they can produce nanoparticles with the same quality and uniformity as the
laboratory-scale reactions currently used. The goal of the research supported by
this award is to understand how to operate many microfluidic reactors
simultaneously, allowing for large quantities of nanoparticles to be produced in
an automated, continuous manner while maintaining the quality of these
particles. The technology developed here will facilitate the efficient and
sustainable industrial-scale production of metal nanoparticles. This project
will be integrated with an educational outreach program that incorporates high
school and community college students as active participants in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While nanofabrication in microreactors is an
established technology, there are several challenges that need to be overcome to
make it a sustainable industrial-scale process. This research will accomplish
four objectives to overcome these challenges. (1) Development of sustainable
ionic-liquid based chemistry for the fabrication of Pt and Rh nanoparticles. (2)
Design of microfluidic surface coatings for maximized throughput of droplet
flows. (3) Implementation of new droplet merger techniques to facilitate
multistep (e.g., seeded growth) nanoparticle fabrication reactions. (4) Feedback
control of highly parallelized systems of microreactors to facilitate
industrial-scale yields. This award will advance knowledge at the intersection
of diverse fields of study, facilitating the application of techniques from
chemistry, chemical engineering, and microfabrication technology to develop
fundamental principles for the scale up of nanoparticle manufacturing in
continuous-flow microreactors. It will lead to the development of broadly
adaptable schemes for the rational assembly and control of massively parallel
microfluidic reactors and techniques for performing sustainable chemistry in
these systems. The goal is a science-based approach to the design of industrial-
scale, sustainable microreactor manufacturing systems.