* 1436862
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Computationally Guided Design of Multicomponent Materials for Electrocatalytic Cascade Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* J.William Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 379,721.00

In order to support world needs, we depend on certain commercial reaction
systems that consume a significant fraction of the world's energy resources,
such as for the production of ammonia fertilizers from nitrogen gas. This is
because one single catalyst material is not optimal for all the elementary
reaction steps that are required for a conversion. The current catalyst system
is the best compromise, but is inefficient. Improving upon this energy-costly
situation through application of new catalyst materials is a daunting challenge,
however. Under the National Science Foundation initiative titled Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future, an award is being made to a
collaborative team of Profs. Michael Janik (Pennsylvania State University),
Suljo Linic (University of Michigan), Will Medlin (University of Colorado) and
Eranda Nikolla (Wayne State University) to develop new multicomponent catalyst
materials that will allow greater efficiency in energy-demanding reaction
schemes. The research team proposes that new cascade catalyst materials be
prepared by nanoscale synthesis techniques to link the multiple components that
have different functions in an overall reaction. Close linking of these
catalytic material components, in principle, can reduce the formation of
unwanted and environmentally hazardous byproducts and decrease the required
energy input for necessary chemical reactions. While the research team has
demonstrated the concepts required to construct the individual catalyst features
required for this approach, predictive models are needed to guide the design of
how to link these components to result in an improved process. This project will
develop the multi-scale models necessary to design complex catalyst assemblies.
These models will be validated and refined through experimental testing of
catalyst materials defined by computational designs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An
alternative approach to catalytic conversion will be developed using multi-
component, multi-active site materials. Communication between active sites will
be controlled by the selective transport of energetic intermediates. A
computationally-guided design framework will 1) utilize atomistic and electronic
structure methods to optimize individual catalytic components, and 2) construct
a coupled microkinetic/transport model to guide construction of the multi-
component material. Synthesis, fabrication, characterization, and reactivity
studies will validate computational models and realize the enhancements offered
by the catalysts. Initial catalyst development efforts will concentrate on
ammonia synthesis, using one site to generate active proton and electron
intermediates that transport to a second site to reduce nitrogen.
Transferability of the design approach will be demonstrated by applying it to
design cascades for selective oxidation of biomass-derived species in alkaline
systems. The computationally guided design of inorganic catalytic cascade
systems will both demonstrate the potential of these multi-component materials
to provide efficient catalytic processes and provide a design framework for
rapid acceleration of their development. The research will be integrated with
educational and outreach activities to broaden the impact of the proposed work.
Undergraduate researchers drawn from programs that target underrepresented
groups will be integrated into research efforts at the four partner
institutions, involving these students in multi-disciplinary work with exposure
to the collaborative team. Research groups at each institution will participate
in science outreach activities targeted at preschool through K-12 groups, such
as Central Pennsylvania's "Exploration Days" and the Michigan Science Center's
"Ask the Expert" series. The collaborative group plan coordinated course
offerings among the partner institutions, which will provide opportunities for
collaborative teaching, specifically aimed at integrating active learning tools
at all the institutions.