* 1436458
* RUI:  Vitamin B12 and nitrogen regulation of oceanic dimethylsulfoniopropionate and dimethylsulfide
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Peter Lee, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2019
* USD 894,662.00

Vitamin B12 and nitrogen are nutrients critical to phytoplankton growth. Since
B12 is produced solely by bacteria, phytoplankton must acquire their B12 from
bacteria. Nitrogen is used to produce the amino acid methionine and B12 is
required by the enzymes that form methionine. Methionine is the precursor to the
algal metabolite dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). Bacteria degrade this
compound to the climatically-active compound dimethylsulfide (DMS). Subsequent
DMS transfer into the atmosphere is considered a significant driver of cloud
formation and a possible climate feedback mechanism. DMSP can also be degraded
via a secondary pathway to form methylmercaptopropionate (MMPA), which is not
released to the atmosphere. Consequently, DMSP formation and the extent of DMSP
degradation to DMS or MMPA are susceptible to B12 availability. Nitrogen
availability influences this effect by controlling methionine production. Thus,
the overarching premise for this study is that B12 availability regulates
oceanic DMSP and DMS formation, and is synergistically impacted by nitrogen
limitation. By providing a mechanistic understanding of relevant biogeochemical
parameters this study will significantly improve the incorporation of sulfur-
related microbial processes into climate models. Undergraduate students from the
College of Charleston and College-partnered summer research programs will
participate in the project, providing them with real-world examples and
understanding of traditional biogeochemical and modern genomics-enabled
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine established
biogeochemistry-based measurements with cutting-edge metabolomics,
transcriptomics and proteomics techniques in laboratory and field studies.
Culture experiments will examine the interactive effect of B12 and nitrogen
availability on DMSP formation in several ecologically-relevant phytoplankton
taxa. Second, the microbial degradation of DMSP and DMS in relation to B12
availability will be examined using several environmentally-important bacteria
and archaea. Finally, field studies will examine the seasonal variability of
B12, DMSP and DMS, and the relative importance of DMS and MMPA formation in the
South Atlantic Bight. Gene and protein expression will be assessed at each level
of this study to identify gene products, metabolic pathways, and cellular
mechanisms underlying the interconnections between B12, sulfur, and nitrogen
cycles. The results generated will have a major impact on current understanding
of the role of B12 and nitrogen on the DMSP and DMS cycling, as well as the
potential role of these stressors in global climate change. In addition to
providing evidence for microbe-based mechanisms behind the modulation of oceanic
DMS, this project will (1) furnish an explanation for "summer DMS paradox", thus
having significant implications for the development of future DMS models, (2)
assess the interactive impact of B12 and nitrogen availability on intracellular
DMSP production and (3) provide insight as to whether B12 may play a far more
critical role in modulating climate feedback mechanisms on phytoplankton
productivity.