* 1436875
* Conjugated Polymer-Based Ternary Blends
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Barry Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,995.00

PI Name: Barry Thompson&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1436875&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun
represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-free energy on earth.
Solar cells for conversion of light to electricity based on electrically
conductive organic polymers offer a simple and potentially low-cost route for
renewable electricity production. However, recent increases in the performance
of organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have only been enabled by increasing the
complexity of device design and fabrication, which often involves multiple
layers. Polymer mixtures have the potential to balance the need for the increase
solar energy conversion efficiency with the desire to maintain simplicity and
ultimately low cost in device manufacture. The goal of this project is develop
OPV devices based on mixtures of three organic polymers, or ternary polymer
blends. A series of novel organic polymers with electronic properties desirable
for OPV devices will be synthesized to serve as components for these ternary
blends. Ternary polymer blends are made into a single thin film using printing
techniques. Devices made from these thin films will then be characterized to
develop a fundamental understanding of how the ternary blend affects
photovoltaic performance. Synergistic interactions within these three-component
systems may provide unique enhancements in device performance while maintaining
the simplicity of a device made from a single organic polymer layer. The project
includes cooperative teaching and research activities between California
Lutheran University and the University of Southern California, which feature the
joint development of a course to educate non-science undergraduate majors on the
importance of energy in a changing world, and plans for involving undergraduates
in the research during the summer. International collaborations through the
Danish Technical University will provide graduate student exchange opportunities
focusing on large area, flexible polymer solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project
is to develop a fundamental understanding of ternary blend organic polymer
photovoltaics (OPV). Ternary blend OPV combines the practical simplicity of
single-layer devices with the performance potential of tandem devices.
Specifically, ternary blends based on a fullerene acceptor and two miscible
conjugated polymer donors with complementary electronic properties are
hypothesized to provide enhanced solar energy conversion efficiency relative to
a single polymer. A series of novel organic polymers with electronic and
thermodynamic properties desirable for OPV device performance and ease of
fabrication will be synthesized to serve as components for these ternary blends.
Specifically, modular synthesis will be used to generate pairs of polymers with
regularly varying electronic and physical interactions. Polymer blend
miscibility will be tuned via polymer surface energy, and polymer-polymer mixing
will be used to determine the limits of this design principle. OPV devices will
be fabricated using printing techniques to make thin films of ternary polymer
blends. Through this approach, the research will gain fundamental understanding
of the influence of physical and the electronic relationships between components
on the performance and behavior of ternary blend solar cells, and establish
design principles for optimal conjugated polymer components in ternary blend
solar cells that ensure cooperative electronic function. The project includes
cooperative teaching and research activities between California Lutheran
University and the University of Southern California, which feature the joint
development of a course to educate non-science undergraduate majors on the
importance of energy in a changing world, and plans for involving undergraduates
in the research. International collaborations through the Danish Technical
University will provide graduate student exchange opportunities focusing on
large area, flexible polymer solar cells.