* 1436590
* Collaborative Research:  New Constraints on Marine Oxygen Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Edward Young, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2015
* USD 203,480.00

Marine oxygen is strongly linked to the cycling of organic matter in the marine
environment, and as such, its budget is central to addressing many of the
outstanding questions in oceanography. In this study, researchers will measure
the amounts of three isotopes of oxygen that can combine to make up the
molecular oxygen gas dissolved in oceanic waters. When oxygen reacts with other
substances, the three isotopes can behave in slightly different ways depending
on the type of reactions; this makes it possible to identify the kinds of
processes that have led to the existence of the oxygen found at different places
in the ocean. These results are expected to yield new insights into how oxygen
interacts with organisms, organic matter, minerals, and other substances under a
variety marine environmental conditions, with important implications for future
studies of ocean productivity and hypoxic (low oxygen) zones in the ocean. A
female graduate student will gain hands-on experience with these new methods,
and results from the research will be disseminated to the general public through
social media and a video.

In this project, researchers will make simultaneous measurements of five stable
isotopic variants of O2, known as quintuple-isotopologue analysis, to provide
new constraints on marine oxygen cycling. Using a combined field and
experimental study they will evaluate the potential for the quintuple-
isotopologue method to trace marine O2 cycling. Utilizing these novel analytical
methods, they will analyze depth profiles and dark bottle incubations of O2
isotopologues in the water column at San Pedro Ocean Time Series (SPOT). These
measurements, combined with nutrient profiles and complementary laboratory
experiments, will yield a first-order understanding of how photosynthesis,
respiration, and mixing affect the isotopologue composition of dissolved marine
O2.