* 1436154
* DMREF: Integrated Computational Framework for Designing Dynamically Controlled Alloy-Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Carlos Levi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

Non-technical Description: Many technologies rely on heterostructures made of
materials with very different chemistries. Examples include (i) turbine blades
in jet engines, (ii) microelectronic applications that rely on semiconductor-
oxide heterostructures and (iii) electrochemical energy storage devices such as
all solid-state batteries. Heterostructures are often out of equilibrium due to
the close proximity of very different chemistries. This results in the evolution
of the heterostructure with a concomitant degradation of its functional
capabilities over time. Predicting the evolution of heterostructures consisting
of widely differing chemistries remains one of the biggest challenges in
materials science and requires a description of processes that span widely
varying length and time scales. The processes that dominate heterostructure
evolution are common to most other non-equilibrium processes in the solid state.
This project will lead to the development of an openly distributable framework
that rigorously integrates theory, experiment and computation to predict and
elucidate the evolution of complex materials heterostructures. It will address
an important challenge within the Materials Genome Initiative of linking the
electronic structure of the constituent chemistries of a complex materials
system to its behavior at technologically relevant length and time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The aim of this project is to
develop a rigorous framework and accompanying predictive infrastructure that
integrates multi-scale computation with precise experimental characterization to
predict and elucidate the evolution of complex heterostructures and multi-phase
coexistence. A specific focus will target the measurement and prediction of
thermodynamic and kinetic properties of individual and combined oxidation
processes in selected model alloys. The methods to be developed and integrated
will be more generally applicable to evolving multi-phase coexistence between
metallic, semiconducting and insulating phases, where evolution requires atomic
diffusion, electron transport, phase nucleation and growth coupled with
interface migration. The activity will focus on model systems presenting a clear
case for benchmarking and validating multiscale models that bridge descriptions
of atomistic processes with continuum length scales. A major objective is to
define design criteria for the stability and evolution of oxide/metal
structures. Experimental measurements will be tightly integrated with modeling
tasks, providing both input and validation. While the emphasis is on oxidation
in model systems that exhibit a range of dynamic phenomena involving interfaces
between different phases, the tools and integrated research methodology will be
applicable to any dynamically evolving heterostructure system coupling phase
evolution with atomic and electronic transport. This includes batteries, fuel
cells, and corrosion processes.