* 1436297
* Control of Robots that Move by Leaping, Bouncing, and Swinging
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kevin Lynch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

A wide variety of robotic tasks, including locomotion and manipulation, can be
characterized by switches between different sets of contact conditions. For
example, a biped running robot can have its left foot on the ground, its right
foot on the ground, or no feet on the ground. The equations of motion of the
robot, which govern how the forces and torques of the motors at the robot's
joints cause the robot to move, change as the robot changes contacts with the
ground. These switching equations raise a number of open questions in motion
planning and control for dynamically locomoting legged robots, such as robotic
pack mules being tested by the US Army and a new generation of humanoid robots
being developed around the world. Control theory, the basis of the lowest-level
software that controls these robots, has not kept up with the latest
developments in robot design. This research will narrow that gap, providing a
firm theoretical "footing" for the software controlling dynamically locomoting
robots. This will help realize the vision of legged robots in military, service,
and home applications. The research will also provide opportunities for
undergraduates and graduate students to demonstrate their work at the Chicago
Museum of Science and Industry, influencing the next generation of scientists
and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the management of
energy, momentum, and uncertainty for uncertain hybrid mechanical control
systems with impacts. While the classical goal of robot motion control is to
control the state of the robot with zero uncertainty, this research deals
explicitly with the fact that this goal is idealized for all uncertain hybrid
systems with impact and formally impossible for many due to their
underactuation. The methodology applies to a broad class of Lagrangian control
systems with impacts, with a focus on locomotion systems. The work will
establish establish principles of state belief propagation and filtering, belief
controllability, motion planning, and feedback control for systems with the
structure of uncertain hybrid mechanical systems with impacts.