* 1436095
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Designing, Understanding and Functionalizing Novel Superconductors and Magnetic Derivatives
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This DMREF project aims to make breakthroughs in
understanding and designing novel superconductors, magnetic semiconductors, and
other magnetic materials. The research can lead to development of materials with
higher transition temperatures suitable for applications to electronic devices
with novel functionalities. To achieve this goal, collaborative research will be
performed by five Principal Investigators (PIs) specializing in a variety of
techniques and methods, including neutron scattering (Dai) and muon spin
relaxation (Uemura) as advanced magnetic probes, synthesis and charge transport
of nano-scale systems (Ni and Kim), and theory and computational material design
(Kotliar). The team members will unite their forces and expertise to
characterize high-quality specimens with multiple experimental probes, to
explore electric field-effect doping of charge carriers using nano-scale
devices, to interpret the results using advanced computational models, and to
design and synthesize new materials. As demonstrated in recent discoveries of
ferromagnetic semiconductors that have crystal structures identical to those of
Fe-based high-Tc superconductors, encounters and coherent collaboration between
experts from different research communities will lead to unanticipated
breakthroughs. Since 2011, the PIs from Columbia and Rice have organized
live/video lecture courses for entry-level graduate students "Frontiers of
Condensed Matter Physics" seeking broader impact, and have accumulated about 100
video lectures of leading scientists describing modern studies of solid state
physics. The present project will allow adding a new series to this course
involving faculty members from Columbia, Rice, Harvard, Rutgers, and UCLA and
connecting their classrooms with a web-based technology for simultaneous
broadcast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Condensation and
pairing mechanisms of high-Tc cuprate and iron-based superconductors have not
yet been established. However, there are growing signatures pointing toward the
important role played by magnetic interactions. With multi-probe experimental
researchers using neutrons, muons, transport, and scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM), supplemented by quantitative comparison to advanced computation, the
present DMREF project will shed new light on the quest for understanding
unconventional superconductors. In conjunction with the predictive powers of
advanced computational methods, a better understanding of the physical
mechanisms at work will contribute to the ability to design materials with
higher transition temperatures. Carrier doping using electric field effects will
provide a new route to search for novel superconductors, less sensitive to
disorder effects associated with conventional doping with chemical
substitutions. Transport results on Fermi-level tuning via electrolyte gate
voltage will be directly compared to advanced theoretical computations on
electronic structures. Additionally, the formation of interfaces of
unconventional superconductors and their magnetic derivatives, and engineering
of phase changes via charge-doping with field-effect gating, will result in
devices with novel functionality, leading to an as yet unexplored
interdisciplinary research front. This project will provide a unique
collaborative experience involving leading researchers, graduate students, and
postdocs with multiple research fields and techniques that will make important
contributions to the development of the future leaders of modern physics
research.