* 1436019
* Collaborative Research:   Biogeochemical Cycling of Particulate Trace Elements in the Western Arctic Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Vincent J. Salters, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2018
* USD 430,334.00

As part of this project, two investigators will participate in the 2015 U.S.
GEOTRACES Arctic expedition to determine the trace element composition of
different suspended particles in the water column of the Arctic Ocean to
identify the sources and scavenging capabilities of these particles. In common
with other multinational initiatives in the International GEOTRACES Program, the
goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and quantify
fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the
ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing
environmental conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life, others are
known biological toxins, and still others are important because they can be used
as tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the
sea. This team of trace element scientists will focus on the measurement of
particulate trace elements, which will enable scientists to better estimate the
sources of particulate metals to the Arctic Ocean and to better understand their
contribution to biological processes. This project will also provide educational
opportunities for undergraduate students, K-12 teachers, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particulate trace element distributions, sources,
sinks and cycling are predicted to be controlled by physical, biological,
anthropogenic and geochemical processes in the Arctic. Furthermore, many trace
elements are required nutrients for marine phytoplankton, playing a key role in
oceanic primary productivity. However, few integrated oceanographic studies have
been conducted to specifically investigate these relationships in this region,
despite the changing conditions and global significance of the Arctic. This
project will significantly advance understanding of the complete geochemical
cycles of a number of trace elements in the Arctic Ocean basin by measuring the
concentrations of particulate trace elements in bulk particles collected through
the water column and in sediments, as well as in phytoplankton from the upper
water column. These measurements will enable scientists to constrain the inputs
of particulate elements from rivers, shelves and ice, and to assess the removal
of dissolved trace elements via passive scavenging and biological uptake.