* 1436015
* Rolling Isolation Systems to Protect Building Contents from Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Henri Gavin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 240,113.00

Fragile objects and mission-critical building contents such as hospital
equipment may be placed on rolling isolation systems in order to protect them
from damage during earthquake event. Rolling isolation systems consist of a
matched pair of horizontal rectangular frames with rigid shallow dishes fixed to
their corners. The dishes in the lower frame are concave up, and those in the
upper frame are concave down. A large steel ball located between these dishes
allows the upper frame to roll over the lower frame. The intensity of shaking
that rolling isolation systems can protect against is determined largely by the
diameter of the steel dishes. Currently one of the limiting factors for rolling
systems is that they can protect objects only from horizontal shaking. Further,
the best bowl shape and the proper amount of energy-damping for a particular
application remain open questions. This award supports research to develop
rolling isolation systems that can protect fragile building contents from severe
horizontal and vertical motions. The resulting systems will incorporate
specialized components for vertical isolation and multiple isolation layers. In
developing these systems and assessing their promise for earthquake hazard
mitigation, this research will lead to a better understanding of the true three-
dimensional aspect of earthquake ground motions and their impact on fragile
objects and structures. Ultimately, the proper design and implementation of
rolling isolation will ensure that irreplaceable objects, critical hospital and
telecommunications equipment, and digital infrastructure will remain operational
during and after severe earthquakes, thereby mitigating the costs of these
potentially disastrous events. Research opportunities for undergraduate and high
school students will broaden the participation in this research. An industrial-
outreach program will enhance the practical dissemination of the
results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The non-holonomic constraints inherent to rolling
isolation systems result in nonlinear coupling between lateral and rotational
dynamics. Uniaxial and linearized models are therefore not sufficient to predict
the response of these systems. The objective of this project is therefore to
advance the performance and implementation of high-capacity isolation systems
for equipment and components subjected to three-dimensional ground-motions. New
mathematical models for the nonlinear dynamics of three-dimensional isolation
systems will be derived and validated with experiments on a six degree of
freedom shake table. These validated models will accelerate the design of new
bowl topologies in order to maximize the effective displacement capacities of
these systems. New methods of seismic hazard analysis will be developed that
recognize the three-dimensional nature of ground motions and the threshold-
sensitive behavior of buildings and contents.