* 1436266
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integrating Innovation in Engineering Design
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Lorraine Fleming, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 539,406.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Howard University will implement a
Targeted Infusion Project entitled: Integrating Innovation in Engineering
Design. The goal of the project is to strengthen engineering education by
integrating innovation into the undergraduate engineering curriculum. This is
accomplished by including design thinking in the introductory engineering course
and through the establishment of a laboratory space where students will actively
engage in innovation. The course will move from a stimulation model of
instruction to authentic involvement in the learning experience. The shift to
authentic involvement experiences, using design thinking, is an attempt to
mitigate current attrition trends. Project efforts will enhance the quality of
the undergraduate engineering experience, promote positive retention and
achievement results, and broaden the participation of innovative engineers in
the nation's workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative engineering design
places focus on the cognitive processes surrounding creativity and the
environmental contexts that optimize student engagement. Redesign of the
engineering course curriculum will incorporate a design thinking framework of
designing, ideating, prototyping, and testing; as well as the establishment of
an innovation space in which students can actively engage in innovation through
design projects. Fundamental components of design thinking that distinguish it
from conventional engineering design concepts are interdisciplinary
collaboration, imagination, and questioning. The innovation space will be open
and flexible so as to facilitate small group work, classroom-style instruction,
and auditorium-style presentations and seminars that can be webcast out or in
from global locations. The project's objectives will be accomplished by engaging
faculty, industry, and university partners as mentors and as facilitators of
workshops in the newly-created innovation space. This project seeks to equip all
engineering students at Howard University, most of whom are from groups severely
underrepresented in engineering, with the skills and opportunities needed to
become innovative engineers.