* 1436081
* GOALI: In-Situ Plasma Cleaning of Optics: Building a Fundamental Understanding of the Etch Process in a Complex Plasma Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* David Ruzic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 287,165.00

Extreme-Ultraviolet (EUV) light holds strong promise as a light source for
producing tomorrow's complex and compact integrated circuits. Unfortunately,
practical economic use is currently precluded by low cost-efficiency for high
volume manufacturing. The EUV source uses tin (Sn) droplets to produce the
13.5nm light, which is collected and transmitted into a scanner by collector
optics. Sn deposits on the collector surface and degrades the EUV reflectivity.
Cleaning Sn using hydrogen radicals is a potential solution. This Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports the
Applied Research Institute at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign to
perform basic research in collaboration with its industrial partners to advance
the fundamental understanding of the underlying physics and chemistry of Sn etch
process using hydrogen radicals. This research will prove to be a milestone in
the success of the next generation chip manufacturing process, which will enable
a cost effective implementation of the technology to print smarter chips and
eventually improve the speed and performance of electronic devices. An
overarching goal of this research is the integration of research findings into
academic courses, student involvement with industry, and attracting young
scientists into the vast field of plasma engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a hypothesis-driven, theoretical and experimental study of Sn
cleaning from optics in a complex plasma environment. It focuses on fundamental
understanding of reactive particle formation in hydrogen plasma, its arrival and
interaction with surfaces, adsorption mechanisms, bond formation with the
surface to be etched, and then finally the formation and desorption of product
molecules under the EUV source operating environment. The team will perform a
thorough computational analysis of the dependencies of hydrogen plasma
conditions and etch rate. Etching experiments will be run to validate the etch
rates predicted by the models. Collaborative industrial partners will help by
providing necessary equipment, metrologies and the plasma source to advance this
research. The research will answer fundamental questions in the field of plasma
material interaction, surface science, plasma processing and etching.