* 1436950
* Modeling Long-Time and Macroscopic Behavior of Complex Atomistic Systems with Application to Silicon-based Lithium Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Ortiz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2017
* USD 329,721.00

In a number of areas of application, the behavior of systems depends sensitively
on properties that pertain to the atomistic scale, i.e., the angstrom and
femtosecond scales. However, often the properties and behaviors of interest are
macroscopic and take place on the scale of centimeters to meters, and are
characterized by slow evolution on the scale of minutes to years. No
computationally-tractable atomistically-based models appear to be as yet
available to study such slow phenomena over time scales of the order of minutes
to years and in macroscopic samples while maintaining a strictly atomistic
description of the material. This project addresses this chronic gap in
predictive science. This approach offers unprecedented capability for the study
of device-level properties mediated by slow, coupled, thermal-mechanical-
chemical processes at the atomistic scale. Thus, beyond this application to Li-
ion batteries, this methodology may be expected to have far-reaching impact as
an enabling tool in applications requiring the careful accounting of atomic-
level processes simultaneously with the elucidation of macroscopic properties
over long time scales, e.g., stability of alloys and irradiated materials,
electromigration in interconnects, corrosion and environmentally-assisted
cracking, among others. The empirical atomic-level kinetic models, variational
meanfield approximation schemes, variational time-discretization algorithms and
spatial coarse-graining schemes developed under the project will be implemented
into a verified and validated high-performance computing solver, the Extended
Quasicontinuum (XQC) solver, for broad dissemination in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is concerned with the further
development and implementation of a novel multiscale analysis methodology. It
combines elements of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and kinetic and
approximation theory. This approach offers unprecedented capability for the
study of the long-term macroscopic behavior of complex multi-species atomistic
systems mediated by slow, coupled, thermal-mechanical-chemical processes at
atomistic scales. Application of the novel methodology to the investigation of
silicon lithiation, both in bulk and in nanowires (SiNW) is considered. The
potential use of silicon as a high energy-density anode material in Li-ion based
batteries is hampered by the extensive mechanical degradation that occurs during
lithiation. The current global market size for such storage, just for vehicle
applications, is estimated at $1.5 billion, and is expected to grow to by more
than 3,000% by the end of the decade. The ability to simulate silicon lithiation
predictively at the device level and over large numbers of charge/discharge
cycles is expected to enable the identification and assessment of novel nano-
engineered materials for Li battery applications.