* 1436626
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Theory-Enabled Development of 2D Metal Dichalcogenides as Active Elements of On-Chip Silicon-Integrated Optical Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Evan Reed, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 287,000.00

Title: DMREF/Collaborative Research: Development of Materials for On-Chip
Silicon-Integrated Optical Communication &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
transfer rates between silicon electronic chips are reaching a limit that
prevents the continued development of high speed smart-phones, computers, and
internet devices. While silicon?s properties are excellent for electronic
devices, optical sources based on silicon are incapable of efficient, high-speed
communication. Within the framework of the Materials Genome Initiative, this
project will seek new materials and associated fabrication processes to overcome
this hurdle. Recently it has been shown that MDC materials, such as molybdenum
disulfide, can be grown in large-scale, high quality, atomically thin films on
silicon dioxide substrates. Theoretically, it is predicted that such materials
are semiconductors with a tunable, direct band gap that renders them far
superior for optical communication applications than silicon. This research
project intends to develop a theory-driven understanding of fabrication and
control of such atomically-thin materials towards validating their use as on-
chip light sources for future optical interconnects for integrated circuits. The
PIs have an excellent track of record on promoting STEM activities within their
respective institution. They intend to work with high school students,
undergraduate and graduate students, and involve students from underrepresented
groups in the planned research. The outreach activities proposed in this project
are solid and will definitely have a broader societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to create a
continuous knowledge link between atomistic material theory and chemical
material synthesis of a variety of 2D metal dichalcogenidies and their alloys as
a foundation for discovering, synthesizing, and accelerating the next generation
of on-chip laser devices suitable for applications in telecommunication and
data-processing. It builds on recent findings by the principal investigators
such as strain-stabilization of different metal&lt;br/&gt;dichalcogenide phases,
mm-scale growth of continuous single-layer molybdenum disulfide films, and loss
management and demonstration of laser devices featuring optical mode sizes below
the diffraction limit of light. The research collaborators will combine
theoretical screening of a broad range of materials and predictive modeling of
substrate stabilization of their structure, with development of growth methods
for a diverse set of materials, and application-near functional evaluation on a
waveguide tested. This project brings together an interdisciplinary set of
methods ranging from analytical and numerical simulation, to chemical process
development and the design and characterization of on-chip integrated laser
devices. This vertical, theory-based integration of materials development
methods realizes the goal of the Materials Genome Initiative. Success of this
project will provide input to the field of functional 2D materials for years to
come that will be instrumental in the development of novel photonic integrated
circuits, and potentially sensors.