* 1436263
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Controlling Hierarchical Nanostructures in Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Craig Hawker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,084,042.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry through the Designing Materials
to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program. Organic polymers are
pervasive in modern everyday life, and they have enabled advances in areas
ranging from health care to computer technology. The great promise of polymers
is their versatility. For example, recent systems have been designed to conduct
electricity. Conducting polymers are potential game-changers because they can be
dissolved in solvents and printed like inks on flexible substrates for low-cost
electronics and sensors. Fabrication of electronic devices using conducting
polymers requires the ability to predict how the printing process affects their
performance. The PIs and students on this project will develop new materials
using an approach in which computational methods guide the design and accelerate
the discovery of high performance conducting polymers. The project will have
significant impact on the future scientific and engineering workforce with
graduate student researchers gaining critical new skills in combining computer
simulations and physical experiments. The research team will also perform
outreach to the public through educational activities in local K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Charge transport in
semiconducting polymers is typically described as two-dimensional due to the
molecular packing structure in many ordered materials. Recent observations
suggest that hierarchical nanostructures form in semiconducting polymers and
suggest the possibility of multi-dimensional transport pathways. This project
aims to accelerate discovery of materials through feedback between computational
and experimental results. The research team will develop highly efficient
computational methodologies to predict processing methods and materials that
lead to hierarchical 3D-transport pathways. A goal of the research is to develop
new computational methodologies for massively parallel computations to take
advantage of advances in computational hardware. New conjugated polymers will be
designed with guidance from theory, and physical measurements will be made to
benchmark the computational framework, in order to understand the evolution of
structure during solution casting. Scalable models to understand the role of
domain boundaries in charge transport in semiconducting polymers will be
developed using structural maps from electron microscopy. Open source codes and
large datasets for benchmarking computational studies of charge transport in
semiconducting polymers are a focus of the research.