* 1436259
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parenting, Family Communication, and Children's Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Ross Matsueda, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2016
* USD 3,554.00

This project examines how family conditions reduce the effects of other risk
factors associated with childhood delinquency, violence, and victimization.
Recent research on families deals extensively with the effects of child agency
on parent/child interactions. To date research in criminology has yet to
incorporate these insights from developmental psychology into explanations of
childhood delinquency, violence, and victimization. The funding for this project
is used to assemble two separate data sets (the Denver Youth Survey and the
National Survey of Adolescent Health) to examine whether and how the quality of
child/parent interactions leads to resiliency for children in environments where
delinquency, violence and victimization might otherwise occur. The project will
contribute to a greater understanding of how parenting practices can produce
positive child behavioral outcomes across a wide variety of circumstances.

Our specific objectives are to (1) correctly specify a dynamic model of parent-
child interactions, and use it to predict child outcomes; (2) to account for the
contextual and conditioning effects of family, parent, and child characteristics
on parent-child interactions and child outcomes; and (3) to extend our model to
predict not only youth delinquency and violence, but also victimization, child
problem-solving behavior,self-esteem, and participation in delinquent peer
groups. We will estimate structural equation models and exponential random graph
models across our two large longitudinal survey samples to test the
generalizability of our theoretical model. Our samples contain a core of common
measures of key concepts such as parenting, parent-child-interactions, family
contexts, and child outcomes, as well as providing several unique advantages
that allow for a complete examination of our theoretical model.

This research project will make several contributions to the study of
delinquency, violence, and family dynamics. First, we argue that child
disclosure informs parental discipline, and models that identify discipline as
controlled only by parents are miss-specified and biased. Criminological
research has yet to include child agency in models of parenting and child
outcomes. Second, our model accounts for contextual risk factors, such as
parental crime and incarceration, early child aggression, and family violence.
By examining these factors simultaneously, and exploring how they are
interrelated, we can determine whether these risk factors are cumulative,
dependent on presence of other risk factors such as poverty, or negatively
interact with one another, all of which is presently unclear. The inclusion of
these contextual variables will also allow us to test other criminological
theories, such as differential social organization theory, with our parenting
model. Third, testing our model across two large data sets allows for a more
complete look at a variety of risk factors and extends our analyses to
populations that are not only high risk for violence and victimization, or
family stress, but are also underrepresented, both in terms of ethnic
composition and socioeconomic outcomes in psychological studies that are at the
forefront of research on child development, parenting, and problem behavior.