* 1436335
* An Adaptive Mode-Division-Multiplexing Network for Quasi-Distributed Gas Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Yong Xu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 395,000.00

Multi-location gas sensing is critical for a large number of civil
infrastructure and environmental applications, including energy grid monitoring
and the surveillance of dangerous processes such as carbon sequestration or
areas such as coal mines and landfills. For such applications, which generally
involve a harsh sensing environment with significant safety concerns, fiber
optic gas sensing is often the only solution. This is because fiber gas sensors
consume little energy and have no need for batteries or other potentially
"unsafe" electrical power supplies. Traditionally, it has been difficult to
combine a large number of fiber gas sensors together for multi-location sensing.
This project aims to overcome this challenge by developing an adaptive gas
sensor network, where the behavior of each gas sensor can be individually tuned
by changing the spatial profiles of optical signals within the sensor network.
This makes large scale integration of 10 to 100 gas sensors possible. As a
result, this project has the potential to significantly reduce per-sensor-cost
for gas sensing and impact a myriad of engineering applications that involve
explosive or dangerous gases. This project also includes a comprehensive
education and outreach plan targeting underrepresented groups at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches for fiber optic gas sensing rely
on using single mode fibers. This project aims to overturn this conventional
paradigm, and to demonstrate a first-of-its-kind adaptive mode-division-
multiplexing (MDM) gas sensor network based on few mode fibers. In this
approach, the sensing characteristics of individual gas sensors can be
dynamically modulated by using adaptive optics (AO) to control the mode
composition of interrogation signals. This sensor network relies on the highest
order fiber mode for gas detection and utilizes the lowest order fiber mode for
low loss signal transmission. This unique design allows one to resolve the
fundamental conflict between high gas sensitivity, which requires large gas
attenuation for individual sensors, and large scale multiplexing, which demands
low-loss power transmission for the entire sensor network. Specifically, this
project aims to experimentally demonstrate an AO-MDM sensor network that
contains at least 10 gas sensors for acetylene monitoring, and theoretically
explore the possibility of constructing a highly multiplexed sensor network with
100 or even 1000 gas sensors.