* 1436064
* Quantification of Structural Transformations during Heat Treatment in Ultra-high Carbon Steels
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Yoosuf Picard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 10/31/2017
* USD 475,810.00

Steel is a metallic material with iron and carbon as the primary components. The
properties of steel can vary greatly depending on carbon level and processing.
Steels with ultra-high carbon levels behave more like ceramics than metals; they
are extremely hard and very brittle. These steels are primarily utilized in tool
components to shape softer steels and other metals, but could see greater usage
if their brittleness can be reduced. To date, brittleness has been reduced by
cycles of heating and forming, methods that are challenging to implement on a
large production scale. It is possible to decrease brittleness in these
materials by simply heating alone; however existing heat treatments are energy
intensive and far from optimized. This award supports fundamental research on
the structural transformation behavior of ultra-high carbon steels during
heating. The research utilizes novel experimental methods to observe changes to
the steel structure in real time during heating and to develop new metrics that
can be used to optimize processing and properties. These fundamental studies
will lead to improved heat treatment strategies that will enable production of
ultra-high carbon steels with improved combinations of properties while also
reducing energy usage. Results from this research will also introduce materials
science undergraduate students to fundamental topics of modern steelmaking and
an outreach component will expose middle and high school students to digital
image analysis and methods used to characterize materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-high carbon steels can exhibit superior hardness and
strength compared to other steels of lower carbon contents. However, the high
fraction of carbides in these steels render them too brittle for many structural
applications. This project seeks to investigate microstructural transformations
at elevated temperatures in steels containing ultrahigh carbon contents (1.7-2.3
weight percent) and the impact of these transformations on mechanical
properties: toughness, hardness, strength and ductility. This study will apply
in-situ confocal scanning laser microscopy and ex-situ electron microscopy to
study and quantify microstructural evolution, specifically examining the effects
of time, temperature and alloy chemistry on carbide dissolution kinetics and
their final distribution in heat treated steels. A comprehensive assessment of
important mechanical properties will be correlated to the final microstructural
state. These pursuits will result in an analytical model that can accurately
describe carbide dissolution and precipitation behavior at temperature ranges
employed for heat treatments of ultra-high carbon steels.