* 1436758
* Recycled Concrete Aggregates for New Concrete Buildings for sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Yahya Kurama, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 303,000.00

Concrete is one of the most versatile building materials and has facilitated
industrial growth in the last century. However, it is difficult to get rid of
concrete waste when concrete buildings are demolished. Crushed old concrete is
recycled as aggregates in highway pavements but it is not used in buildings and
bridges because of uncertainties of performance of new concrete. If crushed old
concrete can be recycled in new building construction it would help in getting
rid of waste and preserve natural riverbed rocks. This project will pursue
research in classifying old crushed concrete for its use as aggregate in new
concrete for buildings and bridges. Properties such as strength, durability,
long-term deformation will be determined for concrete made with recycled
concrete. As the nations infrastructure goes through upgrading, the volume of
available waste concrete will increase. Use of this waste concrete in new
concrete will reduce environmental impact of storing the waste and preserving
natural environment of riverbeds.

Structural concrete made with recycled concrete aggregates can have significant
variability in the behavior of buildings and bridges regarding deformations,
creep and durability. The project will pursue experimental and analytical
research to seek answers to these questions: (1) what are the economic and
environmental benefits of recycling concrete in structures? (2) what are the
long-term service load and design load performances of structural members,
including prestressed concrete members? (3) how do recycled concrete aggregates
affect durability? and (4) what modifications, if any, need to be made to
crushed concrete to enhance performance of new concrete? The project will assess
mechanical properties of concrete made with crushed concrete as aggregates.
Also, beams and columns made of recycled concrete will be tested in laboratory
to establish performance of structural components. Ultimately, the project will
develop performance-based requirements, mix design guidelines, acceptance tests,
and structural design/analysis/construction guidelines to achieve acceptable
performance of concrete members using recycled concrete aggregates.