* 1436476
* RUI/Collaborative Research: The Effects of Age related Changes in Muscle Extracellular Matrix on Muscle Performance and Gait
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Emanuel Azizi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2018
* USD 297,724.00

Muscle extracellular matrix, the connective tissue surrounding muscle fibers,
has been shown to change with age, disuse, and neuromuscular disease. These
conditions cause muscle fibrosis-a pathological increase in muscle extra
cellular matrix. This work aims to understand the basic functional implications
of muscle fibrosis at the level of tissues, organs and whole organisms. In
addition to examining the mechanics of the system at various levels of
biological organization, the project will combine complementary modeling and
experimental approaches to better understand the fundamental properties of
fibrotic muscle. The broad scientific goal is to elucidate the implications of
fibrosis for muscle function, and to examine how such changes relate to
deficiencies in gait and movement. In addition, outreach efforts will broaden
research experiences for underrepresented groups and aid in the development of
interdisciplinary lesson plans in high-school science curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extracellular matrix (ECM) of skeletal muscle is known
to play a critical role in the passive elasticity and stiffness of muscle fibers
and fascicles, but it remains unclear how variation in the properties of the ECM
are likely to affect contractile performance, in vivo function, and gait. The
project will integrate empirical studies using a well-established animal model
system for aging (F344xBN rats) with modeling approaches to examine how the
remodeling of the ECM impacts performance. The first objective will be to use
isolated muscle fascicles and laser diffraction to characterize how age-related
fibrosis alters the capacity of muscle fibers to produce mechanical work. The
hypothesis is that increased ECM stiffness limits a muscle's ability to perform
mechanical work by limiting radial expansion of muscle fibers and fascicles. The
second objective is to use high-speed x-ray imaging to examine how muscle
fibrosis affects muscle performance during normal locomotion. The project will
test the hypothesis that increased muscle stiffness restricts muscle to operate
at relatively short lengths, resulting in decreased force production in vivo.
Finally, an examination of the effects of increasing passive stiffness on gait
mechanics. Using empirical data from rats to drive forward dynamic gait
simulations, the PIs will explicitly link the isolated effects of passive muscle
stiffness on joint mechanics and whole-body performance. By integrating
empirical studies of tissues, organs and whole organisms with model simulations
the work will elucidate how variation in ECM properties affects performance
across levels of biological organization.