* 1436100
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Microphysical Processes and Turbulence Intermittency in  Droplet Coalescence in Warm Cumulus Clouds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Sarma Rani, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 173,642.00

PI: Rani, Sarma L. /Koch, Donald L. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1436100 /
1435953&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed study is to explore the
formation of droplets and the production of rain from a cumulus cloud. This is a
topic relevant for the prediction of rainfall and of hazards such as tornados
and flash flooding. Warm cumulus clouds exert significant influence on the
climate system of the earth by processing atmospheric aerosols, interacting with
electromagnetic radiation from the sun and earth, and redistributing earth's
water and energy through the hydrologic cycle. This study addresses two central
outstanding questions in the current understanding of warm rain production,
namely, the mechanisms leading to the formation of fast-growing 'statistically
fortunate' drops, and the growth of the cloud droplets, both of which hasten the
'colloidal instability' of the cloud, resulting in precipitation. To understand
the effects of turbulence, it is essential to gain insights into the
interactions between large-scale processes such as turbulent entrainment, mixing
and intermittency, and microscale processes such as particle clustering, droplet
relative velocities and collision efficiency. In terms of outreach and
education, it is proposed to involve graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research at the confluence of turbulence, cloud and particle
physics. The PIs plan to reach out to students at Alabama A&amp;M University and
Huntsville High School to encourage the students to pursue undergraduate and/or
graduate degrees in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborating
PIs will conduct a multiscale investigation, in which a Large Eddy Simulation
(LES) will be used to model the whole cloud and to feed energy to a Direct
Numerical Simulation (DNS) model, in order to explain how very small droplets
appear and grow in size within a cloud. The hypothesis is that intermittency in
turbulent shear and flow acceleration are driving the formation and the
coalescence of the droplets. The proposed work is for high Reynolds number cloud
turbulence at practical scales. Using the proposed energy transfer method,
inertial-range LES turbulence intermittency information will be included in the
DNS. The theoretical research will focus on developing stochastic models for
both microscale and macroscale cloud physics including: 1) Detailed microscale
models for the local flow field in the vicinity of bidisperse interacting drops
with statistical properties characteristic of cloud Reynolds numbers; 2) Effects
of particle inertia and differential sedimentation on the stochastic flow field
?seen? by the drops; 3) Effects of non-continuum, van der Waals and
electrostatic interactions between drops on their collision efficiency; and 4)
Macroscale model that accounts for the effects of turbulence intermittency and
eddy mixing on the stochastic kinetics of droplet growth. The proposed research
is expected to shed light on aerosol-cloud interactions that are important in
generating precipitation and in affecting climate patterns.