* 1436856
* Special Topics in Dynamical Systems: A New Mathematical Framework for the Design of Switching and Continuous Control Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Oleg Makarenkov, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 186,855.00

Special Topics in Dynamical Systems: A New Mathematical Framework for the Design
of Switching and Continuous Control Strategies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers
often change a physical process by manipulating an external parameter to get the
response they desire. It is hard to create a controller that can continuously
change the external parameter to get the desired results, so often controllers
have only a limited amount of options. This limited option system is called a
switching control. For example, in an anti-lock braking system, the controller
can either open or close valves completely to relieve pressure in the brakes
rather than by degrees. While the mathematics of each of these stages is simple,
the design of interplay between the two valves is a challenging mathematical
problem. This project provides the knowledge that engineers will use when
designing switching control strategy that move the dynamics toward a required
robust regime. Not only will this project improve designs for simple systems
like anti-lock braking systems, but also in complex systems like a robot walking
on two legs. When a robot walks on two legs, it must be able to change its
center of mass, alternate leg and knee motion and account for the nearly
infinite number of repeated collisions the feet have with the ground. In
addition to implications in the robotics and automotive industry, the theory
developed in this project is relevant in fluid mechanics (wind and river flow,
where the control is continuous, but nonsmooth), ecology (grazing management),
and medicine (intermittent therapies, such as hormone therapies) where, as in
robotics, the systems are complex. This project offers training for mathematics
students interested in collaboration with researchers in other fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the intrinsically nonsmooth
(i.e. new) aspects of the dynamics of differential equations with
nondifferentiable right-hand terms. The current theory is incapable to predict
the emergence (bifurcation) of complex oscillations, if the points of
discontinuity of the right-hand side (switchings) form discontinuous manifolds,
if the trajectories feature infinite number of discontinuities (collisions) in
finite time (chattering), if a trajectory develops into a funnel of curves over
time (i.e. makes long-term prediction impossible), or if one smooths the
discontinuities of the model (i.e. introduces the slow-fast dynamics). These
four mechanisms describe the four objectives of the project because they are the
four central routes for intrinsically nonsmooth attractive regimes to occur in
nonsmooth control applications. To achieve the goal, such chapters of the field
as dimension reduction, normal forms and bifurcation theory will be
significantly advanced.