* 1436254
* Collaborative Research:   Dynamics of Cross-shore Thermally Driven Exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Kristen Davis, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 385,508.00

In contrast to well-studied continental shelves, relatively little is known
about cross-shelf circulation on island coastlines typically characterized by
steep bathymetry and narrow shelves. Cross-shelf circulation results in the
exchange of water masses and controls the distribution of heat, salt, nutrients,
contaminants, sediment, and planktonic organisms like larvae or phytoplankton in
the coastal ocean. In addition, in the case of coral reefs, the horizontal
redistribution of heat by cross-shelf circulation moderates the daily variations
in temperature experienced by coral polyps, thus potentially reducing thermal
stress. This study will use existing data sets from two locations and high
resolution numerical modeling to study the thermally driven exchange flows and
how they vary with cross-shore distance and are modulated by swell energy, shelf
slope, nearshore morphology, wind regimes and seasonal
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations at two reefs at Eilat, Israel and
Oahu, Hawaii have highlighted the role of thermally forced baroclinic exchange
in cross-shore transport. At each site, daytime conditions were characterized by
offshore flow at the surface in response to increased temperatures in shallower
water nearshore. Nighttime cooling resulted in offshore flow near the bottom.
Significant differences in flow response at the two sites indicate distinct
dynamic regimes, however. Time series data from Oahu further indicates that the
exchange provides a first order contribution to the overall cross-shore
exchange. This study will examine the dynamical structure of thermally driven
flows and establish the extent of their influence and generality for tropical
coasts by leveraging existing data sets in a comprehensive historical analysis
coupled with high-resolution numerical modeling spanning a wide parameter space
ranging from a relatively simple wedge case with generally two-dimensional
bathymetry (similar to Eilat) to a complex (more typical) forereef-lagoon
environment with significant wave forcing (Kilo Nalu Observatory, Oahu). It will
provide fundamental understanding of cross-shore transport processes in reef
environments and should reveal the extent to which thermally driven baroclinic
exchange contributes to cross-shore circulation for tropical coastlines in
general. Improved understanding should lead to the construction of models
capable of making accurate predictions of these flows. The results of the
proposed research will have particular applicability to ecologically rich and
economically important coral reefs and other steep, tropical, coastal
environments, such as understanding how reef ecosystems will respond to
environmental changes like ocean acidification or rising ocean temperatures, as
well as to efforts to protect them like the establishment of marine reserves.