* 1436192
* Studies on the Use of Atomically Thin Films for Controlling Friction and Adhesion at Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2018
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2018
* USD 336,724.00

Control of friction and adhesion are widely recognized problems that impact a
broad range of materials applications from gears and engine components, to
medical implants for joint replacements, to micro- and nano-scaled machine
technologies. The drive to design advanced lubrication schemes not only
facilitates bringing new technologies online in these areas, but can also play a
critical role in terms of improved machine efficiencies, where aggregate energy
losses to friction and wear in many sectors of the economy contribute greatly to
the daunting challenges of meeting US energy needs. Graphene, a single-atom-
thick film of carbon, offers a potential solution to many of the challenges in
controlling friction and adhesion at interfaces due to its exceptional
electrical and mechanical properties. The majority of the scientific studies on
the frictional properties of graphene, however, are on perfectly smooth,
idealized surfaces. This award supports fundamental research to understand the
properties of atomically thin materials such as graphene in realistic
interfaces, which are not perfectly smooth but have fine roughness. These
experimental studies will be used to determine what aspects control the
properties in atomically thin films of graphene, and how these may be engineered
to meet technological needs. Students involved in this project receive
multidisciplinary training in materials science, engineering, and surface
chemistry and physics, developing proficiency in these areas that are critical
for the continued development of US technological competitiveness.

The influence of real surface characteristics like surface roughness and
adhesive interactions on graphene-based lubricants will be investigated to
determine how surfaces and graphene may be engineered to meet technological
needs. Importantly, how such materials bind to substrates with controlled
nanoscopic roughness will be examined by creating films of fused silica
nanoparticles, where surface roughness is determined by particle size. Analogous
studies with gold nanoparticulate films will be used to address these same
questions for conductive surfaces. Atomic force microscopy and Raman
microspectroscopy will be used to understand how these materials conform to
substrates with nanoscale roughness, and how this influences its tribochemical
reactivity and frictional characteristics. These studies will be paired with
molecular dynamics simulations of graphene in asperity contacts under analogous
conditions, providing atomically resolved detail of the chemical interactions
and mechanical contributions to changes in the chemical, structural, mechanical,
and frictional properties of graphene in the asperity-asperity contacts that
dominate contact between technologically relevant surfaces.