* 1436972
* Targeted Infusion Project - Building on A Foundation of Stone: The Future Growth of Wiley College's Division of Sciences
* EHR,HRD
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Walter Shumate, Wiley College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Wiley College seeks to establish strategies to
strengthen and enhance STEM teaching, learning, and research and to improve
students' access to and retention in STEM programs. Eighty-five percent of the
students at Wiley College are African-American, with a growing number of
Hispanic students. Most of the students are first-generation college students
and/or are from low socio-economic backgrounds. The project seeks to implement
interventions and strategies to increase the academic preparation of the
students seeking graduate degrees in a STEM field that can serve as models for
other institutions with open admission policies.

The following activities are proposed: a six week long pre-college Mathematics
camp and new minors in Computer Sciences and Physics to strengthen students'
quantitative skills; an interdisciplinary STEM journal club and an undergraduate
research program to prepare students for graduate studies; and professional
development for faculty and support staff. Wiley College seeks to share and
disseminate evidence-based best practices and findings on retention, academic
engagement, and enhancement of STEM undergraduate majors, particularly at
conferences for open door admission institutions.