* 1436607
* New Scalable Nanomanufacturing Technology: Large-Area Nanoimprint Master Fabrication without Using EBL by Innovative Multi-Set Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Stephen Chou, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Two central challenges in nanomanufacturing are to generate complex nanopatterns
over large areas without using electron beam lithography or similar approaches
that are based on a serial writing method, and to generate them at low cost.
Large-area complex nanopatterns have enormous technological importance and many
commercial applications impacting a broad range of multi-billion dollar
industries. However, currently, the most advanced lithography, which is the
workhorse in semiconductor chip industry, is extremely expensive and is limited
to a 12 inch diameter area, flat surfaces, and a period of about 30 nanometers.
This award supports research that explores new path-changing innovative
approaches to provide solutions to the above two challenges. The research will
uniquely combine knowledge and technologies from multiple disciplines to create
large-area nanopatterning. It will lead to new knowledge and technologies in the
fabrication of a broad range of large-area complex nanopatterns, and will
provide materials and technologies to enable many fields of study and
applications, such as, solar cells, solid state lighting, biotechnology, fuel
cells, data storage, optical communication, semiconductor integrated circuits,
and displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome the challenges in
nanomanufacturing, the research will explore a new innovative path-changing
approach, termed "multi-set nanopatterning" (MSN). MSN can generate complex
nanostructures over a large area without using electron beam lithography or
similar serial writing methods. The approach comprises of three innovative
nonconventional techniques and their creative superposition or multiple uses.
They are (i) Fourier nanoimprint patterning, (ii) edge-guided nanopatterning,
and (iii) nanostructure self-perfection. Each individual technique alone can
create complex nanostructures that could not be generated before, but, when they
are combined, they can generate far more complex nanopatterns over a large area
at low cost. The research will explore the science and technology of each method
and their combined use. Furthermore, the research will advance new approaches in
nanoimprint mold duplication and will use large area nanoplasmonics and roll-to-
roll nanoimprint as test-beds for technology development.