* 1436592
* GOALI: Online Defect Detection and Mitigation Method for Incipient Anomalies in Additive Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jaime Camelio, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Additive manufacturing offers significant advantages over conventional
manufacturing, with potential to fundamentally transform the state-of-the-art in
a variety of industries. Notwithstanding the enormous progress in current
additive manufacturing technologies, certain intractable quality issues persist.
This leads to considerable rework and high scrap rates, and thus poses
significant impediments for sustainability of additive manufacturing.
Consequently, there is a vital need to advance online methods for defect
detection in additive manufacturing processes, so that incipient process
anomalies can be identified, and possibly prevented, at an early stage during
manufacture. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
research project is anticipated to significantly advance the process monitoring
and control technology in additive manufacturing, leading to improved product
quality, enhanced process productivity, and higher profitability. Thus, outcomes
from this research will have substantial socioeconomic impacts. The scientific
findings from this research are extensible to many other advanced manufacturing
processes. Furthermore, this project also includes many educational components,
such as new course modules, and research experience for undergraduate students.
Exposing students to this multidisciplinary research will cultivate a diverse
and qualified workforce possessing the state-of-the-art technologies in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to resolve
critical quality issues in additive manufacturing by addressing two fundamental
research questions based on an integration of novel multi-phenomena sensing
techniques with advanced analytical approaches for sensor data fusion: (1) what
is the dynamic behavior of various process attributes, and how does this
behavior cause the onset of additive manufacturing process anomalies? and (2)
what are the causal linkages between additive manufacturing quality performance
and process variables? The objectives of the research include: (1)
quantitatively elucidate the fundamental relationships that connect process
abnormalities in additive manufacturing with features extracted from online
spatiotemporal sensor signals, i.e., achieve a mapping between the sensor
features with the evolving part defects in additive manufacturing, enabling
early detection of surface topography related defects; and (2) establish a model
correlating process conditions/settings with both continuous and attribute
product quality variables in additive manufacturing processes, and identify the
process variables which have significant effects on product quality, providing
valuable strategies for defect mitigation and implementation of close loop
control in future additive manufacturing systems. This research will utilize
prediction based process monitoring to tackle underlying complexity and
uncertainty in additive manufacturing processes.