* 1436120
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of an Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Education Laboratory (IMREL) at Fayetteville State University
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Cevdet Akbay, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 479,500.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Fayetteville State University will
implement a project entitled: Development of an Interdisciplinary Materials
Research and Education Laboratory. Materials Science is an interdisciplinary
field, studying materials synthesis and fabrication, processing, structures,
properties and applications. The project seeks to have an impact on over 500
undergraduate students through curricular improvements, improvements to the
research and education infrastructure, faculty engagement, and opportunities for
students to participate in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to (1) develop an interdisciplinary materials research and education
laboratory at to infuse materials science education into the curricula and to
enhance undergraduate students' participation in this field; (2) enhance the
institution's research and education infrastructure through laboratory equipment
modernization; (3) promote faculty engagement in research through
interdisciplinary collaborations; and (4) increase student enrollment and
graduation in chemistry and physics. The Materials Laboratory will allow faculty
and students to engage in research including X-ray radiation detection using
scintillator nanowires by a novel electron microscopy method, and ultraviolet
and infrared radiation detections using composition- and size-controllable
nanowires.