* 1437758
* Studies of Neutral Lipid Production in Model Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Brett Barney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Principal Investigator: Brett Barney&lt;br/&gt;Number:
1437758&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of microorganisms that make fats and oils
has significant potential to develop new routes for the production of
sustainable fuels and chemicals of commercial significance. In particular, wax
esters are a highly-valued class of oils used in cosmetics, pharmaceuticals,
fine lubricants, and fuels. Most commercial wax esters are synthesized from
petroleum, and thus there is a growing interest in developing biological systems
for the sustainable production of wax esters. The goal of this project is to
characterize and modify enzymes involved in the biological synthesis of natural
wax esters. The final enzyme in the wax ester production pathway is able to
utilize a large array of substrates to produce either wax esters, or smaller
esters with properties similar to biodiesel fuel. This project will explore the
chemistry involved in these biological processes, and further aims to develop
systems that alter the composition and enhance wax ester production using a
model microorganism. The results of these studies will provide important
insights into the enzymes and biochemical processes involved in these biological
oil production pathways, and identify the broad diversity of products that can
be produced utilizing sustainable biological production routes. The need for
shift for a petroleum based fuels to sustainable fuels is a topic of interest by
K-12 students the broader public, and the proposed activities include innovative
activities for outreach to these groups based on the research activities,
including Youtube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
fundamental understanding of lipid biosynthesis and accumulation in the model
bacterium Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8. Enzymes obtained from this species have
been found to be far more active than enzymes obtained from alternative hosts.
The first aspect of the research is related to detailed studies of several key
enzymes responsible for key steps in the biosynthesis of wax esters from the
fatty acyl-CoA pool. This will include studies to alter enzyme substrate
selectivity to tailor the production of specific compounds similar to biodiesel,
and general studies probing structural features of these enzymes. The second
aspect of the proposal deals with broader metabolism, and includes metabolic
studies using RNA-sequence experiments to monitor changes in the cell under
conditions of wax production versus wax degradation, both compared to growth
under exponential growth where no waxes are being produced. Additionally, key
genes will be deleted or altered to determine the effect this has on wax
production, especially in light of the redundancy of many of the genes for the
enzymes involved in this pathway. Finally, efforts to improve or alter the
production and quantities of waxes produced will be pursued in terms of
metabolic engineering of a model neutral-lipid accumulating bacterium. The need
for shift for a petroleum based fuels to sustainable fuels is a topic of
interest by K-12 students the broader public, and the proposed activities
include innovative activities for outreach to these groups based on the research