* 1437625
* Collaborative Research: A Collaborative Proposal for Supporting US Participation in ICMMES-2014 (New York City, USA, July 14 - 18, 2014)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Yiannis Andreopoulos, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The proposal seeks funds to partially cover travel expenses of graduate
students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior faculty members from
institutions in the United States to participate in the International Conference
for Mesoscopic Methods in Engineering and Science (ICMMES) that will be held
July 14-18, 2014 at CUNY in New York City. The main intellectual merit of this
conference lies in the exchange of scientific ideas, presentations of cutting
edge research, and exposure to a richly diverse array of topics in the area of
mesoscopic of fluid dynamics. The conference organization is in direct response
to the growing interest in multi-scale and multi-physics phenomena observed in
nano- or micro-systems and biological systems, and the increasing importance of
computational science to research in these disciplines. The conference will be
attended by both prominent and young scientists in fluid dynamics from around
the world. Topics for the ICMMES conference series include modeling and
numerical schemes based on mesoscopic and kinetic methods and their analysis and
applications to areas that include (i) Computational fluid dynamics (CFD),
including direct numerical simulations (DNS), large-eddy simulations (LES), and
turbulence modeling;(ii) Rheology for complex fluids and soft matter such as
bio-fluids, suspensions, multi-phase and multi-component fluids, non-Newtonian
fluids, and electro-rheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR) fluids (smart
fluids);(iii) Nano-scale phenomena involving non-continuum, surface-dominated,
low-Reynolds-number, (iv) non-Newtonian, multi-scale and multi-physics effects.
Examples are complex flows through porous media, gaseous flows in micro-devices,
electrokinetic-capillary phenomena and droplets and bubbles in micro-fluidics;
(v) Computational methods for multi-scale and multi-physics such as (turbulent)
flow-structure interactions and thermo-chemically nonequilibrium flows, reactive
flows and combustion, and radiation heat transfer; (vi) Algorithms for parallel
high performance computing (PHPC) with engineering applications;(vii) Special
computer hardware (e.g., general purpose graphic processing units or GPGPUs).

The conference will foster cross-fertilization of ideas among researchers and
will address challenges involved in advancing the field in the near future. The
financial support will be used to increase participation of US students and
young scientists who would not otherwise be able to afford to travel to the
meeting and pay associated costs. Special consideration will be given to under-
represented minorities, women, persons with disabilities, and those in
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) and Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIi).