* 1437168
* Development of Low-Cost and Portable Semiconductor Laser Based Evanescent-Wave THz Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sushil Kumar, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,000.00

Many molecules have characteristic spectral fingerprints at terahertz
frequencies, which makes this frequency range unique for applications in
spectroscopic sensing of chemical and biological species. However, progress in
development of terahertz sensors is lacking due to the challenges associated
with generation and detection of terahertz waves. Quantum-cascade lasers are the
most powerful solid-state sources of terahertz radiation that have been
developed in the past decade. However, they are required to be cooled much below
room-temperature for operation, which makes it challenging to implement
conventional optical sensing techniques with such lasers. This award will
support development of a low-cost and compact terahertz sensor instrument based
on arrays of chip-scale terahertz lasers for broadband spectroscopic sensing of
solid or liquids. A unique "evanescent-wave" sensing scheme will allow
measurement of terahertz properties of the analyte placed in ambient conditions
while the laser chip is cooled inside a portable cryocooler for operation. A
successful demonstration has the potential to spawn development of affordable
commercial sensors at terahertz frequencies that would find applications in cell
biology, process engineering, crystal engineering, pharmaceutical quality
control, identification of counterfeit drugs, identification of explosives, and
even drug discovery. Educational opportunities in the area of photonics and
quantum-mechanics will be facilitated at various levels including that for
elementary and middle-school students and engineering undergraduates. The
project will also enable opportunities for interdisciplinary research across
different academic departments of the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop an intracavity evanescent-wave terahertz spectroscopic
sensor with integrated arrays of terahertz quantum-cascade lasers on a
semiconductor chip that would interact with an analyte in either liquid or
solid-phase. A key characteristic of such lasers is that the evanescent-mode of
the laser cavity can extend few millimeters above the appropriately designed
cavities, which could therefore interact with analyte placed in ambient
conditions while it is not in contact with the cooled laser chip. The resonant
frequency of the laser interrogates the complex permittivity of the analyte. The
fact that electronic non-linear mixing still works at terahertz frequencies, on-
chip mixing will be utilized to efficiently down-convert the sensed terahertz
signal to microwave frequency region. Hence, all that is needed to record the
sensed data is a hand-held microwave spectrum analyzer. The need for expensive
terahertz detectors as well as a terahertz spectrometer is completely
eliminated, whereas the functionality attained can be similar to or better than
that from many advanced spectroscopy techniques.