* 1437933
* Primary Emissions and Atmospheric Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation from Coal Combustion and Coal-Biomass Cofiring.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Pratim Biswas, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 331,438.00

1437933&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary Emissions and
Atmospheric Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation from Coal Combustion and Coal-
Biomass Cofiring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been recently discovered that
along with known emissions from coal combustion and coal-biomass cofiring (e.g.,
greenhouse gases, refractory particles), organic aerosol can also be directly
emitted as primary organic aerosol or produced in the atmosphere as secondary
organic aerosol from aging of volatile organic compounds emitted from
inefficient combustion/pyrolysis processes. Atmospheric organic aerosols have a
significant impact on human health and global climate, and increased emissions
in developing nations will have transport-driven implications, even for those
nations that have employed improved emissions technologies. Before a prediction
can be made on the extent of future organic aerosol emissions, it is first
required to understand associated particle formation mechanisms and secondary
organic aerosol formation potential at a fundamental level across a range of
fuels, combustion efficiencies, and photochemical atmospheric ages; this
understanding is the objective of this project. To meet Missouri's need for
increased science and engineering education (MO is an EPSCoR state), a novel
STEM-based Peer Mentoring Pipeline Program will be established to activate Grade
6 through PhD level research and education of ambient air quality and control
technologies. Research projects involving air sampling (using custom sampling
kits) in the presence and absence of a control technology (portable air
purifiers) and subsequent sample analysis, data processing, and reporting will
educate all participants on the science, technology, and impact of pollution and
control technologies. Here, students gain mentoring experience and observe the
strength and impact of outreach activities, increasing their likelihood of
incorporating these types of activities in their careers as they move up the
mentoring pipeline. A new Peer Mentoring Pipeline Program for research and
education on air quality and pollution control will be implemented for
underrepresented youth in St. Louis schools. Research and outreach results will
be broadly disseminated through: national conferences, student groups, and
graduate/ undergraduate courses in Aerosol Science &amp; Technology /
Atmospheric Science / Climate / Thermodynamics, and results will be made
publicly available through peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of this project are aimed at
characterizing new particle formation mechanisms from combustion/pyrolysis of
coal and coal-biomass mixtures, determining associated secondary organic aerosol
formation potential and organic aerosol evolution in the atmosphere, and to
increase education and awareness of the need for pollution control technologies.
Methods involve a novel suite of lab-scale furnaces/flames operating together
with a novel suite of chemical and physical measurements on gas and particle
emissions for a range of fuels and combustion/pyrolysis conditions.
Additionally, a photochemical reactor will be employed to test the secondary
organic aerosol formation potential of emissions over a range of atmospheric
ages. Models for new particle formation and atmospheric oxidative evolution will
be constructed. At the conclusion of this project, metrics will be available for
new particle formation in combustion/pyrolysis systems operating with various
fuels and at various degrees of efficiency. Atmospheric secondary organic
aerosol formation potentials and regional/global climate impact will be better
understood for a major global source of emissions that has not been previously
investigated at this fundamental level, yet evidence for its strong
environmental impact has already been observed and will continue to increase in
developing regions of the world.