* 1437810
* Bio-oil Production and Upgrading in Electromagnetic Fields Using Supported Nanostructured Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Daniel Hayes, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,363.00

Abstract Title: Bio-oil Production and Upgrading in Electromagnetic Fields Using
Supported Nanostructured Catalysts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of
commercially viable bio-fuels from pyrolysis bio-oils requires improvement in
processing technology, particularly with respect to upgraded product stability
and catalyst lifetime. Catalyst effectiveness is the limiting factor. Based on
studies performed through a previous EAGER award, Professors Dorin Boldor and
Daniel Hayes at the Louisiana State University believe they have an approach to
improve the situation. By utilizing direct heating of only the metal particle
supported nanoscale catalysts, bio-organic polymers and precursors are rapidly
broken down and converted into higher quality oil with extremely high yield
compared to state-of-the-art pyrolysis techniques. In contrast to current
generation reactor design where the reactor sidewall is heated and the catalyst
acts as a heat sink, in this system the oscillating magnetic field from RF
induction coils or microwave sources induce eddy currents on the surface of the
supported catalyst resulting in induction heating where the metallic core of the
catalyst acts as a heat source for pyrolysis and the catalyst works most
efficiently for product upgrading. The single step process is expected to be
more energy efficient and provide a greater yield of high value product while
extending the life of catalyst. Additionally, this process can efficiently use a
variety of organic polymers as feedstock. Materials such as recycled plastic
bottles, wood chips or agricultural waste can be turned into high value bio-oil.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to be functionally useful, pyrolysis oil needs to
be catalytically upgraded and stabilized, usually in reactors operating at high
temperature and pressure. During upgrading, unstable molecules have a tendency
to re-polymerize into higher-molecular weight compounds, which, coupled with the
residual phosphorus and sulfur (native to the biomass), tend to inhibit the
catalyst active sites, requiring frequent maintenance and reducing catalyst
lifetime. Inhibition of catalytic sites is thermodynamically favored in
conventional reactors, where the heat is carried by the bio-oil vapors, with the
catalyst bed acting as a heat sink. Thus, molecular migration is favored to
proceed toward the catalyst surface, and is impeded from moving away from the
surface. From the perspective of controlling (i.e. accelerating) reactions and
optimizing the process while prolonging the catalyst life, it is preferable to
rationally design a catalyst-pyrolysis process that is able to generate
thermodynamically favorable molecular transport where the molecules on the
product side migrate away from the reaction surface. In order to achieve this
goal, it is desirable to reverse the thermal flux from the carrier reactants in
vapor phase, using the catalyst surface, or logically its support, as a heat
source. The proposed approach includes a study of biomass pyrolysis at various
temperatures, in conjunction with upgrading in electromagnetic fields using
surface supported nanoscale metallic and zeolite catalysts. The results and
process performance will be evaluated by quantitative and qualitative
measurements of the produced bio-oil, char, and non-condensable gases from
different biomass; by evaluating the catalyst performance and quality after
repeated experiments; and by providing data for a techno-economic and
engineering analysis in order to determine the feasibility of scaling up the
process.