* 1437865
* Collaborative Research: A Fundamental and Modeling Study of  Cluster-Induced Turbulence in Particle-Laden Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rodney Fox, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 222,368.00

The goal of the proposed study is to develop multiphase turbulence models based
on the kinetic theory for granular flows and utilizing high fidelity
simulations. Areas of application of these flows include engines, industrial
furnaces, fluidized beds for fossil and renewable energy conversion, and
chemical plants (chemical reactors, cracking units, etc.), all of which are
important for the competitiveness of the U.S. industry. The collaborating PIs
propose to offer a full implementation of their models and code into commercial
(Ansys Fluent) and public (OpenFOAM) platforms, as well as to make their
comprehensive database of detailed simulation results available to the research
community.

Currently available models for multiphase turbulence are often based on
phenomenological approaches requiring fine-tuning with experimental data. These
models have limited predictive capability, preventing their adoption in industry
or their generalization for research purposes. This proposal, however, aims at
developing and validating a consistent Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)
model that is grounded on first principles, and, thus, generalizable. The exact
RANS equations, as obtained from Kinetic Theory for granular flow, will be
integrated to obtain a set of coupled macroscale hydrodynamic equations, which
can then be averaged exactly. The terms that need to be approximated in order to
close the system of equations will then be obtained with high fidelity Euler-
Lagrange mesoscale simulations, already shown to predict accurately turbulent
particle-laden flows.

This award by the Fluid Dynamics Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by
CIF 21 Software Reuse Venture Fund Program of the CISE/ACI Division.