* 1437860
* A Forensic Approach Towards Biofilm Management
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Sharon Walker, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2019
* USD 335,136.00

Walker&lt;br/&gt;1437860&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Forensic Approach Towards
Biofilm Management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes are becoming one of the
technologies of choice for many applications in water and wastewater treatment.
However, membranes suffer from the formation of a biological film (biofilm) that
over time decreases their throughput or treatment efficiency. The development of
biofilm resistant surfaces has been an ongoing research objective for several
decades, with multiple strategies attempted with varying degrees of success.
However, to date, no truly biofilm resistant materials are commercially
available. In fact, many experts in the field are moving away from the notion
that truly biofilm resistant surfaces can even exist, and instead, better
biofilm management practices need to be developed. Current biofilm management
practices rely on chemical cleaning agents not specifically tailored for a given
biofilm, and therefore, cleaning strategies often rely on an iterative process
designed to test "what works". This project will explore the tailoring of
chemical cleaning strategies to specific biofilm and collector surface
attributes, with the purpose of transforming biofilm management practices from a
trial-and-error process to a scientifically grounded activity that relies on
deep understanding of the relationship between individual biofilm components,
collector surface properties, and different cleaning agents. This project will
improve the understanding of biofilm cleaning methods and study the fundamental
interactions between different elements of a microbial biofilm, collector
surface properties, and different cleaning agents with the goal of developing
transformative biofilm management practices. The outreach portion of this
proposed work seeks to integrate research and education. Specifically, the PIs
propose engaging veterans at Riverside Community College in the exciting world
of environmental science and engineering through summer internships. These
internships will provide experiential learning opportunities to both motivate
and inform the veterans in the opportunities in environmental engineering. At
the end of the summer internship, the Riverside Community College students will
present their work at the University of California Riverside, Undergraduate
Summer Research Symposium and at RCC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of the project are: 1) determination of the impact of representative
cleaning agents on individual biofilm components; 2) evaluation of the
interactions between collector surface characteristics and individual biofilm
components; 3) determination of the impact of residual components of biofilms
after microbial cleaning on re-fouling potential; and 4) optimization of
microbial management practices. These objectives will be met with a combination
of bacterial and surficial analysis techniques including a parallel plate flow
chamber, confocal microscopy, and impedance spectroscopy. It is expected that
this project will produce the following outcomes: 1) an understanding of the
interactions between specific cleaning agents and individual components of a
microbial biofilm that will aid in the design of more efficient cleaning
strategies for microbially fouled surfaces, such as water treatment membranes;
2) a better understanding of the fundamental relationship between surface
properties and individual biofilm components that will inform the engineering of
biofilm-prone surfaces, such as membranes; 3) an understanding of the impact of
residual biofilm components on the re-fouling of collector surfaces; and 4) a
transformative biofilm management strategy based on the forensic investigation
of biofouled properties coupled with a tailored cleaning approach optimized to
specific biofilm compositions. The expected outcomes can be applied in multiple
situations where biofouling is a major concern, enhancing the efficiency of
important industrial processes such as heat exchangers and membrane-based water
treatment processes.