* 1437296
* Altitude Control for Optimal Performance of Tethered Wind Energy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Christopher Vermillion, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 291,819.00

Tethered wind energy systems replace conventional rigid towers with flexible
cables, and can harness strong high-altitude winds using as little as 10 percent
of the material required by traditional turbines. Levelized costs for tethered
systems are estimated to be from $0.05 to $0.25 per kW-h, providing a cost-
competitive energy solution for remote off-grid communities, military bases, and
deep-water offshore locations. Tethered systems can easily change altitude,
allowing them to achieve optimal performance by finding the best available wind
velocity. Preliminary research suggests that exploiting this additional
operational freedom can increase energy production by as much as 50 percent over
fixed-altitude tethered turbines. This award will develop control laws that vary
tether length to measure the change in wind speed with altitude, and use that
information to increase energy production. University students working on this
project will gain real-life practical experience through collaboration with
Altaeros Energies, a tethered wind energy startup based in Boston,
Massachusetts. Outreach activities with high school students in North Carolina
will introduce the role of STEM disciplines in developing new renewable energy
resources, and broaden participation by non-traditional and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to optimize the altitude of a tethered
wind energy system depends both on knowledge of the wind shear profile and
robust optimization strategies that maximize net energy generation. The research
will attack this dual problem of wind shear profile mapping and altitude
optimization through the fusion of information maximization and extremum seeking
control techniques. While both tools are powerful in their own right, neither
provides an ideal stand-alone framework for the simultaneous characterization of
wind shear profile and optimization of altitude. Two mechanisms for fusing the
mapping and optimization objectives will be pursued in this research: one is an
implicit mechanism, using stochastic receding horizon control, and the other is
an explicit method that estimates the map's entropy to morph the perturbation
signal for the extremum seeking algorithm. These methods will be validated using
historical wind profiles from NOAA and NASA and will be flight tested on the
Altaeros Energies Buoyant Airborne Turbine (BAT). The tools arising from this
research will not only benefit tethered wind energy organizations but will also
improve fundamental understanding of performance optimization in poorly modeled
and time-varying environments.