* 1437343
* Support for 2014 Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on Experimental Rock Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Wen-Lu Zhu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This project supports the participation of U.S. based early career scientists in
the biannual Gordon Research Conference on Experimental Rock Deformation and the
associated Gordon Research Seminar. The conference assembles national and
international researchers who study the behavior of rocks and minerals under
various stress, pressure, and temperature conditions in the laboratory in order
to understand deformation of the Earth's crust and mantle. The conference
focuses on cutting-edge topics that include fault zone structure, processes, and
behavior with particular emphasis on earthquake mechanisms. Other session focus
on the detailed mechanisms of fracture and flow of Earth materials, the storage
and transport properties of hydrocarbon and CO2 reservoirs, and the implications
experimental studies may have in the understanding of other planets. The
associated seminar provides graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and early
career researchers opportunity for professional development and focused
discussions about their research. Through support of early career scientists and
students, the project contributes to the development of STEM workforce and also
supports full participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides funding for travel and
registration support to U.S. based early-career professionals and students to
attend the Gordon Research Conference "Evolving Rock Structure: From Grain-Scale
to Planet-Scale", which will be held in Andover, NH from August 17-22, 2014. The
Rock Deformation conference series highlights the latest research and future
trends in brittle and ductile rock mechanics, with experimental, field and
theoretical contributions. Central themes for the conference include: 1) fault
anatomy, fault strength, transient slip, and fluid pressure evolution during the
earthquake cycle; 2) hydration and grain size evolution of ductile shear zones
and their implications for plate dynamics; 3) fast developing X-ray imaging
technologies, which revolutionize experimental rock deformation research by
allowing, for the first time, the quantification of evolving microstructures and
pore distributions in a deforming rock to reveal fundamental hydro-chemo-thermo-
mechanical couplings; 4) the potentials and risks associated with shale gas
extraction and geological carbon dioxide sequestration; 5) the relevance of rock
deformation research for planetary exploration. The project also supports the
inaugural Rock Deformation Gordon Research Seminar to be held August 16-17 in
conjunction with the Rock Deformation Gordon Research Conference. The seminar,
designed for graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and other scientists with
comparable levels of experience and education, focuses on the mechanisms and
implications of rock deformation with an emphasis on 1) processes that operate
on multiple time and length scales, facilitating extrapolation from laboratory
to Earth, and 2) difficulties and progress in elucidating the mechanics of
compositionally complex systems.