* 1437679
* Collaborative Research: Power Analyses for Moderator and Mediator Effects in Cluster Randomized Trials
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Benjamin Kelcey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 289,949.00

Cluster randomized experiments are considered the gold standards by which the
impact of educational treatments and interventions can be determined. One of the
most important design decisions that must be made is determining the size of the
sample of students and the clusters under study (e.g., classrooms or teachers or
schools) in order to estimate the power for an anticipated effect. Currently it
is common for a cluster randomized trial to be designed to detect only the main
effect of a treatment with adequate power. These studies miss out on being able
to provide valid assessments of for whom a treatment might have an impact
(mediation) and the conditions under which a treatment is effective
(moderation). This research study will advance our understanding of cluster
randomized trials by developing power formulas and software for tests of multi-
level moderation and mediation, as well as the combination of the two.

This project will have three components: 1). The development of new formulas for
estimating the statistical power to detect multilevel moderation, mediation,
moderated-mediation and mediated-moderation in cluster randomized trials; 2).
Assess and validate the formulas through simulations; and, 3). Implement the
formulas in two existing software programs, Optimal Design Plus and PowerUp!.
The project will develop training materials for the use of the new analyses and
develop and conduct workshops in order to disseminate the tool widely to the
field.