* 1437657
* Engineered Consortia for Effective Utilization of a Cyanobacterial Carbohydrate Feedstock
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Daniel Ducat, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2018
* USD 299,773.00

Principal Investigator: Daniel Ducat Number: 1437657

Currently, the production of biofuels relies on carbohydrate feedstocks sourced
from plant-based crop species that compete with edible crop species for arable
landmass and potable water. Alternative, photosynthetically derived feedstock
sources of carbohydrates can uncouple biofuel production from traditional
agriculture and potentially decrease the land footprint required. This project
will make use of a genetically engineered strain of a photosynthetic bacterium
(cyanobacterium) that will use carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and light to
make sucrose (table sugar), which can be fermented to biofuels and bio-products.
This microorganism is uniquely capable of rerouting the majority of its
photosynthetically fixed carbon towards the production and excretion of sucrose.
This engineered cyanobacterium has carbohydrate productivity potential that
exceeds that of traditional plant species, and could be used for an alternative
carbohydrate feedstock if effective approaches can be designed to scale culture
growth and minimize the cost of feedstock recovery. The project will focus on
the development of microbial consortia as one means to capitalize upon the
productive capacity of these sucrose-secreting cyanobacteria. In this approach,
the sugar-secreting cyanobacterium with will be co-cultured with yeast strains
that efficiently utilize the carbohydrates and biologically convert them into
commodity products without the requirement of sucrose purification or
processing. Improvements in the capacity for the yeast stain to robustly grow
and utilize cyanobacterial sugars will also ultimately improve the conversion of
sucrose into biofuels and bioproducts. Towards this end, a model microbial
consortium will be developed whereby engineered yeast will utilize
photosynthetically produced sucrose for the production of fatty alcohols, a
useful surfactant and potential biofuel additive. This project includes research
and educational experiences for a graduate student, as well as undergraduate
students through the Plant Genomics Program and Khorana Scholars Program at
Michigan State University. In addition, this project involves engagement with an
undergraduate research program at Schoolcraft College, and science policy
discussions on the use of synthetic biology for biotechnology applications
through a Sloan Institute sponsored Delphi policy study.

Technical Description

The overall goal of this project is to develop a co-culture system for the
overproduction of sucrose from carbon dioxide and light using engineered strains
of cyanobacteria and yeast. The approach relies on a two-step photobiological
production of sucrose through co-culture, and will provide fundamental
understanding on how engineer of inter-species interactions for this purpose.
This project will make use of an engineered cyanobacterial strain, Synechococcus
elongatus PCC 7942 (S. elongatus) recently developed in the PI?s laboratory that
is genetically stable and capable of rerouting up to 85% of its fixed carbon
towards excreted sucrose. This strain possesses a high specific activity for
photosynthetic production and therefore has considerable potential as an
alternative carbohydrate feedstock source if scaled culturing can mitigate three
challenges, which will be addressed by the proposed research. These challenges
are to 1) minimize reactor complexity and cost to a degree consistent with the
commodity product value, 2) reduce the costs of purifying, processing, and
delivering cyanobacterial carbohydrates to downstream applications, and 3) to
reduce the risk of photobioreactor contamination. Towards this end, the project
will focus on the development of a direct co-culture of S. elongates with
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) that will flexibly convert the sucrose into
added-value compounds. The project will explore specific strategies to improve
yeast growth in co-culture, including, improvement of yeast carbon uptake,
increased yeast tolerance of cyanobacterial secondary products of photosynthetic
metabolism, and enhancement of the flux and specificity of carbon from
cyanobacteria to yeast through engineered physical association. These strategies
will be evaluated to improve yeast robustness and efficiency of conversion of
carbohydrates derived from S. elongatus when grown in co-culture, and a final
proof-of-principle production of cetyl alcohol is proposed through the use of an
established fatty-alcohol producing yeast strain. Overall, the project has
potential to impact the field of algal biofuels by providing an alternative
approach for metabolic pathway engineering or by improving upon an attractive
algae-derived feedstock. This project includes research and educational
experiences for a graduate student, as well as undergraduates through the Plant
Genomics Program and Khorana Scholars Program at Michigan State University. In
addition, this project involves engagement with an undergraduate research
program at Schoolcraft College, and science policy discussions on the use of
synthetic biology for biotechnology applications through a Sloan Institute
sponsored Delphi policy study.