* 1437001
* Targeted Infusion Project to Invert the Classroom in Fish and Wildlife Science Disciplines: Enhancing experiential learning opportunities across the curriculum.
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* William Stone, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,146.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research initiation
project from Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU) will overhaul undergraduate
student instruction in six existing fish and wildlife courses that compose a
concentration area in an accredited forestry program at a historically black
university to improve performance on student learning outcomes. Course content
will become substantial portions of learning modules to be designed and made
available on Blackboard LearnÂ®, an on-line instructional support program. Class
time will consist of performing quantitative and written assignments. Specific
activities include making all lecture notes and assignments available on-line
and developing, or expanding existing, quantitative homework assignments into
lab experiments and field exercises requiring technically written research
reports. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These activities constitute an evaluation of the
merits of a relatively new teaching pedagogy (inverting the classroom) designed
to increase performance on existing student learning outcomes related to
achievement of quantitative and communication competencies. Experiential
learning has the potential to improve quantitative problem solving and
communication competencies to increase undergraduate success in wildlife
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities will likely improve student
learning outcomes in existing academic programs (minors) in Fisheries and
Wildlife Biology disciplines where minority participation is extremely low (less
than 1%). As an NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) jurisdiction, this project broadens participation geographically as
well as through efforts to attract and retain underrepresented minority students
in biological and ecological sciences. The project leverages previous
investments in course development and improvement from the US Department of
Agriculture (USDA). Project outcomes will be disseminated broadly.