* 1437118
* Collaborative Research: Relative Abundance and Diversity of Antibiotic Resistance Genes and Pathogens in Reclaimed Versus Potable Water Distribution Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jean McLain, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 35,000.00

1438328&lt;br/&gt;Pruden&lt;br/&gt;1437118&lt;br/&gt;McLain&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;Collaborative Research: Relative Abundance and Diversity of Antibiotic
Resistance Genes and Pathogens in Reclaimed Versus Potable Water Distribution
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water sustainability, antibiotic resistance, and
opportunistic pathogens represent three critical global health challenges.
Expanding the use of reclaimed water is critical to advancing water
sustainability. However, important knowledge gaps remain with respect to
microbial risk and public health. Research results will directly benefit the
water utilities and water stressed regions participating in this project by
vetting existing practices and revealing new and effective management strategies
that proactively address public health concerns. Results will be disseminated
via peer reviewed literature, presentations at conferences attended by water
professionals, and through the newsletter and other avenues sponsored by the
Water Resources Research Center at U. Arizona. The project will also support
Native American and other underrepresented undergraduate researchers at U.
Arizona and two graduate students at Virginia Tech, who will be trained across
disciplines through the Interfaces of Global Change Interdisciplinary Graduate
Education Program. Additional undergraduate researchers will participate through
the NSF Interdisciplinary Water Science and Engineering REU site and other NSF
REU sites at Virginia Tech. The project will be an excellent training platform
at the nexus of public health and sustainability, with training opportunities in
the emerging field of metagenomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is the first comprehensive assessment of reclaimed water distribution systems
microbiome, providing insight into the occurrence and regrowth of microbial
constituents of emerging concern in reclaimed water. The interplay between
physico-chemistry and microbial ecology in reclaimed water distribution systems
will be revealed using an integrated lab and field sampling plan that includes
high throughput amplicon sequencing, metagenomics, and quantitative PCR along
with traditional culturing and chemical approaches that have been well
established for potable water distribution systems. The approach will identify
key factors, such as: level of assimilable organic carbon, presence of
disinfectant, type of disinfectant, water age, and temperature that influence
microbial constituents of emerging concern in reclaimed water distribution
systems and thus inform future management guidelines. It has only recently been
established that microbial regrowth in reclaimed water distribution systems is
the primary source of waterborne disease in developed countries; however,
regrowth in reclaimed water distribution systems is relatively uncharacterized,
despite reasonable expectations and preliminary results that suggest even
greater potential for problems due to higher levels of nutrients, source water
containing microbial constituents of emerging concern, and nuances of reclaimed
water distribution systems operation in water stressed regions. Left
unaddressed, these concerns will impede the direct use of reclaimed water and
call into question existing reclaimed water distribution systems practices. The
proposed effort will address key knowledge gaps and support rationally
engineered water reuse systems that allow the benefits of reclaimed water to be
fully realized, while protecting public health. The proposed work will achieve
the following Objectives: O1: Conduct a lab study to examine the interplay
between water treatment, nutrient level, disinfectant type, distribution system
design/operation, and temperature in selecting for microbial regrowth and
microbial constituents of emerging concern occurrence in reclaimed water
distribution systems; O2: Conduct a field survey comparing the microbiome
composition and microbial constituents of emerging concern occurrence of paired
reclaimed water distribution systems and potable water distribution systems as a
function of kind of treatment, nutrient levels, secondary disinfectant type and
dose, distribution system materials, and water age; and, O3: Based on O1 and O2,
identify engineering practices that are promising for minimizing the occurrence
of microbial constituents of emerging concern in reclaimed water distribution
systems to inform future design, management, and standards for safe application
of reclaimed water for non-potable and potable reuse.