* 1437604
* SusChEM: Promotion of Nickel Catalysts for the Conversion of Biomass-derived Oils to Fuel-like Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Mark Crocker, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2017
* USD 382,706.00

Proposed Abstract Title:&lt;br/&gt;SusChEM: Development of Nickel Catalysts for
the Conversion of Biomass-derived Oils to Fuel-like
Hydrocarbons&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiesel, which consists of fatty acid methyl
esters or so-called FAMEs, is a fuel derived from vegetable oils and animal fats
which has gained much attention in recent years as a renewable alternative to
diesel fuel. However, a number of issues stemming from the high oxygen content
of biodiesel,such as relatively poor storage stability and engine compatibility
issues, have limited its widespread application, along with a lack of suitable
feedstocks. This award, to Professors Mark Crocker and Eduardo Santillan-Jimenez
at the University of Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research, aims to
circumvent these shortcomings by developing an improved process for the
conversion of vegetable oils and animal fats to hydrocarbons which are
chemically indistinguishable from petroleum-derived diesel, and hence, which can
be used as a drop-in substitute for diesel. A key feature of this process is the
use of a catalyst based on inexpensive, earth-abundant nickel, as opposed to the
use of expensive precious metal catalysts. An added benefit of this research is
that it will provide students with hands-on experience in the field of biofuels,
thus ultimately helping to satisfy the growing demand for highly skilled
scientists and engineers in the renewable energy sector. A second objective of
this project is the establishment of new outreach efforts directed at local
Kentucky schools. Specifically, a "biofuels game" will be developed, which
teaches K-12 students basic concepts about petroleum fuels, biofuels, and the
relative economic and environmental costs associated with their production and
use. The entire focus of the award is aligned with the SusChEM
philosophy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic decarboxylation/decarbonylation
(deCOx) has been proposed as an alternative to hydrotreating for the conversion
of lipids and bio-oils to produce renewable drop-in hydrocarbon fuels. Indeed,
deCOx is not only more energy and hydrogen efficient, but it proceeds over
benign metal catalysts, and does not require the sulfided catalysts used in
hydrotreating. The investigators have shown that the performance of specific
catalysts comprising earth-abundant and inexpensive Ni can rival that of the
expensive precious metals (Pd and Pt) commonly used to catalyze deCOx.
Preliminary results have shown that promotion of Ni catalysts with small amounts
of Cu or Sn leads to enhancements in the efficiency of the process. However, the
underlying principles of the catalytic phenomena at play are not thoroughly
understood. This project aims at a more complete understanding of these
promotion effects, which in turn should allow further improvements to the
system. To this end, four main objectives will be addressed: 1) the selectivity
of Ni catalysts towards fuel-like hydrocarbons will be optimized by fine-tuning
the activity of the catalytically active phase; 2) the resistance to
deactivation shown by these catalysts will be improved by modifying the active
phase electronically and/or morphologically; 3) fundamental structure-activity
relationships will be established to rationalize the effect of these changes on
the active phase; and 4) mechanistic and kinetic studies will be employed to
elucidate the reaction mechanism and kinetic parameters for representative feed-
catalyst combinations.