* 1437139
* Characterization and Real Time Defect Mitigation in Chemical/Mechanical Polishing of Microelectronic Wafers Using Decision Theory and MultiSensor Fusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,195.00

The objective of this research is to apply the principles of multi-sensor fusion
and decision theory for deriving quantitative relationships connecting signal
features from various sensors, including, force, temperature, vibration, and
others, gathered during chemical mechanical planarization of microelectronics
wafers, with specific defect evolutions, towards real-time surface defect
mitigation and process control. The approach will be to first induce certain
basic defect patterns on wafers, such as indentation, scratching using
nanoindentation and nanoscratching techniques. These wafers then will be
polished on a chemical mechanical planarization machine instrumented with
multiple wireless microelectromechanical systems sensors. It is anticipated that
an archive of defect-sensitive sensor features for different defects generated
in chemical mechanical planarization will be developed. Decision theory will be
used to predict and control the defects. The control action (for example,
specific adjustment of down force and platen speed) at each time-epoch will be
estimated by maximizing a utility function, so that the control actions are
robust to noise. The chemical mechanical planarization platform will be equipped
with multiple wired- and wireless-microelectromechanical systems-based sensors,
where possible, to monitor temperature, vibrations, chemistry (pH), and forces
for defect detection and mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will facilitate industry adoption of micro-electromechanical systems
sensor-based approaches to address defects and such critical impediments to
wafer yield. The sensor-networked chemical mechanical planarization platform can
be used as a test bed for instruction and training of students and industry
personnel. The Principal Investigators have a track record for attracting
students from diverse backgrounds, and plan to work with local minority
institutions to recruit qualified students into this research project. The
students will be exposed to fundamental multi-disciplinary research and industry
practices in advanced manufacturing processes through mutual visits between
university and industry. The highlights of the research will be made available
on the website of the Principal Investigators and the results will be published
in various journals, trade magazines, and presentations at national and
international conferences.