* 1437248
* The Nitrogen Fertilizer Industry:  Integrating Industrial Ecology and Political Ecology Approaches
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Matthew Huber, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 192,777.00

This research project will examine the synthetic nitrogen production industry by
combining an industrial ecological focus on metabolism to trace inputs and
outputs of the industrial process with a political ecology focus on politics,
history, and culture to ascertain the complex relationships among natural and
human systems. The project will consider the evolution and operation of a major
economic sector from new perspectives. It will expand on the consideration of
metabolism by moving beyond traditional considerations that focus on industrial
process to consider inputs and outputs among a broader suite of natural and
human systems, thereby permitting consideration of the role of natural systems
in terms of impacting on and receiving outputs from industrial processes. The
project will provide a more comprehensive understanding of the processes though
which atmospheric nitrogen has been transformed into a commodity as well as they
ways in which this economic enterprise has evolved and interacted with various
natural and human systems. The project therefore will expand knowledge about the
role of social and other human factors in the transformation of global
biogeochemical flows. The project is expected to result in a range of products
that will enhance fundamental theoretical understandings and yield practical
benefits. A book and other publications will be disseminated to groups like the
Fertilizer Institute, the Food and Agriculture Organization, The Earth
Institute, the Center for Industrial Ecology, and the National Coalition for
Sustainable Agriculture among other organizations in civil society and industry,
The investigators also will develop special educational materials, including
teaching modules that deal with the social and natural aspects of the nitrogen
cycle and illustrate the technical process of taking fossil fuel and creating
nitrogen fertilizer in industrial facilities as well as the larger relationships
this industry has with society and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists consider the "Haber-Bosch Process"
of synthetic nitrogen production to be one of the most fundamental innovations
of the 20th century. The process revolutionized global food production by
lifting previous limitations on natural sources of nitrogen fertilizer, usually
manure. The process has several sustainability concerns, however, because of its
reliance on nonrenewable inputs, especially natural gas, water pollution, and
excessive flows of nutrients into water bodies that can lead to eutrophication
and phenomena like marine "dead zones." The process also yields significant
levels of carbon emission and raises thorny questions regarding relationships
between levels of food production and population growth. As such, nitrogen cuts
across the energy-water-food nexus of environmental challenges. The
investigators will combine an "input-output" analysis more traditionally
employed in industrial ecology with a three-step research design focused on the
historical and social dynamics of the primary "input" (natural gas), the
industrial and related processes occurring at a representative site
(Donaldsonville, Louisiana), and the primary "outputs" (nitrogen fertilizer and
carbon dioxide). They will employ a range of methodological approaches,
including archival research, interviews, and field-based observations.