* 1437412
* Passive shock wave attenuation using shock-free surface interaction in combination with shock focusing techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Veronica Eliasson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 269,911.00

PI: Eliasson, Veronica&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1437412&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed experimental
study is to investigate the interaction of shock waves with liquids and to
discover ways to mitigate shock wave effects. This proposal is aimed at the
investigation of how shock wave attenuation can be obtained by adding liquid
sheets in specific geometric shapes in the path of a propagating shock wave. The
fundamental work proposed here can have applications on designing cheap and
reliable methods to protect buildings, vehicles, and humans from threats of
shock and blast wave impact. For example, it can have an impact in the
construction and mining industries where blast technology, explosives and
detonation are important. Accidents in both surface and underground mines can
lead to shock wave propagation with devastating effects, therefore, shock wave
attenuation should be promoted to reduce damage and
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objectives are (a) to
understand the dynamics between the incident shock wave and the free surface,
and (b) to explore and quantify how the degree of attenuation depends on the
role of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids and their mass, as well as thermal
and inertial properties. Direct measurements of shock wave amplitude, peak
pressure, total impulse in addition to quantitative and qualitative high-speed
shock wave imaging will be obtained for all cases. Gaining such fundamental
understanding can lead to methodologies to reduce shock impact using available
and environmentally friendly liquids. Experiments will be performed in a shock
tube, and numerical simulations will be performed using a finite volume
approach. In terms of outreach and education, the proposal includes a well-
articulated plan to involve graduate and undergraduate students in research. The
Pi will work with the WiSE Program (Women in Science and Engineering) at the U
of South California, whose purpose is to support and promote the participation
of women and minorities, both students and faculty, in the academic life at USC.
The PI will also involve high school students from the Los Angeles area in her
research throughout this project.