* 1437961
* Experimental Evaluation and Modeling of Hydraulic Flocculation Systems Under Conditions of Turbulent Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Leonard Lion, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 358,579.00

1437961 Lion

Experimental Evaluation and Modeling of Hydraulic Flocculation Systems under
Conditions of Turbulent Flow

The overall goal of this project is to make resilient water treatment
technologies that are the most economical for application in the global south
and the highest performing for application in industrialized countries.
Hydraulic flocculation requires no electricity, has no moving parts, and is a
key component of resilient high performing treatment of surface water and of
arsenic contaminated groundwater. The proposed research will create and test a
mechanistically based model for turbulent flow hydraulic flocculation and to use
that model as a basis for optimizing hydraulic flocculator design. The research
performed under this project will be integrated into the AguaClara program at
Cornell University. This integration ensures a high level of undergraduate
involvement in the research and rapid transfer of the research results into
scalable design algorithms and then to implementation partners in other
countries who build AguaClara facilities for communities in need of safe
drinking water. The hands-on research and design experience with an
international context creates an engineering education that changes lives. The
fundamental understanding resulting from this research will improve the
performance of robust gravity powered, water treatment plants and will reduce
costs.

The large range of relevant length scales (nm to m) and the turbulent and
laminar flow regimes that occur in sequential processes used for water treatment
have resulted in an empirical approach to design that does not correctly scale
to the flows applicable to small communities (1,000 to 50,000 individuals). In
the proposed research, theoretical analysis coupled with experimental evaluation
will be used to identify the dominant parameters and mechanisms affecting the
growth and breakup of flocculent particles, and their distribution of
sedimentation velocities. Most previous work on flocculation has utilized
mechanically-stirred reactors with poorly characterized and highly heterogeneous
energy dissipation rates. This project will use well-characterized turbulent
tube flow flocculators and turbulent serpentine baffled flow reactors
(characterized by computational fluid dynamics (CFD)). Core components of the
proposed model have already been created through studies of flocculation under
laminar flow and reveal a composite dependence of flocculation on floc volume
fraction, colloid surface coverage by coagulant (both dependent on influent
turbidity and coagulant type and dose), and reactor conditions (energy
dissipation rate, hydraulic residence time). Specialized instrumentation has
also been constructed that permits non-destructive analysis of flocculent
particle settling velocities, video monitoring of solids concentration over a
wide range of time and spatial scales within experimental reactors, and
automation of experiments which allows exploration of a greater range of
parameter space than would otherwise be possible.