* 1437396
* DMREF: Design of Nanoscale Alloy Catalysts from First Principles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tim Mueller, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,046,827.00

Tim Mueller and Chao Wang of Johns Hopkins University are supported by an award
funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Designing Materials to Revolutionize
and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program to develop a way to rationally design
new alloy nanoparticle catalysts. Alloy nanoparticles are promising materials
for use as advanced catalysts that increase the energy efficiency of chemical
processes at relatively low cost. It is possible to modify the performance of
alloy nanoparticle catalysts by adjusting their size, shape, atomic structure,
and chemical composition. The research approach used by Mueller and Wang takes
advantage of this flexibility. They create computational models that are able to
accurately predict how the conditions under which nanoparticles are made affect
their catalytic performance. These models are refined and validated by iterative
comparisons with experimental results. As a proof of concept, this approach is
being used to design catalysts that facilitate the conversion of carbon dioxide
into hydrocarbon fuels. The conversion of carbon dioxide into fuels could
simultaneously increase global fuel supply and reduce the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere; but it is not yet economically viable due to the lack
of suitable catalysts. This research is integrated with a comprehensive
educational outreach program that includes research opportunities for a female
high school student, a workshop on energy technologies, and a new course on
renewable energy technologies at Johns Hopkins University.

This project has two primary thrusts. In the first, the researchers are
developing a predictive model that relates synthesis conditions to nanoparticle
structure. To accomplish this, computational models based on cluster expansions
are trained on ab-initio data and used to predict the atomic structures of alloy
nanoparticles. The predicted structures are then compared to the experimentally-
determined structural characteristics of monodisperse and homogeneous alloy
nanoparticles created from organic solution synthesis. The computational and
experimental approaches are iteratively refined until they are consistent,
resulting in a model with strong predictive power. In the second thrust, the
researchers are developing and validating a predictive model that relates
nanoparticle structure to catalytic properties. Density functional theory is
used to calculate the binding energies of key intermediate adsorbates on the
surfaces of nanoparticles, and these energies are used in the computational
hydrogen electrode model to calculate catalytic properties of the alloy
nanoparticles. To iteratively refine the computational models, computational
predictions for nanoparticles of different sizes, compositions, and surface
structures are compared to experimental catalytic and spectroscopic studies. To
demonstrate and validate the effectiveness of this approach, the researchers are
designing and testing Cu-alloy nanoparticle catalysts for electrochemical CO2
reduction.