* 1437125
* Conference: International Conference on Environmental Catalysis in Asheville, August 24-27, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Carsten Sievers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT TITLE Conference: International Conference on Environmental Catalysis
in Asheville, August 24-27, 2014

ABSTRACT This award provides the funds to subsidize the registration and travel
costs for US student participation at the 8th International Conference on
Environmental Catalysis (ICEC) with preference given to students making oral
presentations. The conference will be held in Asheville, North Carolina, on
August 24-27, 2014. The PI for the award is Prof. Carsten Sievers of the Georgia
Institute for Technology. The principal objective of the conference is to create
an environment for fruitful discussion and exchange of ideas among researchers
from universities, national laboratories, and industry around the globe on
catalytic reactions and processes with environmental implications. The field of
catalysis plays a key role in the nation?s economy and standard of living.
Fundamental research in catalysis produces materials (i.e., catalysts) that
significantly improve the manufacturing process for many products. Many of these
products find application in improving the quality of human life, reducing the
adverse impact of human activities on the environment, and securing the nation's
energy supply. Research in the field of catalysis also has major economic impact
since a majority of the products used by a modern society require catalysts at
some point in their manufacture. The scientific topics to be covered by this
conference are the control of emissions of environmentally unacceptable
compounds; the application of catalysts for the production of alternative, less
polluting products; waste minimization; and the production of fuels and
chemicals from renewable resources. These topics have significant societal
impact because they directly affect the quality of life. Students who are
educated by performing research in these areas will be uniquely qualified to be
leaders in the technical areas required for a viable ?green economy?. This
meeting will provide U.S. researchers, student and expert, exposure to
developments at the cutting edge of catalysis research and a chance to publicize
their research internationally to leaders in environmental catalysis. The 8th
ICEC will cover all aspects of environmental catalysis, both heterogeneous and
homogeneous. This meeting will provide U.S. researchers, student and expert,
exposure to developments at the cutting edge of catalysis research and a chance
to publicize their research internationally to leaders in environmental
catalysis. Five topical sessions have been arranged: (1) sustainable and clean
energy production, (2) emission control, (3) indoor air cleaning, (4) water
treatment, (5) green chemistry. The ICEC was last held in the United States in
1998. International exposure is particularly important because environmental
catalysis is heavily influenced by researchers from Europe and, increasingly,
Asia. In addition, the conference will stimulate international collaborations
and expose students and postdoctoral associates to new concepts, experimental
techniques, and potential colleagues. The topics chosen for the 8th ICEC have
significant societal impact because they directly affect the quality of life.
Students who are educated by performing research in these areas will be uniquely
positioned to be leaders in a new ?green economy?. The technological impact of
support for this conference stems from the key role of catalysis in underpinning
the nation?s economy and standard of living. The technical contributions to the
8th ICEC will be disseminated widely. The book of abstracts will be distributed
to all participants in print and electronic version, and peer-reviewed articles
will be published in a special edition of Catalysis Today.