* 1437003
* Three-Dimensional Isolation System for Building Resilience to Earthquake Hazard
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Faramarz Gordaninejad, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 359,132.00

Building isolation systems placed between foundation and the structure are able
to reduce shaking of the buildings and mitigate serious damage in earthquakes.
However, recent earthquakes and large scale tests have shown that there is a
large amount of damage to the interior of buildings (mechanical system, ceiling
tiles etc.) and to the critical equipment in buildings (hospital and electrical
equipment, telecommunication items etc.) leading to inoperability of buildings
and high economic losses. These damages to the interior are primarily caused by
vertical shaking of the ground in earthquakes. This project will pursue research
in identification of the level of vertical shaking in buildings in earthquake
and development of isolator that reduces the shaking to acceptable level. The
proposed system will stack traditional isolation bearings for protection from
horizontal shaking and new devices for protection from vertical shaking. The new
device combines a weight bearing liquid spring and controllable damper into a
single package. These isolators will have potential of use in other engineered
systems where vibrations are critical. The researchers will recruit
participation of underrepresented groups in the research and education efforts.

In this project, basic science will be advanced through an analytical study to
understand the fundamental dynamics of three-dimensional isolation of rigid
bodies and flexible structures, subjected to earthquakes. Optimal properties of
an effective three-dimensional isolation system will be determined. The proposed
vertical isolation system uses liquid spring technology that is robust, ideal
for supporting large loads and operating in harsh conditions. The novelty of the
proposed system is combining the liquid spring stiffness and the controllable
damping characteristics into a single, sustainable device for civil
infrastructure application. The proposed system is fail-safe, such that even
under power or control system failures optimal damping is retained in the
passive mode since the spring action is passive. A one quarter scale device will
be designed, built, and characterized in this project.