* 1437057
* RUI:  Ectomycorrhizal functioning and specificity in a global tri-partite symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 02/14/2014,08/31/2015
* Peter Kennedy, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 37,368.00

Fungi associated with plant roots play major ecological roles in nearly every
terrestrial ecosystem, however, the factors that determine what species of
mycorrhizal fungi are associated with a particular plant remain poorly
understood. This project will test the hypothesis that the unique composition
and low diversity of fungi associated with plants in the genus Alnus are driven
by the presence of nitrogen-fixing Frankia bacteria. The research will involve
field, lab, and culture-based experiments that utilize a range of molecular and
biochemical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on the enzymatic
capacities of ectomycorrhizal fungi as well as their growth in different
nutrient settings, the research will explicitly examine the relative importance
of host-plant selection and environment conditions in the structuring of
mycorrhizal assemblages. There has been a strong temperate bias in ecological
studies of mycorrhizal fungi, and proposed research in Mexico will reveal
whether patterns observed in temperate areas are also present in a tropical
region. More broadly, this research will highlight the importance of
understanding symbioses in their ecological context, where multiple simultaneous
interactions can significantly influence individual pair-wise outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build both scientific infrastructure and
education. The combination of field and lab-based analyses will expose a post-
doctoral researcher and undergraduate research assistants to a wide range of
research techniques. Direct collaboration with investigators in France and
Mexico will provide excellent opportunities for scientific and cultural
exchange. Finally, the proposal will involve a collaboration with a high school
biology teacher, which will result in a teaching module about plant-microbial
symbioses and their importance in Pacific Northwest, USA forests.