* 1437814
* SusChEM: Molecular organic frameworks for solid state ion channels with exceedingly simple design: Toward barrier-less ion migration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Stephanie Wunder, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2017
* USD 549,981.00

1437814 - Zdilla

Batteries that can effectively, affordably and safely compete with the internal
combustion engine require new materials development and design strategies.
Energy storage in portable consumer rechargeable lithium ion batteries has
reached ~ 3.0 Ah, insufficient for powering electric vehicles, but with
reasonable, > 30,000, charge/discharge cycles. The use of metallic lithium as
the anode (to increase the cell voltage) and flow-through cathodes or cathodes
in which oxygen is reduced, can increase energy density. Replacement of lithium
with less expensive, more available sodium will reduce costs. However, current
high energy and power density Li battery technology suffers from safety concerns
and poor performance at low temperatures. Replacement of liquid electrolytes
with solid electrolytes will improve safety, and development of low-barrier
conducting materials will improve wintertime behavior. Next generation lithium
batteries such as lithium air and flow-through cathode batteries have already
been designed with solid electrolytes (alone or in combination with liquid
electrolytes). Here, one aspect of this multidisciplinary problem will be
addressed, namely the formation of soft solid crystal electrolytes with low-
affinity channels for lithium or sodium ion conduction. All solid-state lithium
ion organic conductors have the benefits of increased safety, but the limitation
of poor ionic conductivity, while ceramic/glass conductors have higher ionic
conductivities but are brittle and can have poor adhesion to the electrodes.
Engineering of solid-state organic materials with specific ion conduction
pathways that can enhance ion migration offers promise as a means to achieve
higher solid-state ionic conductivities, while soft, more malleable organics
will afford better adhesion to the electrodes. There is only limited progress in
this area, making the development of new synthetic routes for the formation of
specific architectures with ion channels an important avenue of research.

Proposed is a project on design and fabrication of a novel class of solid
electrolytes made from lithium salt cocrystals. The proposed materials posess
ion channels with weak interactions between the ions and channel walls. These
weak interactions arise from the deliberate use of polarizable (soft)
functionality on the walls, which interact poorly with the non-polarizable
(hard) lithium ions according to the Pearson Hard Soft Acid Base Concept. The
resulting materials will be soft solids with good conductivity, decreased
flamability, and improved low-temperature conduction. Two preliminary materials
show lithium ion conduction with negligible activation barrier, and equal
conductivity at room temperature and -78 C. A major goal of the proposed work is
to increase the thermal stability of prototype materials at high temperatures.
This will be achieved by developing systems with greater intermolecular
interactions through pi-stacking or covalent linkage. The resulting materials
would be the first solid electrolytes to have favorable conductivities over the
entire range of global temperatures. Variation of anion size and matrix affinity
will be used to optimize the selective conduction of cations in the matrix. The
use of sodium ions in place of lithium ions will also be explored in an effort
to design electrolytes for sodium batteries as well. These materials will be
fabricated into films for device testing. Preliminary results on the use of
Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane polyethylene glycol (POSS-PEG) as a binder
are promising, and provide junctions between the cocrystals for DC conductivity
without affecting the temperature independent behavior.

Intellectual Merit : The proposed class of materials represent a new class of
material for solid electrolytes. They exhibit behavior slightly superior to pure
polymer electrolytes at room temperature, and exceeding superiority at low
temperature. Such materials have the potential to lead to the design of solid
state batteries that work across all ranges of global temperature, and posess
increased safety due to the absence of volatile flammable electrolytes.

Broader Impacts : Energy renewables is an increasingly important sector of the
United States Economy. Batteries will continue to play a major role in energy
storage for some time. The proposed work may lead to new materials for the
improvement of safety and functioning of batteries for the betterment of US
energy independence. More importantly, the project will train young scientists
in order to supply the market's increasing demand in the field of ion
conduction, which is relevant to numerous applications in this growing economic
sector.