* 1437384
* SusChem: Sustainable Chemicals Production Using Solid Polymer Electrolyte Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Levi Thompson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Principal Investigator: Peter N. Pintauro&lt;br/&gt;Number:
1437384&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address concerns related to carbon dioxide emissions and dependence on foreign
sources of fossil fuels, the chemical process industry is working to transition
its manufacturing methods towards more sustainable raw materials and production
schemes. A potentially transformational strategy to improve the environmental
and energy sustainability of organic chemical manufacturing would involve the
replacement of thermally driven reactions with processes that are driven
directly by electricity obtained from renewable resources. A prime example is
the reaction of organic chemicals with hydrogen gas to make a variety of new
chemicals, a process called hydrogenation, which accounts for up to 20% of all
reaction steps in a typical chemical process. Hydrogen gas is typically obtained
from the reforming of natural gas, which is an energy-intensive and complicated
process requiring fossil fuels. New systems based on electrochemistry offer a
sustainable alterative. The overall goal of this study is to develop an
electrochemical reactor to carry out the hydrogenation of organic chemicals
using electricity, water, and the organic chemical feedstock as the only inputs.
In particular, solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) reactors which promote
electrochemical reactions are a potentially efficient platform for this purpose.
These reactors internally generate hydrogen which feeds the hydrogenation
reaction that is occurring at the cathode of the reactor system. The mild
temperatures and high hydrogen concentrations at the cathode can promote the
production of a variety of commercially relevant hydrogenated organic products.
The innovative aspects of the project include the use of electricity, preferably
from renewable resources, to drive the chemical reactions under mild conditions
of temperature and pressure, the development of novel catalytic cathodes to
improve product selectivity, and the use of water as the source of hydrogen. The
project will train graduate students in multi-disciplinary science and
engineering technologies, including electrochemistry, chemical engineering, and
chemical catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this study is to develop an
electrochemical reactor to carry out the hydrogenation of organic chemicals
using electricity, water, and the organic chemical feedstock as the only inputs.
The availability of low-cost, renewable electricity could drive a transformation
in the chemicals processing industry via a significant expansion in the
commercial use of electrochemical reactors that use solid polymer electrolytes
(SPE) for driving organic hydrogenation reactions. Expanded use and improved
designs for such reactors would benefit from a better understanding of the
inter-relationships between cathode composition, reactor operating parameters,
product yields, and current efficiencies. Towards this end, this project will
investigate the use of new catalytic materials and hybrid
electrochemical/chemical mixed catalytic systems as the cathode electrode in SPE
reactors, and study the selective hydrogenation of multifunctional organic
substrates. Experiments will be performed to correlate reactor operating
conditions and feed composition to power consumption and products yield. The
mechanistic details of electrochemical organic substrate hydrogenation and
hydrogen generation on catalytic cathodes will be elucidated through analysis of
kinetic data from batch slurry reactor experiments. The project will train
graduate students in multi-disciplinary science and engineering technologies,
including electrochemistry, chemical engineering, and chemical catalysis.