* 1437327
* DMREF: Engineering Strength and Toughness into Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Subhash Mahajan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,381,675.00

Two of the most important properties of structural materials are their strength
and their ductility - the ability to withstand deformation without breaking.
High strength is desired for structural components so that they can carry high
loads, and a good ductility is essential to avoid catastrophic failure in load-
bearing applications. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our
Future (DMREF) award supports fundamental research to engineer strength and
toughness into metals, by establishing a framework of strengthening and
toughening mechanisms in metals. The research program will investigate
fundamental mechanisms of deformation in structural metals at the microscopic
scale, and relate these to the performance of these materials. This research
involves collaborations between the University of California at Davis, Georgia
Institute of Technology and Los Alamos National Laboratories, with a synergistic
approach encompassing experimentation, modeling and simulation, and diagnostics.
This research will accelerate materials discovery by building a knowledge base
to design materials that have specific combinations of strength and
toughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this DMREF research is to engineer
twin-twin meshes. The hypothesis is that these meshes can simultaneously impart
strength by introducing a high density of barriers to slip, toughness by crack
deflection and blunting, microstructural stability by nature of an interlocking
network, and isotropy in these superior properties due to their three-
dimensional configuration. Results obtained from this research will help
formulate the scientific framework required to design twin meshes and to
implement experimental studies to acquire data for refinement of physical models
and enhancement of model predictions. Ultimately, the strategy of this research
program is to establish an original synergistic experimental-modeling approach,
which can be implemented to engineer strength and toughness into metals via the
novel concept of "twin mesh engineering."