* 1437930
* Collaborative Research: Artificial Photosynthesis Based on Archaeal Lipids and Proteins for Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Parkson Chong, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Principal Investigator: Parkson Chong Number: 1437930

Nontechnical Description

The goal of this project is to develop an artificial photosynthesis device to
ultimately enable the production of fermentable sugars directly from carbon
dioxide and sunlight. These sugars would serve as the renewable feedstock for
biofuels production. The concept of reconstituting light harvesting proteins and
energy conversion enzymes of photosynthesis into lipid membranes for light
driven synthesis of chemical energy carriers required to make sugars from carbon
dioxide has been known for many years. However, the low energy conversion
efficiency and poor long term stability have hindered further development of
this approach. This project will make new artificial photosynthesis devices
using novel biomaterials with much improved long-term stability and energy
conversion efficiency. The research activities will also provide
multidisciplinary project for training graduate and undergraduate students. This
is a collaborative project between Temple University, North Carolina State
University, and Drexel University.

Technical Description

The goal of this project is to develop an artificial photosynthesis platform
that uses bipolar tetra-ether lipids and membrane proteins isolated from
thermoacidophilic archaea.integrated into a microfluidic device. The research
will study the biochemical and biophysical properties of this artificial
photosynthesis platform, and develop a microfluidic device that will serve as a
tool to design, fabricate, and evaluate a potentially efficient and durable
membrane-based artificial photosynthesis system. This system would support the
development of a process that would be capable of converting sunlight, carbon
dioxide, and water into carbohydrates for the production of biofuels. The polar
lipid fraction E isolated from the archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius will be
used as the membrane matrix. These lipids are extremely stable and non-toxic. An
ATP synthase will also be isolated from the same thermoacidophile, which is
intended to provide stability to the reconstituted protein membrane system and
enhance the overall yield of ATP synthesis. Microfluidic chips will be developed
to accommodate the bacteriorhodopsin/ATP synthase/archaeal lipid membrane
system. The proton pumping efficiency of bacteriorhodopsin in archaeal lipid
planar membranes, the ATP synthesis efficiency of the system, and the carbon-
fixation efficiency from ATP to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate will be individually
measured to assess the performance of the artificial photosynthesis platform.
The research activities will also provide multidisciplinary project for training
graduate and undergraduate students.