* 1437230
* Understanding Excitons for Lead-Free Perovskite Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Andre Schleife, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 329,395.00

Principal Investigator: Andr√© Schleife Number: 1437230

Nontechnical Description

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-free energy
on earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb
the sun?s energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called
photovoltaics. The search for the best photovoltaic material is an active area
of solar cell research. Recently, an exciting new class of photovoltaic
materials called organo-metal perovskites has emerged. These materials are
promising because they have low production cost, use elements and materials
abundant in the earth?s crust, and currently possess solar energy conversion
efficiencies of over 15%. Further research is needed to tune the optical
properties of these materials to improve light absorption needed to push the
efficiencies over 20% to be competitive with silicon solar cells, and to remove
lead, which is toxic, from the material matrix. The goal of this project is to
gain a fundamental understanding of the beneficial electronic and optical
properties of organo-metal perovskites to address these two issues. Advanced
computational approaches will be used to predict electronic and optical
properties of organo-metal perovskites at the atomic level to study how quantum
mechanics plays a role in the performance of these materials for solar
photovoltaic applications. Model simulations will be performed to identify
replacements for lead that maintain desirable solar energy absorption
characteristics. Scientific results will be made available to the public in
blog-style updates, and a database will be provided to the scientific community
to confirm the findings and make use of this information. In addition, in this
project will provide training of material science graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced supercomputer techniques needed to provide a pipeline of
trained scientists in this critical area of national workforce need.

Technical Description

Recently, organo-metal perovskites, especially those based on lead, have emerged
as an exciting new class of earth-abundant photovoltaic materials with solar
energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 15% and potential for low manufacturing
cost. The goal of this project is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
excitonic and optical properties of organo-metal perovskites through advanced
computational models, and then use this approach to identify replacements for
lead in the material matrix. The perovskite material system offers a large phase
space for improvement by replacing different constituent atoms. However, for
targeted development, a fundamental understanding of electronic correlations,
particularly the physics that governs the excitonic and charge-transport
properties, is needed. In this regard, the interplay between free carriers in
systems with perovskite crystal structures that possess optical and excitonic
properties is unknown. Theoretical spectroscopy techniques based on many-body
perturbation theory will be used to achieve a fundamental understanding of
light-matter interaction in perovskite-halide materials with different
constituent ions. First-principles techniques based on Hedin?s approximation and
the Bethe-Salpeter equation, which accurately computes quantum-mechanical,
electron-electron, and electron-hole interactions, will be used to predict band
gaps, effective carrier masses, and optical absorption spectra. By taking into
account quasi-particle energies, excitonic effects, and the interplay with free
carriers, this approach will provide mechanistic insights into the optical
absorption process in perovskites. This project will also investigate the
influence of different constituents, particularly systems with and without lead
ions, on these optical absorption processes. The research outcomes will be made
available to the public in blog-style updates, and the computational results
will be provided to the scientific community for continued validation. In
addition, in this project will provide training of material science graduate and
undergraduate students in advanced atomistic modeling techniques on
supercomputing platforms.