* 1437113
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Mechanical Models for the Aging Brain
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* John Georgiadis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 252,050.00

As 81 million 'baby boomers' living in the US enter old age, the fact that 50
percent of adults over the age of 85 are afflicted with Alzheimer's disease
presents a looming crisis. Early diagnosis or the hope of developing an
effective neuroprotective or regenerative intervention requires a deeper
understanding of how the healthy human brain ages normally. A novel noninvasive
elastography method based on magnetic resonance imaging has allowed high-
resolution measurements of local mechanical properties of the living brain,
which reveal that brain stiffness decreases with age. This award focuses on the
development of fundamental knowledge to connect brain tissue microstructure with
local mechanical properties measured noninvasively. Employing imaging technology
available in the local clinic, mechanical maps of the brain can then be
generated and used as a baseline to determine the stage of age-related brain
degeneration, or to monitor the efficacy of an intervention. This award will
enhance the outreach efforts of both principal investigators towards continuing
to attract engineers from traditionally underrepresented groups interested in
the intersection of computational mechanics, soft-tissue mechanics, image
processing, and neuroscience. In addition to the enrichment of the mechanics-
related curriculum and training of future engineers in research aligned with the
national healthy brain initiatives, this project is expected to directly impact
the broader medical communities at the two institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two important technical advances have provided insight
into the development and degeneration of brain neurons: cell-level
mechanobiology and high-resolution in vivo magnetic resonance elastography. The
challenge is to unify these two levels of analysis in order to obtain a rigorous
biomechanical view of the white matter of the human brain during normal aging.
This award supports the development of hierarchical multiscale models of white
matter micromechanics based on medical imaging and published histological data.
These models will enable the interpretation of the magnetic resonance
elastography data in terms of certain parameters in axon microstructure. Local
viscoelastic properties will be spatially correlated with architectural metrics
of the axonal network, so that the biomechanical properties of the brain can be
investigated across subjects and age groups. The main outcome of this multiscale
modeling effort is to relate the structural integrity of the axons to locally
averaged functional properties quantified by magnetic resonance imaging. This
will help explain how the age-related changes in the brain white matter are
related to alterations in connectivity and mechanical coupling between neurons
and glial cells as they age.