* 1437409
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Environmental Transformation, Exposure from Sediment, and Toxicity (E-TEST) for ZnO Nanomaterials in Natural Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Helen Poynton, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 177,689.00

PI: Poynton, Helen / Unrine, Jason Proposal Number: 1437409/ 1437451

The study of nanoparticle (NP) aging and aging conditions is an important part
of NP nanotoxicology research. One essential aspect is to be able to
differentiate between possible intrinsic toxicity of NPs from the toxicity of
their soluble ions. The investigators propose an interdisciplinary approach that
combines isotope tracing with NP aging, RNA sequencing technology, and dynamic
modeling to study mechanisms of nanoparticle bioavailability in sediment water.
The isotopic tracing will use stable isotope tracer techniques, which will
enable the investigators to better identify whether the toxicity is due to the
NPs themselves or to dissolved Zn ions. The study of nanoparticle aging and
aging conditions is an important aspect in nanotoxicology research, as is the
ability to differentiate between the effect of the nanoparticles and their
soluble ions, which is critical in understanding the fate and transport of these
particles in the environment. The PIs have a record of strong commitment to
outreach and education of students and will continue their activities, such as
making a permanent exhibition of NP interactions with the environment and the
human body at the Kentucky Science Center, in Louisville, KY.

This proposal aims to characterize NP partitioning between the water column and
sediments, to describe how particle aging influences these processes, and to
understand the consequences of this partitioning for sediment dwelling
organisms. Specifically, the PI will investigate ZnO nanoparticles and their
interaction with sediments, addressing several key parameters in understanding
long term NP effects in the environment. Differentiation between the effect of
the nanoparticles and their soluble ions is critical in understanding the fate
and transport of these particles in the environment. They lay out several
hypotheses to test, e.g., that decreasing NP solubility will result in decreased
uptake of Zn++ by _Hyalella Azteca_ , a species of amphipod crustacean and that
NP uptake will occur primarily at the sediment surface, while Zn++ ion uptake
will occur primarily through water column exposure. The investigators call this
approach Environmental Transformation, Exposure from Sediments, and Toxicity
(E-TEST). These studies and approach will introduce new techniques in an
integrated way for nanoparticle assessment. The experiments are well thought-out
and it is likely that excellent information will come from the study. This is an
excellent collaboration between two investigators that approach the problem from
different perspectives.