* 1437656
* Surface Analytical Investigation on Organometal Trihalide Perovskite
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Yongli Gao, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2019
* USD 337,100.00

Principal Investigator: Yongli Gao&lt;br/&gt;Number:
1437656&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential
source of pollution-free energy on earth. Solar cells for producing electricity
require materials that absorb the sun?s energy and convert its photons to
electrons, a process called photovoltaics. The search for the best photovoltaic
material is an active area of solar cell research. Recently, an exciting new
class of photovoltaic materials called organo-metal perovskites has emerged.
These materials are promising because they have low production cost, use
elements and materials abundant in the earth's crust, and currently possess
solar energy conversion efficiencies of over 15%. However, the reasons why these
materials work so well is not really known. The overall goal of this project is
to gain a fundamental understanding of the origins of photovoltaic performance
in perovskite based solar cell materials by using highly sensitive techniques to
probe the material surfaces and interfaces without destroying the material
itself. This fundamental understanding can be used to advance the development of
perovskite materials for solar cell applications. The project activities will
train graduate and undergraduate students in state of the art techniques for
surface characterization of materials. Existing programs at the University of
Rochester will be used to provide lab tours, short lectures, and hand-on
experiences for high school girls in organic electronics to stimulate interest
in STEM fields. Robust perovskite solar cell demonstration kits will be
developed for use by high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, organo-metal perovskites have emerged
as an exciting new class of earth-abundant photovoltaic materials, with solar
energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 15% and potential for low manufacturing
cost. The overall goal of this project is to use an array of surface analysis
tools to gain a fundamental understanding of origins of photovoltaic performance
of organometal trihalide perovskite materials. The proposed research will study
the electronic structure, interface formation, carrier relaxation dynamics, and
factors affecting the stability of these materials in air, through variety of
techniques, which include ultraviolet and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
inverse photoemission spectroscopy, and time-resolved 2-photon photoemission
spectroscopy. The surface structure and morphology will be characterized using
low energy electron diffraction, scanning tunneling microscopy and atomic force
microscopy. Finally, perovskite thin film device structures will be prepared and
characterized in situ under vacuum and then transferred directly to the surface
analytical tools to determine how interface structures change. This integrated
approach will provide a comprehensive description of the electronic structure
and interface properties of perovskite based solar cell materials and their
correlation to photovoltaic performance. The project activities will train
graduate and undergraduate students in state of the art techniques for surface
characterization of materials. Existing programs at the University of Rochester
will be used to provide lab tours, short lectures, and hand-on experiences for
high school girls in organic electronics to stimulate interest in STEM fields.
Robust perovskite solar cell demonstration kits will be developed for use by
high school students.