* 1437450
* Strength and Reliability of Graphene Produced Using Industrially Scalable Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* James Hone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 398,101.00

Graphene--a single atomic layer of carbon atoms--is a two-dimensional material
with many exceptional properties. For example, pristine defect-free graphene has
the highest electrical conductivity as well as the greatest mechanical strength
of any known material. To harness these unique properties, scientists and
engineers have fabricated many different electrical, optical and magnetic
devices from graphene using nanofabrication methods. Many of these devices are
much superior to their microscale counterparts in terms of performance and/or
energy usage. Thus graphene has tremendous potential to impact society
positively. However pristine defect-free graphene is extremely expensive because
manual methods must be used to isolate and manipulate it. To address this,
several methods to grow graphene in an industrially scalable manner have been
demonstrated recently. Graphene grown by such methods would benefit from an
economy of scale that could translate to the mass production of nanofabricated
devices that take advantage of graphene's unique set of properties. However
graphene grown by these methods contains defects that degrade the properties,
especially the mechanical properties. Our project addresses the fundamental
challenge of quantifying the strength and reliability of graphene grown by
industrially scalable methods. The outcome of the project is expected to be: (1)
an experimental method to quantify the strength and reliability of as-grown
graphene; (2) an understanding of how the growth process can be optimized to
maximize the strength and reliability of as-grown graphene; (3) an
experimentally validated multiscale theoretical and computational tool to
predict the strength and reliability of graphene; and, (4) demonstration that
as-grown graphene can be used as the backbone for ultrahigh strength laminate
composites. The availability of large area CVD graphene with well-understood
properties will make possible the mass production of graphene-based devices such
as ever smaller and faster electronic devices and ultra high strength composite
materials. In addition, the PIs and supported student will interact with high
school teachers in the public New York City school system to host student visits
and to develop laboratory experiments to measure the mechanical response of
materials fitting high school science projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective is to quantify CVD graphene's probability of failure at a given stress
as well as its mean strength. The Weibull probability distribution for a
heterogeneous stress state will be employed. The experimental methodology will
be via nanoindentation and pressure loading of free-standing circular films of
CVD graphene. In order to rationalize the experimental results, a multiple
length constitutive model of grain boundaries in graphene will be developed.
Molecular dynamics simulations will predict the strength of individual grain
boundaries that were previously characterized at the atomic length scale using
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). This information will be transferred to
continuum cohesive zone models that will be incorporated into detailed finite
element computational models. Thereby, the model will also account rigorously
for the non-linear and anisotropic properties of the individual grains in the
polycrystalline CVD graphene. The experimentally validated physics-based
predictive capability of the model will serve as a tool to optimize the CVD
growth of graphene and other two-dimensional materials.