* 1437965
* Collaborative Research: SusChem: Enabling the Biorefinery: Isolation, Fractionation, and Transformation of Bio-based Feedstocks into Fuels and Chemical Products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Julie Zimmerman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 201,423.00

1437965 (Zimmerman), 1437595 (Beckman), and 1437688 (Soh). Biomass has potential
to meet many of society's energy and chemical needs, replacing the need for
fossil fuels, while minimizing environmental impact. In this project, a
biorefinery approach will be explored to achieve viable and sustainable
utilization of biomass for fuels and valuable co-products. Analogous to
petroleum refining for a wide spectrum of products, biorefining maximizes
utilization of all fractions, reducing economic and environmental barriers. In
addition to fuel, some of the components also represent a palette of higher-
value, non-fuel products such as nutritional supplements and feedstocks for
bioplastics. There are orders of magnitude differences in the value of products
that can be produced depending chemical structure and intended end-use (i.e.,
fuel, fine chemicals, nutraceuticals). Advances in selective, efficient, and
sustainable technologies for the extraction and conversion of lipids from crude
biomass are essential to enhance a transition to a biobased economy. This
project will develop separation and processing techniques that are robust,
selective, and tolerant of varying biomass compositions, to gain economic and
environmental benefits through a biorefinery approach. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall aim of this work is to fundamentally understand the
system variables for extraction, fractionation and transformation of minimally
processed biomass to produce fuel and other value-added co-products using a
carbon dioxide and methanol mixture for efficient processing and separation. The
work will model the fundamental system properties based on experiments with
representative compounds and in turn the model will be used to control
processing of real world wet biomass samples. The specific aims of the project
are: 1) Ascertain and model the phase behavior of systems consisting of
methanol, CO2, trans-esterification reaction substrates (reagents,
intermediates, and products/byproducts), with or without water, to better
understand the necessary operating conditions for conversion and fractionation
of fatty acid methyl esters; 2) Evaluate and optimize heterogeneously catalyzed
trans-esterification in CO2-methanol for selective conversion of model lipids
and recovery of specific methyl ester fractions; 3) Apply experimentally
determined parameters and model outcomes to optimize conversion and
fractionation of real world biomass feedstocks including pre-extracted oils,
waste feedstocks, and wet algal biomass; 4) Perform process design, life cycle
assessment, and techno-economic analyses for informing system design to
integrate this technology into a biorefinery setting. As such the efforts of
this collaborative research will provide information on system fundamentals as
well as the broader economic and environmental impacts of the system if
implemented effectively. The project intrinsically provides student-learning
opportunities in terms of high level research as well as educational resources
regarding sustainability. The design approach modeled in this project provides
an example of life cycle thinking mitigating the potential for unintended
consequences. Graduate student researchers will have the opportunity to
translate experimental results into educational materials, to be delivered on
campus, in the community, and also globally via online curricula. Undergraduate
researchers will be recruited through campus programs that support students from
groups that are historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The project will be used in undergraduate
process design courses, integrating sustainability and green design into the
core chemical engineering curriculum. Further, a short-course will be developed
between the collaborators in the topic of green engineering and sustainable
design, using this project as an example platform with developed materials made
publically accessible. In terms of K-12, the project will be used to expand on
established relationships serving underrepresented populations. Efforts will
range from "greener" school competitions for Grades 6-8, to a focused experience
for early high school students associated with a 3-week program in residence on
campus. A new course, "Energy and Sustainability" will be designed and
implemented to reinforce scientific principles that students will have learned
in their 9th grade physical science class and to prepare these students for
their 10th grade biology and 11th grade chemistry classes while introducing
concepts of green design.