* 1437021
* Natural Attenuation of Groundwater Contaminant Plumes in Riverbeds: Control of Hyporheic Zone Mixing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Erich Hester, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

1437021&lt;br/&gt;Hester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural Attenuation of Groundwater
Contaminant Plumes in Riverbeds: Control by Hyporheic Zone
Mixing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contaminated groundwater eventually exits to surface
water including streams, rivers, and estuaries, posing a threat to human and
ecological health. In fact, the US EPA found that half of identified hazardous
waste sites impact surface water. Excess nutrients also frequently well-up into
rivers in agricultural areas. As groundwater contaminants move toward rivers,
they eventually cross through the hyporheic zone beneath and adjacent to rivers,
where mixing of surface water and groundwater in shallow sediments creates
conditions that are often far more reactive than in overlying surface water or
deeper groundwater. Contaminants that have degraded little in up-gradient
aquifers can degrade up to 100 % once they reach the hyporheic zone (hyporheic
natural attenuation). Yet upwelling contaminants often require mixing with
reactants from surface water in the hyporheic zone in order to capitalize on
this great potential for hyporheic natural attenuation. The results of this
project will transform groundwater remediation, risk assessment, and total
maximum daily loads to address ecological, human health, and human recreational
risks and impairments due to groundwater contamination intersecting surface
water. Knowing how hyporheic natural attenuation potential varies with
hydrologic and geomorphic conditions will allow calculating the amount of
hyporheic natural attenuation expected at specific sites. The proposed project
will also lead to subsequent projects addressing specific contaminants and
engineering approaches to enhance hyporheic natural attenuation, such as carbon
amendment by riparian reforestation. These lab experiments will serve as
excellent tools for students in the PI's surface water-groundwater class to
visualize hyporheic zone processes in ways that are otherwise not possible. The
PI will work with the School of Engineering's Center for the Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity to recruit under-represented undergraduates to participate
in project research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controls on such mixing have received
almost no attention, yet recent work shows that such mixing is highly sensitive
to hydrologic conditions. To tap the potential for hyporheic natural
attenuation, it is necessary to better understand such controls on hyporheic
mixing, and better distinguish mixing-dependent reactions from related processes
such as dilution. This will allow prediction of how hyporheic natural
attenuation varies among rivers of differing hydrologic, climatic, and
biogeochemical conditions; among different types of contaminants; across time
scales such as storms and seasons; and in response to engineered enhancements.
This project will be the first to examine how the behavior of upwelling
contaminants is affected by realistically complex hydrologic flow paths in the
hyporheic zone. Both the tracer and biogeochemical portions of this study are
therefore fundamentally novel. For example, this project will produce the first
measurements of local dispersivities and first estimates of microbial growth
parameters for riverine sediment subject to realistic hyporheic zone flow
conditions. Such parameters are required for a wide range of biogeochemical
reaction modeling of hyporheic zone processes. This project will also be
groundbreaking methodologically, including the first laboratory simulation of
upwelling of tracer and mixing with surface water advecting through the
hyporheic zone. By focusing on broadly relevant processes like transport and
transformation of tracers, oxygen, and carbon, this project will shed light on
transformations of a wide range of pollutants in the hyporheic zone, including
metals, organic contaminants that act as electron acceptors (e.g., chlorinated
solvents), and organic contaminants that act as electron donors (e.g., petroleum
hydrocarbons). This work will support future studies that evaluate other
electron acceptors (e.g., nitrate, iron), specific contaminants, and entrained
particular carbon, as well as extension of these experiments to larger lab
experiments (flowing flume) and field sites.