* 1437820
* Platform Nanoscale Sorbents for Advanced Separation and Recovery of Metals and Metalloids in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Daniel Giammar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 329,835.00

1437820&lt;br/&gt;Fortner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Platform Nanoscale Sorbents for
Advanced Separation and Recovery of Metals and Metalloids in
Water&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will benefit society by providing
information that can enable a new approach to adsorptive removal of metals in
drinking water. The project is focused on improved treatment of three
contaminants, arsenic, uranium and chromium, which are of current interest both
within the United States and internationally. Newly created information on
magnetic iron oxide sorbents will not only enable their integration into
sorption treatment technologies, but it will also benefit other particle-based
environmental technologies related to sensing, imaging, and remediation.
Systematic evaluation of sorbent regeneration and the properties of the residual
solids will contribute to the life cycle assessments of processes that use new
sorbents. The research plan will help train the future science and technology
workforce through the involvement of high school, undergraduate, and Ph.D.
students. In all educational activities, programs will be used to promote
increased participation of underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate a potentially transformative new approach to preparing
tailored sorbent media for removal of metal and metalloids from drinking water.
The platform approach uses engineered iron oxide nanoparticles with high surface
areas and affinities for metal adsorption that can be controlled with respect to
their aggregation and deposition on substrate supports. The project will advance
scientific understanding of metal adsorption of arsenic, uranium and chromium to
a novel set of engineered nanoparticles and the factors that control the
properties of the nanoparticles and their interactions with supporting media.
The project objectives are to: (1) develop model libraries of engineered iron
oxide nanoparticles with controlled size, composition, and aqueous stabilities;
(2) quantify the adsorption affinity and capacity of the new sorbents and
elucidate adsorption mechanisms; (3) evaluate the performance and regeneration
potential of sorbent media in realistic treatment configurations. The PIs will
pursue these objectives through three integrated tasks. Task 1 they will develop
a library of iron oxide nanoparticles with a range of surface coatings and
particle sizes, and then characterize the stability of particle suspensions and
their deposition to substrate media. Task 2 is a detailed investigation of the
adsorption of arsenic, chromium, and uranium to the nanoparticles that will
combine batch adsorption experiments, spectroscopic characterization of adsorbed
metals, and surface complexation modeling of adsorption. Task 3 will evaluate
the performance and regeneration of substrate-supported sorbent materials in
continuous-flow column experiments. The research approach will be closely linked
with education and outreach activities at their university and in their
community.