* 1437836
* Enhanced Production of Advanced Biofuels through Model Guided Synthetic Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Mark Blenner, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2018
* USD 336,751.00

Principal Investigator: Mark Blenner Number: 1437836

This project seeks to improve the production of biodiesel in a genetically
engineered strain of bacteria by understanding how sugars are converted into
biodiesel. This will be accomplished through cell-based monitoring of the
microorganism?s metabolism control processes through the principles of synthetic
biology, which look holistically at how all metabolic processes within a cell
interact with one another. A second aim of this project is control these
metabolic processes to maintain high biodiesel production rates under changing
environmental or process conditions. The results of this project may also apply
to other metabolic pathways that produce sustainable fuels and chemicals,
allowing transfer of these techniques from the laboratory to industry with more
certainty and fewer complications. The project activities will also include
efforts to engage women potentially interested in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers in the state of South Carolina.
Education and research will be integrated by providing training opportunities
for students already in STEM, and local outreach to young women who might become
more interested in STEM. Finally, this research will be integrated into a new
elective course on protein and metabolic engineering offered at Clemson
University.

Technical Description

This project will use simple unsteady-state kinetic models to rationalize
protein engineering and synthetic biology based improvements to E. coli
biodiesel production. Preliminary modeling studies identify inefficiencies due
to pathway imbalance, and suggest that better flux distributions can be achieved
through genetic and protein engineering efforts. Enzymes with catalytic
efficiencies predicted to improve biodiesel production will be used. Critical
enzymes will be engineered using directed evolution to relieve pathway
bottlenecks. Protein-level feedback control will be engineered and combined with
genetic level feedback control to allow pathway fluxes to remain high in spite
of short and long time-scale metabolic perturbations. The combination of genetic
and protein-level dynamic control will allow biofuel and other chemical
producing systems to withstand perturbations from environmental variation and
scale-up conditions without suffering large losses in yield and efficiency. The
results of this project may lead to more general methods for balancing pathways
that does not rely on explicit kinetic or flux data. The project activities will
also include efforts to engage women potentially interested in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers in the state of South
Carolina. Education and research will be integrated by providing training
opportunities for students already in STEM, and local outreach to young women
who might become more interested in STEM. Finally, this research will be
integrated into a new elective course on protein and metabolic engineering
offered at Clemson University.