* 1437988
* Nonlinear analysis of flow-induced instabilities of wind turbine blades using theoretical models and supported by experimental data
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Matthew Lackner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 280,602.00

Principal Investigator: Yahya Modarres-Sadeghi Number: 1437988 Title: Nonlinear
analysis of flow-induced instabilities of wind turbine blades using theoretical
models and supported by experimental data Institution: University of
Massachusetts, Amherst

Increasingly, wind farms for the production electricity are being sited off
shore to harvest this renewable energy resource. The available energy that
individual wind turbines within the wind farm may extract is proportional to the
swept area of the turbine rotor blades, creating a powerful incentive to design,
manufacture, and commercially use longer and more slender blades. This trend is
driven by economics - wind farm installation costs are substantially higher
offshore than onshore, and so increased energy production per installed wind
turbine is crucial for cost-effective offshore wind energy. However, as blades
become longer and more slender, they become more susceptible to various flow
induced instabilities. A particularly troublesome instability is the unwanted
blade oscillations, or flutter, caused by the interaction of the blade with the
wind. This unstable behavior can lead to catastrophic failure of the blades.
This limitation poses a threat to the integrity of offshore wind turbines and
their ability to reliably operate. In the current research, flow-induced
instabilities of wind turbine blades will be studied using advanced
computational models based on a technique called nonlinear analysis in order to
better understand these instabilities and develop guidelines for the design of
future wind turbine blades. As part of the proposed activities, the principal
investigator will organize a session at the North American Wind Energy Academy
(NAWEA) on Offshore Wind Energy, develop YouTube presentations on wind turbines
targeted to middle and high school students, and give demonstrations to local
high school students on the same topic.

Technical Description

The goal of this research is to develop a nonlinear, fully-coupled continuous
fluid-structure interaction model for flexible and rotating wind turbine blades.
This model will be used to study flow-induced instabilities for long and slender
blades that are anticipated to be used in future shore wind turbines. A wind
turbine blade is an inherently three-dimensional and nonlinear system.
Nevertheless, current approaches for wind turbine blade instability analysis
have modeled the blades as two-dimensional, linear systems in order to bypass
the difficulties associated with three-dimensional, nonlinear system modeling.
However, as blades become longer and more slender, the need for more
comprehensive models is necessary. The proposed nonlinear model for flexible and
rotating blades will account for varying blade shapes and cross-sections, as
well as bending and torsional properties. Geometric, flow-related and fluid-
structure interaction nonlinearities will be embedded into the model. A
comprehensive series of wind tunnel experiments will be conducted to validate
this model. The validated model will then be used to provide a fundamental
understanding of flow-induced instabilities of wind turbine blades. This
approach will also enable the study of nonlinear instability of flexible
structures with non-uniform properties along their length under highly nonlinear
interaction with flow, and thus provide a broader understanding of the physics
underlying nonlinear fluid-structure interaction systems. With respect to
education and broader impacts, the principal investigator will organize a
session at the North American Wind Energy Academy (NAWEA) on Offshore Wind
Energy. Outreach activities include development of YouTube presentations on wind
turbines targeted to middle and high school students, and demonstrations to
local high school students on the same topic.