* 1437054
* Nitrogen Fixing Prokaryotes in Corals: Is Nitrogen Fixation a Core Function of the Coral Microbiome?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Lesser, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2018
* USD 799,896.00

Coral reefs provide crucial services for people and are becoming increasingly
threatened by climate change. But many important questions about coral reefs
remain unanswered, such as how their incredibly high biodiversity has developed
and is maintained. It is well known that reef-forming corals consist of many
different groups of bacteria and algae that live in the tissues of corals, but
the function of most of these microbes remain unknown. One of the reported
microbial functions is the process called nitrogen fixation. Nitrogen fixation
is better known as a very important process on land. For example, alfalfa in
agricultural fields has microbes associated with its roots that can capture
nitrogen from the air and replace nitrogen lost from soils in water. The
nitrogen cycle in the oceans is less well known, especially in tropical waters
where nitrogen levels are low, although nitrogen in coral reef systems is known
to derive mainly from nitrogen fixation. Recently nitrogen-fixing bacteria have
been discovered in the tissues of corals, which begs the overarching question of
this project: how important is the contribution of this fixed nitrogen to corals
and to the surrounding environment? This research will integrate with an
educational program that fosters critical thinking and cooperative learning
among participants by involving undergraduate students who will work closely
with the scientists. Students from underrepresented backgrounds will be
recruited; the undergraduates will become part of an existing undergraduate
research opportunities program where they receive mentoring, financial support,
and intensive writing support while conducting original research projects of
their own. Also a new program will be developed with the university's veterans
office to attract and transition veterans into science fields across campus.
Finally, outreach activities will be organized at local public high schools, and
some public environmental education lectures about the ecology and biology of
coral reefs are planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant gaps in understanding
exist about the role of prokaryotes in the physiology, biochemistry and ecology
of reef-forming corals. This project will assess how different prokaryotic
communities affect the biogeochemistry of nitrogen, specifically nitrogen
fixation, within the coral holobiont and how nitrogen fixation contributes to
the dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) content of excreted mucus. The introduction
of "new nitrogen" though nitrogen fixation and release of DON could have
significant impacts on the biogeochemistry of nitrogen in the adjacent benthic
communities surrounding corals. High throughput sequencing tools will be used to
quantify the taxonomic and functional diversity of these symbioses in corals
from the Pacific and Caribbean, as well as the taxonomic diversity of nifH genes
in the tissues of corals. Rates of nitrogen fixation on several coral species
from Australia, Hawaii and Curacao will be measured, along with the
translocation of fixed nitrogen to all compartments of the coral holobiont, and
the contribution of "new nitrogen" to the DON of mucus released to the
environment determined. The results will increase our understanding of the
taxonomic and functional biodiversity of symbiotic prokaryotes in corals. This
project will also help guide future studies on the biogeochemical cycling of
coral-derived nitrogen on coral reefs.