* 1437417
* EAGER: Magnetic Interrogation Of Mesoscale Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Nelly Mateeva, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 09/30/2017
* USD 119,999.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will funds studies in
three contemporary areas that lay the foundation for a comprehensive
collaboration between The Florida A &amp; M University (FAMU) and The National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), an NSF facility. Faculty at FAMU, an
HBCU that is a predominantly teaching university, will collaborate with staff
from the NHMFL to study new catalysts, new techniques for preparing hard/soft
magnetic materials and nanoscale protein assemblies. This collaborative activity
will provide important new research opportunities to faculty and students at
FAMU and will seed a long term relationship between the institutions. The
proposed activities will strengthen the activities in the existing doctoral
program in Physics and will support the development of a doctoral program in
Chemistry. The multidisciplinary program that will develop will significantly
impact and enhance research in physics, chemistry, biology and engineering, with
a direct link to the NHMFL and will strengthen the nations STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed studies will seed activity in three areas of current interest. These
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Catalyst and catalyst assemblies based on magnetic
molecules. This work seeks to establish the fundamental mechanisms by which
high-valent species of Earth-abundant metals achieve water splitting. It will
also provide information of critical importance for addressing the correlation
between the nature/structure of high-valent intermediates and their catalytic
activity towards water oxidation. These studies have potential implications for
the development of sustainable energy systems that take advantage of catalytic
water splitting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Studies of meso-scale spring-exchange
magnets assembled in polymer superstructures. This work will explore new
synthetic methods to assemble hard/soft composite magnets via bottom up
formation of mesoscale structures to deliberately form controlled magnetic
domains by utilization of nano-processing. The proposed research will result in
novel materials that will have potential to substantially decrease our
dependence on the imported rare-earth metals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Studies
of nanoscale protein and peptide assemblies. These studies will result in a
fundamental understanding of the different mechanisms of self-assembly in
peptides and how these mechanisms give rise to a resultant macroscopic property
(elastic modulus, yield stress). This will allow control over the final property
and be able to tune peptide properties towards a particular application (for use
as cell and tissue scaffolds). These studies will also result in novel NMR
techniques that characterize the self-assembly mechanisms which can be used to
investigate aggregation and self-assembly in a wide variety of other materials.
&lt;br/&gt;