* 1437532
* Automated Computational Modeling and Adaptive Control for Critical Patient Resuscitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Matthew Franchek, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 09/30/2020
* USD 320,000.00

Physicians face enormous challenges in making decisions to resuscitate and
stabilize critically ill and injured patients based on rapidly changing vital
signs. This project will investigate automated processing of physiological
measurements, using high-speed computational models to provide near-
instantaneous treatment recommendations to stabilize blood pressure, cardiac
output and renal function. Additionally, feedback control algorithms will be
developed capable of automatically regulating the administration of drugs and
fluids to optimize critical care, subject to the specific physiological state of
the patient. This advance in continually monitored and adjusted personalized
treatment is expected to benefit patients suffering from trauma, burn,
infection, and shock. The resulting decision assistance system and adaptive
closed-loop drug and fluid delivery system will greatly benefit the accuracy and
reliability of critical care treatments, resulting in increased survival rates
and improved therapeutic outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop adaptive models of cardio-vascular and fluid response, subject to the
injection of vasoactive drugs and fluid therapy. The corresponding drug and
fluid administration problem is challenged by a changing physiological dynamic
response and a significant time-delay in the response due to drug absorption.
Multi-model observers will be investigated to provide instantaneous dosage
recommendations to doctors to achieve targeted values of blood pressure, cardiac
output and urinary output. The models will compute the patient's responsiveness
to various drugs and fluids, and will self-adapt to varying responses to
treatment from patient-to-patient and within a single patient over time (intra-
patient and inter-patient variability). Detection algorithms will be developed
to identify potential sudden changes in the patient's physiological response,
such as the presence of an internal hemorrhage, and alert the doctors.
Additionally, model-based adaptive and robust closed-loop drug infusion
algorithms will be developed to automate the drug administration process for
optimized patient resuscitation. The research team will collaborate with medical
experts that will provide physiological data from animal experiments and will
assist in the evaluation of the developed models and decision support
algorithms.