* 1437916
* Particulate Matter Size and Composition Change in Response to Transport from the Outdoor to Indoor Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Peter DeCarlo, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2018
* USD 337,657.00

1437916 DeCarlo, Peter F.

Particulate matter size and composition change in response to transport from the
outdoor to indoor environment

In the field of air pollution, very little is known about how particle
composition changes in real time when particulate matter is transported from
outdoors to the indoor environment. The goal of this project is online real-time
characterization of particulate chemical composition and size distribution
outdoors, indoors, and in the building supply air with high time resolution (6
minute cycle of 2 minute sampling at each location). The research plan intends
to fortify collaboration between outdoor air quality and an indoor air quality
research. Boundary lines between these two disciplines are typically rigid, but
much can be learned by two groups working in concert, as is proposed here. To
facilitate this interaction, workshops will be convened on outdoor and indoor
air quality, bringing together investigators in our region to define a research
agenda with the goal of understanding the transformations occurring when outdoor
air moves indoors. Insights gained will have the potential to improve our
understanding of risk due to indoor environmental exposure to outdoor particles
that are transported into the indoor environment and change in composition
during that transition. Finally, public outreach opportunities are prevalent in
the Philadelphia area. Events such as the Philadelphia Science Fair hosted by
the Franklin Institute, offer an excellent opportunity for PI DeCarlo to
showcase the results of this work to members of the general public.

Utilizing the unique dataset, generated by instrumentation recently acquired
through an NSF MRI grant (Award 1229298), this study will examine the effect of
temperature and humidity gradients on dynamic partitioning behavior of
particulate matter chemical composition and size distribution as it is
transported from outdoors to the indoor environment. This study will ask several
questions, for example: 1) How do the changes to outdoor PM size and chemical
composition from typical processes (e.g. diurnal cycles, photochemical
production, weather events, seasonal cycles) influence the size resolved
chemical composition of indoor PM? 2) How do changes in environmental factors
(gradients in temperature and humidity) influence the size resolved chemical
composition of PM transported from outdoors to indoors. 3.) Are there additional
chemical and physical changes to particulate matter induced in an occupied
versus unoccupied room? It appears that this is the first study to use any type
of Aerodyne Aerosol Mass Spectrometer in the indoor environment. Aerosol mass
spectrometer instruments are commonly used in atmospheric particulate
measurements, but they have not yet been utilized in indoor particulate
measurements and research. Pilot study investigations demonstrated the
feasibility of this experimental approach and the richness of the data
generated. The initial observations show the need for high time resolution and
chemical information provided by aerosol mass spectrometry. The full study will
make use of the real-time measurements of particulate sulfate, nitrate,
ammonium, black carbon and a variety of organics species using both positive
matrix factorization and ion markers for specific compounds. It is expected that
the results of this study will be an important contribution, unique in the
indoor air quality field.