* 1437482
* Investigating the Unsteady Rheology and Evolving Microstructure of Suspensions of Swimming Microorganism
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Paulo Arratia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 336,124.00

CBET-1437482

This award provides support to investigate the physical properties of
suspensions of microorganisms that can propel themselves through liquids, also
thought of as "swimmers." A suspension of this kind is an example of a class of
materials called active matter, which is an important new branch of soft matter
physics and engineering. The project will examine the rheology (the properties
of a fluid or suspension when it flows) of suspensions of microorganisms in a
viscous liquid. The investigators will use two devices that they have developed
to allow them to simultaneously measure the rheology of the suspension in
unsteady flow and observe the suspended microorganisms directly. They will
correlate the measured properties of the suspension with the mechanism that the
microorganism uses to swim, and with spatial arrangements of the microorganisms
induced by flow. The results will be useful to scientists and engineers who
process suspensions of microorganisms, which is necessary for the manufacture of
pharmaceuticals, biofuels and other products.

The unsteady rheology of suspensions of microorganisms will be examined using
two devices, an interfacial rheometer and a microfluidic-based rheometer, that
allow simultaneous measurement of rheology with observations of fluid
microstructure. Suspensions of three kinds of microorganisms will be
investigated: the algae C. reinhardtii and V. cateri, and the bacterium E. Coli.
These were chosen because each exhibits distinctly different swimming
kinematics. The effects of swimming kinematics, volume fraction of swimmers, and
level of swimming activity will be correlated with measurements of rheological
properties such as loss and storage moduli. The arrangement of the
microorganisms will be tracked over time and correlated with changes in the
moduli. Finally, the applicability of newly developed constitutive equations for
active matter will be tested with these active suspensions.