* 1437573
* RAPID:  Mitigation of Threatened Cultural Resources at the Shaktoolik Airport Site
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Christyann Darwent, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2015
* USD 24,734.00

This RAPID grant funds mapping and small-scale testing of imminently threatened
archaeological resources at the Shaktoolik Airport heritage site (NOB-072) in
northwestern Alaska. The research team visited this site in 2013 and noted a
large concentration of more than 25 late Thule (ca. <AD 1400) to early contact
period ?house? depressions. This house concentration includes what appears to be
a communal or ceremonial men?s house (Karigi/Qargi in Inupiaq or Qasgiq in
Yup'ik), a structure that has been documented ethnographically but rarely
investigated archaeologically. However, this site is located on a low-lying spit
of land that is in immediate danger of being destroyed by coastal erosion and
flooding from increased ocean storminess and river outwash. In addition, melting
permafrost is lessening artifact and site preservation ? something that once
made the Arctic an exceptional place for archaeology. The intellectual merit of
this RAPID is high. Given the number and density of dwellings, this site is
unique to the Thule period in Alaskan prehistory. The potential for a ceremonial
house increases the uniqueness of the site, as such features are rare in
northern Alaska. In addition, this particular site spans the prehistoric to
historical period, which was a time of considerable cultural, economic, and
social transformation including massive epidemics commensurate with the end of
the Little Ice Age and collapse of the northern caribou population in the
mid-1800s (i.e., Yup'ik territories were contracting and Inupiaq territories
expanding). Shaktoolik site was the nexus of early trading among Inupiat,
Yupiit, Athbaskans, Russians and Americans and has the potential to shed light
on the role this early historic period and its shifting economic and social
alliances played in the Inupiat expansion. Because the Airport site is located
on the outskirts of the Native village of Shaktoolik it offers an excellent
opportunity for local community involvement in the research, and thus the
broader impacts for this project is also high. PI Darwent has developed a robust
plan for the inclusion of community members in the research, including training
and directly employing local youth in the site testing. In addition, the
exploration and mitigation through mapping and testing of the site will assist
the scientists and community members in gaining a deeper understanding of local
and regional cultural heritage, and has the potential to safe guard important
information for future generations, community members and scientists alike. In
addition, the research offers training to UCD graduate students and potential
for future dissertation projects.