* 1437101
* Measurement of Forces and Their Role in Stem Cell Differentiation Using Suspended Fiber Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Amrinder Nain, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2019
* USD 380,000.00

Stem cells are the essential bridge connecting embryos to the adult life span
through amazing capability of unlimited self-renewal and commitment to become
(differentiate into) specialized cells representing tissues and organs. In
addition, they are key players in repair mechanisms as impairment of stem cell
functionality is directly related to disease models including cancer. Cells in
their native environment are constantly subjected to both biochemical and
biophysical signals. While the role of biochemical cues on stem cell behavior is
well documented, only recently have we begun to understand the role of
biophysical cues. In this context, very little is known on the role of
ubiquitous forces cells feel or exert constantly during differentiation. This
award funds fundamental research in determining these forces and their role in
stem cell differentiation. The new knowledge will allow development of scaffolds
capable of providing simultaneous biochemical and biophysical factors specific
to a cell type, thus impacting both developmental and disease biology. This
research involves multiple disciplines including engineering (mechanical,
biomedical), polymer physics, biology and mathematics under the umbrella of
rapidly growing mechanobiology. The knowledge from this research will benefit
the U.S. economy and society, while also providing pathways for increased
participation of underrepresented groups in research and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plans to build extracellular
matrix (ECM)-mimicking nanofiber-based scaffolds called 'nanonets' as force
measurement probes. Nanonets are composed of aligned and suspended nanofibrous
assemblies of a mix of diameters, lengths, and spacing in double layer
configuration. Furthermore, nanonets contain fused fiber intersections, which
allow migrating single cells to deflect fiber segments, thus providing a measure
of forces using inverse methods. This multiscale approach will permit
simultaneous investigations on the role of biophysical (curvature, structural
stiffness (N/m)) and biochemical (growth factor concentrations) cues on
differentiation of single human bone-marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells
(h-MSCs) attached to suspended nanonets. This will allow development of a set of
force-differentiation (F-D) master curves calibrating the optimal biophysical
and biochemical contributions to mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. The
fundamental knowledge will contribute significantly by unraveling the role of
cell-ECM mechanobiological interactions at the single-cell level and provide
insights in development of implantable platforms for tissue regeneration, wound
healing sutures, single cell force measurement assays for early diagnosis and
drug testing for a wide variety of diseases including cancer.