* 1437232
* Collaborative Research: Manufacturing of Complex Lenses for Thermal Imaging, Night Vision and Surveillance Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Don Lucca, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2020
* USD 141,741.00

Ultra-precision machines utilize single crystal diamond tools to manufacture
lenses (optics) with dimensional accuracy that is on the order of a small
fraction of the diameter of a human hair (approximately one ten-millionth of one
meter). New ultra-precision machine technology enables the manufacture of lenses
(optics) of nearly arbitrary shape: freeform optics. This freedom allows lens
designers to think in entirely new ways. As one of the enabling technologies for
freeform optics, ultra-precision machining is poised to play a major role in an
optical revolution. A prime application area of this technology is the
manufacture of lenses for thermal imaging and surveillance, thermal imaging and
night vision systems (infrared imaging). This award supports fundamental
research needed for the cost effective manufacture of freeform infrared
(thermal) optics. While the immediate impact area is infrared imaging, the
research has broader application to many industry sectors critical to the U.S.
economy including solar energy, healthcare, biomedical, aerospace, and
automotive. This research crosses the disciplines of manufacturing, mechanical
engineering, materials science and optical science. The multi-disciplinary
approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reports in the
literature give numerous anecdotal examples of brittle materials that are
machinable by diamond milling ("diamond millable") but are not generally
considered "diamond turnable". The difference may be due to the interrupted or
non-steady state nature of the cutting process. The objective of this research
is to test the hypothesis that when diamond milling brittle materials, the
characteristics of the surface and subsurface depends not only on the geometric
parameters as in diamond turning, but also on the dynamic non-steady-state
parameters such as the time-in-cut and the dynamically changing chip thickness.
Researchers from UNC Charlotte and Oklahoma State University will design and
construct a simplified milling experiment with the capability to isolate and
measure the response of materials in different geometries ranging from those
typical to milling to high-speed nano-indentation. The surface and subsurface
characteristics will be measured with techniques ranging from atomic force
microscopy to Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry. The effort will target
infrared (IR) optics manufactured in single crystal germanium and IR-transparent
glass. Research results will not only enable more productive machining of the
targeted materials, but also provide a scientific basis for expanding the range
of "diamond millable" brittle materials for optical and other applications.