* 1437354
* GOALI:  Convective Delivery of Clot-Busting Drugs to Dead-End Arteries for Stroke Victims by Magnetically Driven Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 01/31/2019
* USD 261,240.00

CBET 1437354&lt;br/&gt;Bonnecaze, Roger T.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI:
Convective Delivery of Clot-Busting Drugs to Dead-End Arteries for Stroke
Victims by Magnetically Driven Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When flow through a
liquid-filled tube is blocked because of an obstruction, it is difficult to
deliver chemical agents that could remove the obstruction and restore flow
through the channel. Partial or complete obstruction of flow can occur in a
variety of situations, perhaps most notably in stroke victims whose cerebral
blood flow is blocked owing to a blood clot in a vessel. Delivering drugs such
as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) that can dissolve a clot and restore blood
flow is a challenge because the drug must diffuse to the clot, which is slow and
often ineffective. This GOALI project will explore the use of micron-sized iron
particles in a magnetic field that can cause fluid mixing in blocked channels
and improve transport of tPA along the length of the vessel to the clot.
Investigators at The University of Texas and Pulse Therapeutics, Inc. will
conduct a series of experiments and numerical simulations to analyze the flow
induced by the particles and optimize transport of clot-dissolving agents in
blocked vessels. The results of the project could improve the effectiveness of
tPA therapy, and be helpful in a diverse array of technological applications,
including using surfactants to remove trapped water in shale and tight gas-sand
reservoirs to improve oil and gas production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI
project will develop an experimentally validated model and simulation of
magnetically driven convection of iron-containing fluid to understand how the
strength of the magnetic field, its gradient and rotation rate generate flow and
the sensitivities of the flow to these parameters. The simulation tool will help
optimize design of the magnetic system and selection of particle properties. At
the particle scale conservation equations will describe the local concentration
of free particles and particles that chain together to form rods, including the
formation and destruction of the rods due to the applied magnetic field, shear
flow and interactions with the walls of the vessels. It is hypothesized that
these rods rotate in the field and generate localized vorticity that drives the
macroscopic convective flow in the vessel. At the vessel scale conservation of
mass and momentum equations will describe this magnetically-induced vorticity
driven flow. The model equations will be solved asymptotically and numerically
to understand this unique process for creating convective flows in dead-end or
blocked vessels. Complementary experiments conducted by research team at Pulse
Therapeutics will validate the model and indicate modifications as necessary.