* 1437591
* Collaborative Research: Links Between Long-Term Soil Carbon Storage and Canopy Properties in Tropical Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Daniela Cusack, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 184,700.00

Atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) has been increasing, leading to changes in
Earth's climate, but it is unclear how much of that CO2 can be drawn back down
by the planet's ecosystems and stored in soils and plants. This project focuses
on understanding that CO2 draw-down and storage process with particular focus on
tropical forests, which are one of the most carbon-rich ecosystems on Earth. New
space technologies have recently improved the ability to measure plant carbon
storage using satellite remote sensing. However, a large proportion of carbon
storage occurs in soils, where dead plant material can be stored for much longer
periods than in live plants. This study uses new remote sensing technologies and
field-based measurements to link plant and soil carbon storage. The project
integrates these two types of measurements through a new predictive framework to
broaden understanding across space and time. Broader impacts for this project
include the training of several undergraduate students and a graduate student
(UCLA) in cutting-edge geographic and ecological technologies, and creation of a
Field Technician Training Program for Latin American college students and
community members to expand the work force in science and technology. At the
broad scale, this research will also improve predictability of carbon storage
across tropical forest ecosystems, providing insights for management of carbon
sequestration.

Soil carbon (C) dynamics present one of the largest sources of uncertainty in
global C cycle models, with tropical forest soils containing some of the largest
terrestrial C stocks. The interactions between aboveground C uptake by plants,
transfer of this C to the forest floor, and subsequent loss or storage of this C
in soils must be better understood to predict how climate change may alter
large-scale and long-term soil C storage. This research will advance
understanding of humid and seasonal tropical biomes through the intersection of
modeling, remote sensing, and in situ field measurements across geological and
rainfall gradients, focusing on the links between canopy and soil properties.
The research will include measures of the total fluxes of C into forests using
remote sensing measures of canopy fluorescence, and use these measures, together
with knowledge of geology and soil nutrients, to predict soil C storage. The
central hypothesis is that: Spatial variation in canopy properties, which
reflect geology and the availability of scarce soil nutrients, are directly
linked to landscape-scale patterns of long-term soil C storage in tropical
forests. Soil phosphorus, rainfall, and canopy species composition will be
assessed for their roles in driving soil C storage. The approach spans scales
from nanometer organo-mineral associations in soils, to 3 km2 measures of forest
plant growth. The study will be conducted in a variety of tropical forests in
Panama in collaboration with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. To
better understand how tropical forests around the world store carbon, beyond the
spatial and temporal scales of the field study, measures will also be integrated
into an existing ecosystem model.