* 1437106
* DMREF: Discovery and Design of Magnetic Alloys by Simulation and Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 673,809.00

Magnetic cooling, in which a magnetic field is used to change the temperature of
a material, offers a profoundly different energy solution to applications
involving power generation, heating, and refrigeration. Magnetic cooling is
potentially an environmentally friendly, energy-efficient technology capable of
outperforming conventional gas-compression refrigeration. It has been over
fifteen years since the discovery of materials that can convert magnetism for
cooling in normal operating conditions, but much is still unknown about how to
optimize the manufacture and performance of these materials. This Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project seeks to
identify and optimize the chemical compositions of magnetic alloys, and
understand the fundamental scientific properties that control this important
behavior. A combined computational and experimental design approach will be used
to identify the optimal candidate systems rapidly. Advanced computational
methods will be used to predict and design alloys exhibiting the strongest
effect; the most promising compositions discovered will then be synthesized and
tested in the laboratory. The expected results are (i) the identification of
several high-performance magnetic alloys for cooling and refrigeration, and (ii)
an assessment of the performance attainable in this highly promising class of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program focuses on optimizing performance
within one of the most promising class of materials: the metamagnetic Ni-Mn-Sn
and Ni-Mn-In-(Co) shape memory alloys. Due to a unique coupling between two
design degrees of freedom, magnetism and crystal structure, these Heusler-type
alloys have the potential to dramatically change our approach to cooling and
refrigeration. This effort brings a combined computational/experimental
methodology to design and optimization, via quantum mechanical simulation
methods and unique experimental capabilities to measure performance under large
magnetic fields. A set of target performance metrics, elastic constants, phonon
modes, spin wave stiffnesses, and exchange interaction energies - will be
calculated using quantum mechanical models coupled with phenomenological
descriptions. For the most promising candidates, targeted experiments on single
crystal samples will be used to validate the computational models by studying
the magnetic field induced transition from the martensite phase to the austenite
phase in selected compositions producing a significant change in magnetization.
Ultimately this program will provide an exhaustive assessment across a spectrum
of candidates in the metamagnetic shape memory alloys Ni-Mn-Sn and Ni-Mn-
In-(Co).