* 1437263
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Design and Testing of Nanoalloy Catalysts in 3D Atomic Resolution
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Jianwei Miao, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,133,334.00

DMREF: Collaborative Research: Design and Testing of Nanoalloy Catalysts in 3D
Atomic Resolution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: The project
aims at the discovery of ultra-small, nanometer-sized alloy catalysts to improve
the efficiency of fuel cells, mobile power generation, and automotive catalytic
converters. State-of-the-art laboratory and computer simulation techniques will
be engaged to explore the uncharted design space of bimetallic nanostructures
for such applications and implement reductions in cost through partial
replacement of precious metals such as platinum by cheaper alternatives. The
team of three PIs will synthesize new nanocatalysts using biomimetic approaches,
image the positions of all atoms in 3D resolution using the world's most
powerful electron microscope, and carry out performance tests in fuel cells in a
close feedback loop with predictions by multi-scale modeling and simulation.
Fundamental understanding of synthesis controls, atomic-scale order, and
associated reactivity of the nanoalloys will lead to rational design rules to
optimize catalyst performance and enable targeted improvements of promising
materials. The development and validation of predictive multi-scale simulation
tools will also benefit the broader computational user community. New
fundamental insight into alloy synthesis and reactivity controls has further
potential benefits to improve catalysts for commodity chemicals, magnetic
information storage, batteries, sensors, and nanoelectronic devices.
Undergraduate students, high school students, and teachers will be engaged in
summer research activities at UCLA and in annual Engineering Career Days at the
University of Akron to encourage careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project focuses on
the computationally driven, rational optimization of nanoalloy atomic
composition and shape for catalytic performance in the Oxygen Reduction Reaction
(ORR) in fuel cells. Specific aims include the deterministic synthesis of Pt-M
Nanocrystals (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Cr, Mn), the three-dimensional
characterization of nanoalloy catalysts in atomic resolution and model
refinements, as well as the prediction, tests, and optimization of the
reactivity in the ORR. Methods comprise biomimetic synthesis protocols coupled
with molecular dynamics and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, ORR performance
testing by voltammetry and density functional theory calculations, and in-situ
monitoring of all reactions. The coordinates of the atoms in the synthesized
nanostructures will be monitored by electron tomography to identify atomic
ordering, to validate and improve interatomic potentials, and to predict
reaction rates in ORR. Detailed understanding of alloy growth mechanism, shape
control, and catalytic performance through new polarizable and reactive force
fields for alloys and their aqueous interfaces from first principles will close
a wide gap between experimental capabilities and missing theoretical
understanding. Aided by thorough experimental characterization, predictions with
unprecedented accuracy at length scales of 1 to 100 nm appear feasible, far
beyond the limits of quantum-mechanical methods and building on previous
successful models for interfaces of pure metals (CHARMM-METAL).&lt;br/&gt;