* 1437132
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Religion in Public Life
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Anna Secor, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 191,471.00

Religion is increasingly playing an important role in politics and public life
worldwide. Many societies today have to adjust to the growing relevance of
religion in global affairs, national political debates, and the everyday public
spaces of cities within which religious plurality exists. Despite the increasing
influence of religious voices globally, there remains a critical gap in
knowledge regarding how attitudes towards the changing role of religion may
vary, who drives these changes, and what implications they may have for
pluralism in diverse societies. This research project will help to fill this
crucial gap by examining attitudes and practices concerning the shifting role of
religion in public life. How can different moral systems and lifestyles be
accommodated within a pluralistic public? What the renewed role of religion in
public life means for secularism and pluralism is especially crucial for the
Muslim world, where the role of Islam in public life is continuously evolving.
In many Muslim societies, there is a notable trend away from the establishment
of an Islamic state towards intensifying Islamic values and practices in public
life. This project will assess how the renewed role of Islam in society
formulates the problem of pluralism in Muslim democracies. The results will have
implications beyond the Islamic world as well. The project will contribute basic
understanding with respect to the geographies of religion, pluralism, and public
life and offer new information and insights for discussions regarding the
changing nature of secularism and the political role of religion worldwide.

This project will provide insight into the public role of religion and
secularism worldwide through an empirical investigation of the varying practices
and attitudes concerning the public role of Islam in Turkey. The investigators
will assess how attitudes regarding the reconfiguration of Islam and secularism
vary across Turkish society, and they will evaluate how the devout Sunni Muslim
sector, which constitutes about half of the Turkish population, is participating
in this reconfiguration. They will conduct a nationwide survey to identify and
assess the spectrum of attitudes towards and practices of the shifting dynamics
of Islam and secularism in public life. The investigators will conduct in-depth
qualitative research using focus groups and interviews with moderately to highly
devout individuals in two representative Turkish cities to obtain new insights
into the values and everyday practices of the politically and culturally
influential devout sector of society. This project thereby will provide
assessments of Turkish society's internal variability and what this variability
means for the changing role of Islam in public life in Turkey and other Muslim
nations. Because Turkey is a key U.S. ally and an influential political and
economic player in the Middle East and Central Asia, this project will
contribute beneficial knowledge as the U.S. and other nations seek to understand
and more effectively interact with Muslim nations that are envisioning and
enacting a pluralistic public sphere within which both religious and secular
values and lifestyles have a place