* 1437073
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Cholesteric Pitch in Nanocylinder Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Micah Green, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2019
* USD 190,728.00

CBET 1436637/1437073&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are material phases
that exhibit both crystalline order and the fluidity of a liquid. This project
will investigate the properties of nanocylinder dispersions that can form liquid
crystals. The particular liquid crystals being investigated are termed
cholesteric (chiral) because the nanocylinders align in a preferred direction,
but the preferred direction itself rotates about an axis. As a result of this
structure, cholesteric liquid crystals can have unusual optical properties. When
the materials are processed into thin films, the unusual structure and optical
properties are maintained, which makes the materials especially interesting for
applications such as liquid crystal displays, decorative coatings, and specialty
inks. This project will investigate the rheological properties of nanocylinder
dispersions and analyze how flow changes the microstructural characteristics and
optical properties of the materials when processed into thin films. The results
will help scientists and engineers to design and process cholesteric liquid
crystals into films with controlled optical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
combination of experiments and modeling will be used to understand the effects
of dispersion properties and flow on dispersion rheological and morphological
properties. This will result in parameter space maps for the dispersion rheology
and microstructure as a function of composition and shear rate. Two model
systems capable of forming lyotropic cholesteric liquid crystals will be
investigated: aqueous dispersions of sulfonated cellulose nanocrystals and
aqueous dispersions of double stranded DNA and single-walled carbon nanotubes.
For both systems, a combination of mesoscopic polydomain modeling techniques and
physical experiments will be used to investigate the following features: 1) the
microstructure (texture) as a function of mesogen concentration as probed by
oscillatory rheology, 2) transients during the start-up of steady shear, 3) the
steady shear rheological behavior, particularly at low shear, 4) texture at rest
and texture development after flow cessation, and 5) texture and optical
properties of solidified films.