* 1437405
* CheMS'14 Student Support
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Kevin Sellner, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 3,000.00

1437405&lt;br/&gt;Sellner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support
graduate students from the regional universities. Students will actively
participate in the symposium, via presentations, posters, and open discussion
with a goal of expanding communication and modeling skills for these neophyte
modelers and the science and non-science community that will eventually use
their models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Chesapeake Community Modeling Program
(CCMP) seeks to improve modeling tools and related resources specific to the
Chesapeake Bay, its watershed, and connected environmental systems by fostering
collaborative open source research. Toward this end, the CCMP is convening a
modeling symposium as a venue to identify and showcase existing modeling efforts
as well as promote information exchange and open modeling. An important
objective of the Chesapeake Modeling Symposium series is to engage student
modelers and encourage their participation. At the 2010 Symposium, 14 students
participated with more than half of them submitting abstracts for oral
presentations and posters. For the 2012 symposium, 21 students attended and 2 of
them presented. This project will continue to include integrate students
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental models are increasingly taking
on higher profile roles in the management process. Numerical models have been
used extensively to guide management efforts in Chesapeake Bay. These models
include simulations of the airshed, watershed, and estuary and have included
living resource components such as submerged aquatic vegetation and fish.
Although these models are some of the most advanced in the world, many
challenges remain. These include the need for higher spatial resolution and
better mechanistic representations of physical, biological, and chemical
processes in the airshed, watershed, and estuary. More flexible approaches are
also needed for representing management impacts on living resources and
particularly higher trophic levels. Linking these models to human impacts and
socio-economic systems is another challenge that has not yet been addressed.
More flexible (modular) approaches could also facilitate the use of multiple
models. However, the development of increasingly complex end-to-end models that
are difficult to validate, understand, and diagnose also points to the need to
develop alternative simplified empirical and mechanistic models for specific
management applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bringing together modelers,
managers, scientists, and stakeholders for a series of plenary talks, panel
discussions, and special sessions, the 2014 Chesapeake Modeling Symposium will
highlight recent progress, challenges, and prospects for the next generation of
Chesapeake Bay research and management models.