* 1437668
* Optimization Models for Investment, Operation and Water Management in Shale Gas Supply Chains
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2018
* USD 217,353.00

1437668 - Grossmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of shale gas is one of
the most important developments that has taken place in the US in the last
decade. It has radically changed the availability of energy sources, as well as
greatly improved the international competitiveness of the U.S. petrochemical
industry from low-cost feedstocks. The Energy Information Administration
predicts U.S. shale gas production to grow from 23% to almost 50% of the total
gas production for the next 25 years. In order to support this projection, the
objective of this proposal is to contribute to the optimal and sustainable
development of the shale gas industry through new computational tools for
optimizing the investment and operation of production fields and processing
plants, as well as optimizing water management and reuse. The proposed
computational tools will be based on novel optimization models and advanced
mixed-integer programming methods that optimize the design and operation of the
supply chain infrastructure, as well as optimizing the use and cost of water
management for hydraulic fracturing operations, while accounting for its
environmental impact. The motivation for this research is that currently there
are virtually no computer tools available to support decision-makers in the
development of shale gas facilities. The project will be complemented by
educational materials that can be used in undergraduate design courses in
chemical engineering. The goal is to make students aware of the engineering
challenges and opportunities involved in shale gas
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of the proposed work is to develop a new mixed-integer optimization model for
the design of shale gas supply chain infrastructures. The proposed model is
aimed at optimizing the selection of the number of wells to drill on
new/existing pads, size and location of new gas processing plants, location and
length of new pipelines for gathering raw gas, delivering dry gas, and natural
gas liquids, location and power of gas compressors to be installed, and planning
of freshwater consumption from available reservoirs for well drilling and
fracturing. The goal of this model is to maximize the net present value of the
supply chain infrastructure over a long planning time horizon. A major challenge
in the model involves solving a large-scale mixed-integer nonlinear program
(MINLP) to global optimality. The proposed project will also involve the
development of a detailed operational mixed-integer linear model to optimize
water use life cycle for well pads with the objective of reducing freshwater
consumption by reuse and recycle, while minimizing transportation and treatment
costs. The supply chain and water management models will be extended to minimize
environmental impact within a multi-objective optimization framework that
incorporates Life Cycle Analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;From a theoretical point of view this research will open new
application areas for modeling and optimization that have not been addressed
before in process systems engineering. These are likely to impact the academic
community by promoting research in the development of new complex MINLP models
for design and operation of shale gas processing. From a practical point of
view, the proposed project will provide new advanced computer tools that have
not been used by shale gas producers, whether large or small. The proposed work
on supply chain infrastructure will help to optimally integrate investment and
operational decisions, including scheduling the drilling of wells. Furthermore,
it is hoped that this work on water management will promote the efficient and
sustainable use of water, as well as reducing congestion of roads for its
transportation. The proposed models will help to quantitatively assess the
environmental impact of shale gas production. From an educational perspective,
the PI will engage undergraduates in research in these areas, and develop
educational materials in the form of case studies that can be used in the
teaching of undergraduate design courses in chemical engineering to make
students aware of the challenges and opportunities involved in producing shale
gas. Finally, the PI will leverage the project with his industrial partners of
the Center for Advanced Process Decision-making, gas producers in the greater
Pittsburgh area, and international collaborations with researchers in Argentina
and Norway where the production of shale gas is actively pursued. The practical
relevance of the proposed models will be validated with case studies provided by
industrial collaborators.