* 1437775
* Investigation of terminal alkene formation by polyketide synthases and the application toward sustainable alpha-olefin production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2018
* USD 377,146.00

Proposed Title: Characterization of specific polyketide synthases and
application toward the biological production of highly-desirable, short-chain
olefins.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Recent concerns as to the
supply and cost of petroleum-based fuels and commodity chemicals have sparked an
interest in creating alternative routes to these important hydrocarbon
compounds. In particular the alpha-olefins, a class of compounds currently
derived from petroleum, serve as precursors to many industrially produced
plastics, short chain fatty acids, surfactants and recently have been touted as
potential fuel alternatives. One potential route for synthesizing commodity and
specialty chemicals is to engineer microorganisms to transform inexpensive,
renewable sugars to desired products. Unfortunately, the scope of biological
transformations available to generate differing chemical functional groups is
lacking, thus limiting our ability to replace all petroleum-derived commodity
chemicals. In an effort to produce this important set of chemicals, scientists
at the University of California, Berkeley have identified enzyme components
comprising a class of polyketide synthase (PKS) terminal modules known to
generate alpha-olefins by way of a unique structural feature. Understanding the
mechanism of this enigmatic reaction will pave the way for future enzyme
biocatalyst design, in particular, new designer PKS assemblies for specific
terminal alkene production. Studies and engineering efforts concerning the PKS
modules will be executed under the supervision of the awardee, Prof. Jay D.
Keasling (UC, Berkeley), by a diverse group of students from a wide range of
socioeconomic and educational backgrounds. In particular, through the iCLEM
program and partnership with the University of California, Berkeley Extension
Program, Keasling and his group aim to involve high school and undergraduate
students pursuing education outside the formal university requirements (e.g.
through Associate Degrees and certificate programs) to gain valuable hands-on
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this proposal is to understand
how these unique, conserved terminal sulfotransferase-thioesterase (ST-TE)
didomains of PKS function to produce alpha-olefins. The specific project aims
include 1) to characterize the overall substrate tolerance and fundamental
kinetic parameters of four terminal olefin-forming PKS modules; 2) to perform an
in-depth mechanistic analysis of the CurM TE to better understand this pivotal
transformation; and 3) to use this information to guide the generation of two
chimeric synthases for the sustainable production of C5 (pentene) and C6
(hexene) terminal olefins, as well as the related aromatic alkene, styrene. PKS
proteins will be expressed in Escherichia coli or a native olefin producer, such
as cyanobacteria Synechococcus PCC 7002. Aggregate results will be leveraged to
design highly active catalysts specific for producing these olefinic compounds.
Chimeric PKSs will be evaluated in both E. coli and Synechococcus PCC 7002 to
better explore PKS activity and olefin formation in both natural and unnatural
hosts. Definition of this this unique termination mechanism and application of
the findings to create novel enzymes will provide a biological route to terminal
alkenes, which may ultimately contain novel functional groups (e.g., halogens,
amines, etc.) that can be used to create new cross-linkable polymers with
altered properties, or compounds with improved fuel characteristics, all from
low-cost renewable resources.