* 1437050
* Chemical Routes to the Growth of Crystalline Oxides Directly on Germanium for Applications in Future Generation Microelectronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Alexander Demkov, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 314,827.00

Presently, the majority of transistors that power microelectronic devices are
based on silicon. While there have been significant increases in speed of
silicon-based microelectronic devices in recent years, the speed at which
silicon-based chips can operate is limited by the material itself, and in order
to make faster devices a new semiconductor material is required. Germanium is
one such promising material that can enable manufacturing of faster computer
chips. One critical challenge in building transistors is the need for a good
electrical semiconductor and a good insulator that is compatible with that
semiconductor. To make germanium-based chips work, a good electrical insulator
is needed. This award is to develop and understand a new type of electrical
insulator that is compatible with germanium and which can allow for
manufacturing of germanium-based microelectronics. The broader impact of the
research will be in continued scaling of transistors to smaller sizes that will
provide faster computer processor speeds, lower power consumption, and higher
data storage capacities for microelectronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines perovskites for use as dielectric oxides in germanium
transistors. Perovskites are selected for their ability to bond chemically to
germanium and eliminate the electrical defects that affect device performance.
This work will explore how to grow crystalline perovskite oxide films on
germanium that meet the many performance requirements of modern microelectronic
devices. The research explores an all-chemical growth process that should be
scalable, is inherently less costly, and is based on current manufacturing tool
infrastructure to promote easy adoption by industry. The research explores and
describes the materials chemistry and the surface chemistry associated with
growing crystalline SrHfO3 and SrZrO3 on germanium using atomic layer deposition
processes. The overarching objectives are to understand and describe processes
that lead to the formation of crystalline oxides on Ge (001) with requisite band
offsets and interface trap densities in a chemical deposition process. The
intellectual merits of the work stem from the specific focus areas of the
fundamental studies which are: 1) elucidating the reactions and structural
changes at the Ge (001) oxide interface that seed crystalline oxide formation;
2) understanding the evolution of structure in the perovskite layer leading to a
crystalline film and how the structure depends on process conditions; and 3)
establishing the structure-property-function relationships in the context of a
gate oxide in a field effect transistor application.