* 1437257
* Collaborative Research: Mechanistic and Predictive Genotoxicity Assessment of Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2014,04/30/2018
* April Gu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2018
* USD 183,607.00

PI: April Gu / Chad Vecitis&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1437257 / 1437209
&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Northeastern University / Harvard University
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Mechanistic and Predictive
Genotoxicity Assessment of Nanomaterials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Carbon-based
nanomaterials (CNMs) may be among the most useful engineered nanomaterials for
different applications, although our understanding of the toxicity and potential
impact of carbon-based nanomaterials on human and ecosystems is still in its
infancy. Among the various toxicity effects observed, genotoxicity (the damage
to genes from chemicals) is of particular concern to human and other lives
because genotoxicity from nanomaterial (nanogenotoxicity) can potentially cause
cells to mutate and eventually lead to cancer. This study will demonstrate the
application of a new high-throughput, rapid and effective nanogenotoxicity assay
platform and a new mechanism-driven hierarchical model framework that will be
tested. The results of the research will fill in the urgent knowledge gap in
mechanistic understanding of the environmental and health impact of CNMs. This
research has significant benefits to the environment and public health
protection. The outcome from the research will aid strategies related to
nanoscience and technology, as well as elucidate the environmental and health
implications of nanomaterials, which will help bridge the gap between scientific
research, creation of commercial products and public health protection. In terms
of broader impact on the community, the synergized arrays of education outreach
and public education programs will present the technology, benefits, and
societal and environmental impact of nanotechnology to a wide range of audiences
at many levels. For example, PI Gu had initiated the BEST (Biotechnology for the
Environment, Showcase and Training) program as part of a CAREER award. With this
proposal, she will be able to expand that program, as well as collaborate with
additional existing programs (e.g. a RET program, NEU CONNECTIONS, etc) to
promote training of students and teachers. Both PIs will also work with the
Boston Museum of Science to create multimedia that disseminates research to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to perform a comprehensive
and systematic genotoxicity assessment of a variety of well-characterized
carbon-based nanomaterials (CNMs), using a newly developed high throughput
toxicogenomics-based 3-D gene/protein expression profiling technique, with the
aim to relate nanogenotoxicity with CNMs' physicochemical and structural
properties and, explore prototype mechanism-driven QSAR (Quantitative Structure
Activity Relationships) model. Genotoxicity of four different CNMs (SWCNT,
fullerene C60, carbon black and graphene) and their variations will be evaluated
by measuring the NM-induced expression alteration in genes and proteins that are
indicative or essential for the known DNA damage and repair pathways, using the
newly developed molecular genotoxicity assay platform and, with the extension to
multiple species across different taxonomic levels (bacteria, yeast and human).
Dose-response relationships and molecular genotoxicity endpoints will be
determined using the molecular effect level index (MELI) recently proposed by
us. To validate the proposed molecular assay and confirm the genotoxicity of
CNMs tested, conventional phenotypic genotoxcity assays will be performed in
parallel. An array of modern techniques will be employed to determine the
purity, elemental composition, dimension, surface chemistry, aggregate size and
state, zeta potential, hydrophilicity etc. of the CNMs. A prototype
nanogenotoxicity QSAR model with hierarchical structures that integrates current
QSAR framework with molecular bioassay information through correlative links
among CNMs descriptors, DNA damage mechanism-specific molecular endpoints and
phenotypic genotoxicity endpoints will be explored.