* 1437746
* System of Systems Approach and Uncertainty Mitigation/Exploitation for Wind Farm Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/16/2013,07/31/2016
* Achille Messac, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 369,023.00

The objective of this research is to make it possible to design wind farms with
significantly higher power generation capacity (a 25 to 30 percent increase from
existing designs). A comprehensive system of systems approach to wind farm
design will be developed which addresses the concomitant pervasive uncertainty
through, both mitigation and exploitation. We will build on existing work in the
supporting technological areas of wake modeling, wind farm power generation
modeling, economics modeling, and optimal design for computationally prohibitive
multidisciplinary systems. The major research activities include: (i)
optimization, design, and uncertainty propagation; (ii) economic modeling; (iii)
development of product family approaches; (iv) developing and parameterizing
power output model of wind turbine arrays; and (v) validation of models.
Guidelines will be developed that will directly assist engineers, researchers,
and investors in their pertinent decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the unique approach to dealing with the uncertainty-ridden system
and the system of system approach being developed here, can enable the
scientific community to achieve a new level in addressing our current and future
energy requirements. A unique interdisciplinary environment will be provided to
students who are motivated by the grand challenge of achieving 20% electric
power using wind by 2030, and by the desire to be prepared for green jobs in the
context of a rapidly changing economic landscape. Periodic exchange visits by
faculty members, graduate and undergraduate students between the two
institutions (RPI and SU) will provide the students with unique preparations. A
key anticipated benefit of the proposed research is the increased likelihood of
reaching our critical goal of having 20% of our electricity come from wind
energy by 2030, which is a high national priority.