* 1437630
* SusChEM:  Development of Next-Generation, Ultra-Selective Aquaporin-Based Membranes for Sustainable Water Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

1437630&lt;br/&gt;Elimelech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SusChEM: Development of Next-
Generation, Ultra-selective Aquaporin-based Membranes for Sustainable Water
Purification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of drinking water from non-
traditional sources, such as brackish water, seawater, and wastewater, is
critical to augmenting global water supply. Reverse osmosis (RO) is the dominant
technology for desalination and wastewater reuse, and its worldwide usage is
expected to significantly increase in the future. In addition, an emerging
membrane technology, forward osmosis (FO), has the potential to play an
important role in desalination, wastewater reuse, and treatment of high salinity
brines. Thin film composite polyamide membranes are currently the state-of-the-
art technology for these processes. However, despite the relatively high salt
rejection of these membranes (&gt;99 %), they have less-than-ideal selectivity
to a wide range of solutes, which leads to higher energy consumption and
increased capital and operation costs. Increasing solute selectivity can only be
achieved at the expense of significant decrease in water permeability due to the
intrinsic trade-off between permeability and selectivity of current generation
polymeric membranes. A radically different approach for membrane design is
critically needed in order to break the inherent permeability-selectivity
tradeoff of current membrane technologies. This project will also promote
diversity and to enhance the involvement of under-represented groups in science
and engineering by: 1) establishing a biomolecular engineering workshop at a
minority serving institution, 2) developing a tele-tutoring program to
facilitate scholarship in STEM at a minority serving institution, 3) actively
participate in conferences and workshops that promote diversity in science and
engineering, 4) training and inspiring undergraduate students, focusing on
under-represented groups in science and engineering, and, 5) participation in
science outreach and science mentoring of inner city, low-income minority
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is to
develop a novel, ultra-selective aquaporin-based membrane for water
purification. The proposed new approach utilizes the uniquely selective nature
of aquaporin, an integral cell membrane protein that is permeable only to water,
to overcome the intrinsic permeability-selectivity trade-off of current
membranes. Specific objectives include: studying aquaporin incorporation and
functionality in vesicles comprising polymerizable lipids or block co-polymers;
developing a fundamental understanding of the effects of rupture technique,
surface chemistry, lipid or block co-polymer chemistry, and aquaporin
concentration on the formation of tethered supported bilayers through vesicle
rupture; fabricating a stable and ultra-selective aquaporin-based layer on top
of a chemically-modified membrane support; and characterizing the fabricated
membrane to assess membrane water flux and selectivity for a variety of solutes.
To complete the project the PIs propose the following tasks: 1) expression and
purification of aquaporin; 2) end-functionalization of lipid or triblock co-
polymer to allow for bilayer tethering and polymerization; 3) analysis of
aquaporin permeability in polymerized lipid or polymer vesicles using stopped
flow light scattering; 4) assessment of vesicle rupture techniques and bilayer
formation kinetics on model surfaces; 5) fabrication of aquaporin-containing
membranes using surface-modified commercial and hand-cast nanofiltration
membranes as a bilayer support; 6) evaluation of the performance (water flux and
solute rejection) of fabricated membranes in reverse osmosis and forward
osmosis; and, 7) testing the membrane mechanical and chemical robustness. They
will accomplish this they will: (i) study aquaporin functionality in
polymerizable lipids, (ii) utilize a readily-occurring chemical reaction to
covalently rupture aquaporin-containing vesicles, (iii) study the deposition and
rupture kinetics of covalent-assisted aquaporin-containing vesicle rupture, (iv)
chemically tether an aquaporin-containing bilayer onto a nanofiltration membrane
support, and, (v) assess planar aquaporin-based membrane permeability of neutral
solutes, such as ammonia, urea, and boron. The focus on solute ultra-selectivity
also differs from previous membrane development efforts, which largely focused
on maximizing water permeability.