* 1437864
* Connecting Interfacial Properties to Emulsion Stability for Complex Particle-Laden Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Lynn Walker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 02/28/2018
* USD 349,999.00

CBET 1437864&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulsions and foams occur in many processes of
industrial and biological importance. The food, cosmetic, pharmaceutical,
medicinal, polymer, and oil and gas industries routinely process emulsions and
foams. One of the key requirements in making useful, long-lived products from
emulsions and foams is to guarantee that they are stable by preventing the drops
or bubbles from coalescing with each other, which can degrade product quality.
This project will use a microtensiometer developed by the investigators to
examine the physical and chemical properties of drop and bubble interfaces and
determine how those properties influence the coalescence of two drops under
carefully controlled conditions. Using the microtensiometer, the investigators
will examine the coalescence process while simultaneously acquiring information
about the interfacial characteristics of the drops. The influence of emulsifiers
that can stabilize emulsions by adsorbing onto drop interfaces and preventing
coalescence will be examined. Then, the team will explore the effectiveness of a
novel stabilizer consisting of nanoparticles coated with surfactants. The
results will provide new tools to scientists and engineers who formulate
emulsions and foams and design systems to process them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
microtensiometer will be used to study the interfacial rheology of small drops
and bubbles with radii between 50 and 150 micrometers. By monitoring the
pressure inside the bubble and the interfacial area, the dynamic surface tension
and interfacial elasticity of the interface can be determined. To access
conditions where the adsorption of surfactants onto the interface is kinetically
limited, the device will be modified by adding a convective flow past the
interface. The microtensiometer will then be used to observe the coalescence of
two drops or bubbles with identical curvature, composition and history, which
will help eliminate ambiguities that occur in other coalescence measurements.
The results will be used to ascertain the relationship between interfacial
rheology and coalescence. The effects of particle-laden interfaces on
coalescence will be characterized using a model system of surfactant-coated
nanoparticles that readily adsorb onto interfaces.