* 1437636
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Control of Polymer/PbS Blends for PV Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2017
* USD 103,296.00

Proposals in Collaborative: PI Names: Moule (Lead) Proposal No: 1436273
Institution: University of California, Davis

PI Name: Ganapathysubramanian Proposal No:1437636 Institution: Iowa State
University

PI Name: Ginger Proposal No: 1437016 Institution: University of Washington

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-free energy
on earth. Solar cells for conversion of light to electricity based on organic
polymers integrated into a photovoltaic (PV) device offer a potentially low-cost
route for renewable electricity production if the solar energy conversion
efficiency can be improved. The key to improving the efficiency of organic
polymer based solar cells is to better understand the molecular arrangement of
the materials within the polymer film. This project will apply novel electron
microscopy tools to understand how materials processing affects the three-
dimensional arrangement of materials in polymer/nanoparticle films designed for
photovoltaic (PV) applications. Mixtures of low-cost lead sulfide (PbS)
nanoparticles with electrically conducting polymers will be studied because
these mixtures have shown recent high photovoltaic efficiency, and because these
materials have high imaging contrast by electron microscopy. The electron
tomography will generate three dimensional concentration maps of materials
within the mixture. These maps will be used to correlate processing conditions
to material arrangement within the polymer/nanoparticle film. This information
will then be correlated to device performance in order to identify strategies
for making better solar cells based on organic polymers. The work will be
carried out by a collaborative team that will simultaneously advance the science
of polymer/nanoparticle film fabrication, three dimensional electron microscope
imaging, and computational analysis of the images to reveal nanoscale structure.
This collaborative approach has the potential uncover the structural origin of
optical and electronic properties that cannot be measured by any other
technique. With respect to education and activities for broadening
participation, the project will provide a diverse set of outreach and
educational opportunities that include interaction with children through the
Boys and Girls Scouts and 4H, public education at well attended local festivals,
inclusion of research material in classes, and retention of female engineering
students.

Technical Description

This project will develop and use new electron tomography tools to understand
how materials processing affects the three-dimensional arrangement of materials
in hybrid polymer/nanoparticle films designed for photovoltaic (PV)
applications. Mixtures of low-cost lead sulfide (PbS) nanoparticles with
electrically conducting polymers will be studied because these mixtures have
shown recent high photovoltaic efficiency, and because these materials have high
imaging contrast by electron microscopy. The electron microscopy tool is based
on high-angle annular dark-field scanning electron tomography (HAADF-ET)
combined with the discrete algebraic reconstruction technique (DART) to generate
three-dimensional (3D) material concentration maps with resolution of less than
three cubic nanometers for the hybrid organic/inorganic photovoltaic materials.
Development of morphology descriptors of the 3D data, including features like
the number of phases, concentration ratio in each phase, domain size, domain
connectivity, tortuosity of pathways, anisotropy and domain surface area will be
measured using graph-based analysis. This information will be used to correlate
morphology, structural heterogeneity, and physical distribution of recombination
sites in mixed organic/inorganic electronic films to optoelectronic properties
and photovoltaic performance. With respect to education and activities for
broadening participation, the project will provide a diverse set of outreach and
educational opportunities that include interaction with children through the
Boys and Girls Scouts and 4H, public education at well attended local festivals,
inclusion of research material in classes, and retention of female engineering
students.