* 1437545
* Electrohydrodynamics of particle-covered drops
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Petia Vlahovska, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 12/31/2017
* USD 321,425.00

CBET 1437545&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the behavior of
liquid drops that have small particles adsorbed on their interfaces. When the
drops are placed in an electric field, the particles on the interface can
assemble into a variety of interesting structures, including particle belts that
rotate and undulate around the drop. These structures can become unstable in
some conditions, leading to bucking or wrinkling. The investigators will
experimentally map out the structures that form as a function of fluid,
particle, and electric field properties. Then, they will use the experimental
results to develop a model to predict the observed instabilities. When the
particles completely cover the interface of the drop, the interface resembles an
elastic solid. The way the drop shape deforms in flow will be used to deduce the
mechanical characteristics of the interface. The information from this project
will be useful to scientists and engineers to design and process novel colloidal
products such as drops with interfaces that can respond to their local
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrohydrodynamic flow in leaky-dielectric
liquid drops can be used to structure and manipulate colloidal particles at the
drop surface. This project will establish the mechanisms of particle assembly on
a drop placed in an electric field to relate particle architectures and drop
behavior to control parameters such as field strength, particle and fluid
properties. Experimental studies will be carried out for drops with low particle
coverage to construct a phase diagram of particle structures and the influence
of particle structure on drop deformation in flow will be measured. For high
surface coverage drops, drop deformation will be used to determine elastic
properties of the interface. A leaky dielectric model and small deformation
theory will be used to relate drop deformation and elastic properties of the
interface and to predict the electric field threshold for rotation of the drops
as a function of surface conductivity. The research outcomes will lead to the
engineering of novel colloidal-coated drops with versatile and controllable
surface coverage.