* 1437251
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Design of Multifunctional Catalytic Interfaces from First Principles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Volkan Ortalan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,375,000.00

Abstract Title:&lt;br/&gt; DMREF: Collaborative Research:Design of next-
generation catalysts through predictive modeling and atomic-scale
experiments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysts are the materials that allow the
production of critical substances that make modern life possible. Catalytic
technologies make essential contributions to many sectors of the US economy,
ranging from petrochemicals processing to pollution abatement in automobiles,
and many products that are taken for granted in contemporary society would not
exist without these crucial processes. Traditional strategies for the discovery
of new heterogeneous catalysts have relied heavily on chemical intuition and
experience accumulated over many years of industrial practice, but to develop
the next generation of catalytic materials, these strategies will be inadequate.
The collaborative team of Profs. Jeffrey Greeley, Volkan Ortalan, and Fabio
Ribeiro of Purdue University, and Chao Wang of Johns Hopkins University, have
been awarded a grant under the National Science Foundation Designing Materials
to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) initiative to develop a new
strategy. The team proposes to make accurate predictions from a combination of
experiments with atomic-level resolution and modeling using large-scale
computing. Such predictive techniques have been explored for simple classes of
catalytic materials, such as highly ordered metal or oxide surfaces. However, a
much broader space of potentially exciting catalysts can be accessed by
exploring so-called "multifunctional" materials, which offer complex interfaces
between metals and oxides. The researchers will combine unparalleled atomic-
scale experimental characterization, synthesis, and reactivity measurements to
both inform the computational models and test predicted catalysts to emerge from
the computational analysis. The proposed program will both lay the fundamental
groundwork for accelerated identification of breakthrough catalytic materials,
in general, and identify practical new catalysts for reactions with CO, CO2, and
H2 as feedstocks, in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single component
heterogeneous catalysts are constrained by inherent limitations in catalytic
rates, as exemplified by the well-known maxima in volcano plots that have been
observed for many catalytic chemistries. The limitations can, in turn, be traced
to an extensive series of fundamental correlations that exist between the
energetics of elementary steps and species on the sites in question.
Multifunctional catalytic structures, such as the interfaces that exist between
thin oxide films and metal nanoparticles, provide a potential means of
overcoming these limitations and identifying entirely new classes of catalysts.
Developing a unified design framework for such multifunctional structures will
require a combination of first principles molecular modeling techniques,
advanced methods to synthesize and characterize the structure of catalysts at
the atomic scale, and highly accurate measurements of reaction rates on the
resulting materials. The project team will focus on model reactions, relevant to
hydrogen production and methanol synthesis, which can be promoted at
multifunctional interfaces. The team will develop new molecular modeling
strategies, relying primarily on ab-initio methods, to rapidly evaluate the
catalytic properties of many combinations of metal/oxide interfaces for the
reactions of interest. Promising candidates to emerge from these computational
screening studies will then be synthesized using techniques that permit control
of the catalyst structure at the atomic level. The catalytic and structural
properties of these catalysts will be verified experimentally at atomic
resolution, and the resulting information will be used to improve the predictive
models and to further refine the candidate materials. The end goal is a method
of broad applicability that can be used to design breakthrough multifunctional
catalytic materials for a variety of reactions of scientific and economic
importance.