* 1437371
* Collaborative Research: A combined boron isotope, pH microelectrode and pH-sensitive dye approach to constraining acid/base chemistry in the calcifying fluids of corals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Justin Ries, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2020
* USD 369,413.00

The anthropogenic elevation of atmospheric CO2 is causing the oceans to become
more acidic, which may make it more challenging for corals to build their
skeletons and, ultimately, entire reef structures. How corals respond to future
ocean acidification will largely depend on how the pH of the internal fluid from
which they produce their skeletons-their so-called calcifying fluid-is impacted
by the surrounding seawater. It is therefore essential that current methods are
refined to accurately measure the pH of corals' calcifying fluids in order to
understand and, ideally, predict their responses to CO2-induced ocean
acidification. In this project, a three-pronged approach to measure calcifying
fluid pH within three species of reef-forming corals will be used to assess how
their calcifying fluid pH responds to experimentally induced ocean
acidification. This research will improve our understanding of corals' responses
to ocean acidification and thus has the potential to inform the decisions of
policy makers and legislators seeking to mitigate the deleterious effects of
rising atmospheric CO2 on marine ecosystems. The work will support the
development of three early career scientists, a postdoctoral fellow, graduate
students, and undergraduate researcher assistants-several of whom are from
underrepresented groups in the earth and ocean sciences. Results will be widely
disseminated through publications, conference presentations, the PIs' websites,
an educational film, coursework, and outreach activities at area schools,
museums, and science centers.

Corals and other types of marine calcifiers are thought to begin the
mineralization of their calcium carbonate skeletons by actively elevating pH of
their calcifying fluid, thereby converting bicarbonate ions (comprising ~90% of
seawater dissolved inorganic carbon) to carbonate ions, the form of carbon used
in calcification. This project will compare the combined boron isotope, pH
microelectrode, and pH-sensitive dye approach to measure the calcifying fluid pH
of three species of scleractinian corals, and to assess how their calcifying
fluid pH (a primary factor controlling their calcification) responds to
experimentally induced ocean acidification. As a result this multi-pronged
approach to measuring calcifying fluid pH of the same coral species under
equivalent culturing conditions will permit the first systematic cross-
examination of the validity of these independent approaches. The combined
approach will also yield values of calcifying fluid pH with uncertainties that
can be quantified via inter-comparison and statistical treatment of these
independent measurements. Importantly, this multi-pronged approach will be used
on three coral species that due to differences in the carbonate chemistry of
their native waters possess differing capacities for proton regulation at their
site of calcification; a deep, cold-water coral (strong proton-pumper); a
shallow, temperate coral (moderate proton-pumper); and a shallow, tropical coral
(weak proton-pumper). Target outcomes of this research include (1) cross-
examination of the validity of three independent approaches to estimating coral
calcifying fluid pH, (2) quantification of uncertainty associated with the three
approaches to estimating coral calcifying fluid pH, (3) advancement of our
mechanistic understanding of coral calcification, (4) exploration of the
mechanism by which ocean acidification impacts coral calcification, (5)
elucidation why corals exhibit such varied responses to ocean acidification, (6)
identification of coral types most vulnerable to ocean acidification, (7)
exploration of so-called "vital effects" that limit the use of corals in
paleoceanographic reconstructions, and (8) quantitative constraint of existing
models of coral biomineralization.