* 1437831
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics and Self-Assembly in Block Copolymer Micelles for Tailored Cargo Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Megan Robertson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 02/28/2018
* USD 165,067.00

CBET 1437831/1437767&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micelles are tiny self-assembled
capsules that can be customized for a variety of technological applications,
including carrying drug molecules to a specific location inside the body as well
as cleaning up environmental spills. Micelles can be composed of molecules made
of two kinds of linked polymer chains, called block copolymers. Micelle
behaviors can be finely tuned by changing the molecular structure of the block
copolymers, and thus purposely designing the uptake amounts and release rates of
interior compounds (such as drugs). This collaborative project explores the
structure of block copolymer micelles as well as the block copolymer motions. By
combining advanced analysis methods, the investigators will determine how the
micelle-encapsulated compounds affect micelle structure and motions, and the
exchange of compounds between micelles and their surroundings. This information
will help scientists and engineers precisely formulate micelles for new
applications in drug delivery, advanced lubrication, oil extraction, personal
care products and other industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
systematically examine the effects of small molecule additives, co-solvents, and
encapsulated drug molecules, on the structure and dynamics of block copolymer
micelles. Targeted model additives (tetrahydrofuran and doxorubicin) will be
employed to uncover the influence of such additives on micelle structure and
dynamics. Small angle neutron scattering and multi-modal nuclear magnetic
resonance will be used to investigate the effects of additive-polymer
interactions on micelle equilibrium structure, polymer chain and micelle
dynamics, and release rates of encapsulated compounds. The combination of these
techniques will provide a comprehensive picture of key micellar dimensions and
highly specific dynamical information including free unimer exchange kinetics,
block and polymer chain dynamics, micelle diffusion processes, detailed solvent
dynamics and exchange of additives in and out of micelles, and rates of fission
and fusion.