* 1437437
* Collaborative Research: Time Dependent Behavior of Flexible Active Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Zoubeida Ounaies, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 264,433.00

Flexible active composite materials combine the light weight and durability of
polymers and the actuation and sensing capabilities of piezoelectric ceramics.
One example of achieving active flexible composites is by embedding
ferroelectric ceramic fibers in a homogeneous polymeric matrix. Active composite
materials find use in many engineering applications that require controllable
reconfiguration of complex 3D shapes, such as artificial skins, implantable and
energy harvesting devices, or flexible robots for use in hazardous environments
to name a few. Similarly, the coupled behavior makes them attractive candidates
for sensors for structural health monitoring applications, i.e. damage detection
in civil infrastructures such as bridges. However, despite their great
potential, many of the active composite materials in use today experience
suboptimal performance as well as property degradation over time. This grant
addresses existing knowledge gaps by focusing on the fundamental research needed
to accelerate the development of flexible active composite materials with
improved long-term performance. In addition, the PIs will focus on outreach and
education goals that will improve the depth, rate, and retention of learning in
the training of future engineers, broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM-related fields and improve the scientific literacy of the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the long history of the use of lead zirconate
titanate (PZT) fiber-based composites, important engineering challenges still
remain in understanding and predicting their behavior. These challenges are
primarily related to the different frequency (rate) dependent hysteretic
responses of the polymers and PZT constituents and the gradual changes in their
properties under continuous cyclic loadings. This research will address this
important gap in knowledge using an integrated experimental and numerical
approach that is expected to have positive consequences on the reliability and
widespread use of flexible active composite materials in critical applications.
Models will be built to integrate the time-dependent and electro-mechanical
coupled responses of the different constituents to the overall deformations in
flexible active composite materials. Additionally, these models will be enhanced
to incorporate the gradual changes in the nonlinear properties of the active
composites and their constituents under various electro-mechanical loading
conditions. Based on the models, prototype composites with targeted improved
performance behaviors will be processed and characterized. Understanding the
relationships between processing and life performance of flexible active
composite materials will inform manufacturing and enable wide-spread utilization
of such systems for engineering applications.