* 1437710
* Role of Composition on Mesostructure-Flow Interaction and Rheology of Particle Laden Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gordon Christopher, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 294,924.00

CBET-1437710&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical properties of suspensions such as
emulsions and foams can be strongly affected by the presence of small particles
that adsorb onto liquid-liquid or liquid-gas interfaces. This project will
explore how the presence of adsorbed particles, their composition, and the
arrangements they can take on an interface, which is called their mesostructure,
can influence the rheology of the interface. An interfacial rheometer has been
developed for this study, which will allow investigators to measure
characteristics of the interface and simultaneously observe particles at the
interface. The results will be used to determine the role of mesostructures on
interfacial rheology. This relationship between structure and rheology is
important, because many manufacturing chemical processes found in consumer
cosmetics, food products, drug delivery applications, and enhanced oil recovery
use emulsions that have particle-laden or particle-covered interfaces. The
information gathered in this project will be useful to scientists and engineers
who formulate such products and design large-scale processes to manufacture
them. The investigators will use results from the project to develop a series of
informative and engaging modules that can be used by instructors to teach fluid
dynamics principles to university and middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mesostructure in particle-laden interfaces
are affected by interparticle forces, which depend on composition. The
mesostructure resists flow-induced deformation, resulting in an interfacial
viscoelasticity. The nature of particle interactions on an interface differs
from that in the bulk, primarily because of an anisotropic capillary attraction
between interfacial particles. Using the interfacial rheometer, investigators
will characterize the role of composition on the equilibrium mesostructure of
particle-laden interfaces, characterize the role of composition on the rheology
and mesostructure of deforming interfaces, and relate changes in composition
such as particle surface concentration, particle size and polydispersity, and
surfactant concentration to interparticle forces and viscous forces.
Viscoelasticity of such interfaces affects dynamical behavior of emulsions,
including drop deformation, coalescence and breakup. Understanding the
relationship between composition and rheology will allow practitioners to tailor
interfaces and engineer materials with desired properties.