* 1437478
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Effect of Transient Interfacial Dynamic in the Transport and Deposition of Particles in the Vadose Zone
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* German Drazer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 165,001.00

1436482&lt;br/&gt;Frechette&lt;br/&gt;1437478&lt;br/&gt;Drazer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;Collaborative Research: Understanding the effect of transient interfacial
dynamics in the transport and deposition of particles in the vadose
zone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport of small suspended particles, referred
to as colloidal particles, in geological media has been the subject of numerous
studies, due in part to its importance in contaminant spreading and water
purification. The vadose zone, the upper levels of the soil column, is the entry
point for the replenishment of groundwater reservoirs and, therefore, the
transport and fate of particulates is key to the sustainability of water
resources. Particulates containing contaminants, ranging from pathogenic
microbes to the increasing number of nanoparticles used in industrial
applications, can pollute groundwater reservoirs. In addition, it has been shown
that colloidal particles can facilitate the transport of molecular contaminants.
Unfortunately, the development of predictive models for the transport and fate
of colloidal particles in the vadose zone has proven especially elusive. A
better understanding of the mechanisms driving the transport of particulates in
unsaturated porous media could lead to new paradigms in the design of water
purification processes, the management of contamination risk, the development of
remediation strategies, and would facilitate the recovery and recycling of
technological nanomaterials. The impact of this work lies in both education and
outreach, public health, as well as on its technologically enabling
capabilities. Training will be provided to graduate students, undergraduates,
and high school students in an interdisciplinary environment that includes a
strong exposure to the fields of materials and interfacial science as well as
transport and modeling. The investigators educational philosophy is designed to
foster a true passion for science in students by giving them opportunities to
actively produce scientific material, rather than acting as passive consumers.
Outreach and educational efforts by the investigators will include course
development, and the ongoing participation of undergraduates and high school
students to the research activities. The investigators groups will also adopt an
after-school classroom for a year (visiting the classroom weekly) in which
students, under the guidance of a trained facilitator, will engage in hands-on
STEM activities in the area of sustainability of water resources. In the lab,
undergraduates and high school students are encouraged to present their findings
within the group and externally, including authorship in peer-reviewed
scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical portion of the
proposed work lies in the broad scientific, technological, and economical
importance of remediation of contaminants from groundwater, especially as the
resources for potable water are becoming scarcer, the use of synthetic
particulate and nanomaterials increases, and the cost of energy is skyrocketing.
The transformative nature of the proposed work lies in providing a particle-
level understanding of the role of non-equilibrium hydrodynamic and chemical
transients on the attachment/detachment of particles from air-water (-solid)
interfaces by the integration of state-of-the-art experimental and simulation
tools. The results from the proposed work will also be important in other
scientific areas such as water filtration, oil recovery, fouling in microfluidic
devices, and clogging. Therefore, there is an important scientific and
engineering rationale in understanding the mechanisms for particles adsorption
and desorption from an air-water (-solid) interface during transient conditions.
The design of simple and versatile experiments to address these issues will lead
to an ideal platform to study particle deposition in unsaturated porous media.
In addition, tools that will be developed for this work will allow, in the
future, to study the deposition of more complex colloids such as bacteria,
viruses, or minerals of various shapes and propensity to adsorb at fluid
interfaces.