* 1437751
* Actuated Surface Attached Post Systems for Microscale Fluid Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Falvo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 270,032.00

PI: Superfine, Richard&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1437751&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Myriad biological propulsion and mixing systems
operate efficiently even in highly viscous or viscoelastic fluids. In all of
these cases, nature has developed a common solution: the cilium. The goal of the
proposed study is exactly this: to investigate the role of cilia in propulsion
and mixing of fluid flows at the microscale. Results of this work will be
applicable to problems of interest in biological and technological contexts in
microfluidic applications. Pumping and mixing are the most critical
technological challenges in current microfluidics. Since the flows are in the
very slow, turbulent fluid motion cannot be supported, and consequently fluid
mixing is very slow. The proposed research will answer interesting questions in
how mechanical cilia can transport viscoelastic fluids, which may have large
impacts on the field of microfluidic/lab on a chip
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomimetic representations of cilia in the
form of microscale surface attached post (ASAP) arrays will be employed to pump
and mix Newtonian and viscoelastic (VE) fluids. These posts will be actuated to
respond to the flow. Though modeling work has been done for viscous fluids, very
little experimental or theoretical literature exists for microactuator driven
pumping in non-Newtonian fluids. The questions to be answered through this
research are what forces are required for pumping or mixing, what beat shape is
most effective and how does the beat frequency affect pumping? These questions
will be answered in relation to hypotheses and theoretical considerations, and
will be related to the rheological properties of the viscoelastic fluid.