* 1437129
* Production of Renewable Acrylic Acid via Catalytic Dehydration of Lactic Acid: Mechanistic Studies and Catalysts Design
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Bingjun Xu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2018
* USD 318,000.00

Abstract Title: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of green polymer precursors
from biomass through catalytic dehydration of lactic acid to acrylic
acid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As environmental concerns and
the price of hydrocarbon-derived feedstocks and intermediates escalate on a
continuing basis, the shift of the production of fuels and chemicals from fossil
to renewable carbon sources not only makes economic sense due to price
volatility and dwindling reserve of crude oil, but also is highly desirable from
the environmental perspective by effectively reducing some CO2 emissions.
Acrylic acid and its esters are key precursors in the polymer industry, with an
annual demand of 4 million metric tons. They are currently produced through an
energy intensive crude oil-based process. In addition, the explosive growth of
natural gas production has led to a sudden increase in the use of natural gas
relative to crude oil as a carbon source, has created significant gaps between
the production capacity and demand of many key chemicals including propylene,
the raw material for acrylic acid production. Fortunately, recent progress in
the field of biomass conversion has made the production of various chemicals,
such as renewable lactic acid, from biomass technologically feasible and
economically competitive. Professor Bingjun Xu at the University of Delaware,
proposes to develop the fundamental understanding to formulate a process for
using this lactic acid as a green precursor to make acrylic acid. This award
supports the research needed to answer the challenges of a shift to renewable,
biomass-derived feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Production of acrylic acid
from lactic acid via catalytic dehydration is potentially more selective
compared to the current industrial route due to the structural similarity of
lactic and acrylic acids. In contrast to the current industrial process, which
requires several selective oxidation steps starting from propylene, only one
dehydration step is needed to convert lactic acid to acrylic acid. Thus
catalysts and reaction condition can be optimized for a single step rather than
many reactions, which typically occur on different type of active sites and
reach optimal performance under different conditions. In addition, it is
generally easier to control selectivities in dehydration than partial oxidation
reactions, since total oxidation is typically more thermodynamically favored
than partial oxidation reactions. The proposed work aims at rationally designing
efficient catalysts to facilitate the conversion of lactic acid to acrylic acid
through a combination of reactivity evaluations, materials synthesis and
spectroscopic investigations. The study of catalytic dehydration of lactic acid
to acrylic acid will also provide fundamental insights into the interaction and
selective activation of bi- or multi-functional molecules, a group to which most
biomass-derived molecules belong, with catalytic active sites. Thus, the
mechanistic insights gained in the proposed research could lead to guiding
principles for tailoring active sites of catalysts, not only for the specific
reaction of dehydration of lactic acid, but also for a broad range of other
chemical transformations involving multifunctional biomass-derived molecules.