* 1437091
* Collaborative Research: Controlling the Chemistry at the Nanoscale: Parallelization, Robustness, and Registration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* William King, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 38,061.00

Nanofabrication is the process of making functional structures with arbitrary
patterns having nanoscale dimensions. Nanofabrication has been widely
implemented commercially for improving microelectronic devices and information
technology. However, the limitations of conventional lithography techniques in
terms of resolution, capital and operational costs, and limited flexibility in
terms of materials that can be patterned and fabricated have motivated the
development of unconventional fabrication methods. Scanning probe lithography is
one of these promising new fabrication methods, and it uses a scanning sharp
probe to produce with nanoscale precision modifications on the surface of a
material. This award supports fundamental research for the development of a
scanning probe lithography method based on hot probes, which are used to thermo-
chemically change the properties of a material at the nanoscale. This
technology, called thermochemical nanolithography, has a broad range of
applications, in particular to fabricate nanostructures in graphene, conductive
polymers nanowires, DNA and protein nano-arrays. The research work is geared
toward answering questions that can facilitate the wide scale use of
thermochemical nanolithography and providing students with a unique
interdisciplinary training that includes developing knowledge in materials
science, spectroscopy, nano- and micro-fabrication, and surface science
techniques. This will enable the team to augment the community's understanding
of nanoscale processes and potentially provide inexpensive and robust tools to
decrease the cost of entry into nanolithographic patterning.

Thermochemical nanolithography is a versatile atomic force microscopy based
technique that can be used to fabricate nanostructures and nanoribbons of
graphene-like materials via local thermal reduction of chemically modified
graphene. Thermochemical nanolithography uses thermal probes to locally heat the
surface of a material to produce a variety of nano-scale chemical reactions,
which can be controlled in terms of spatial resolution and extent of chemical
conversion, so that complex chemical gradients can be obtained. For applications
in the next generation of electronic, sensor and energy nano-devices based on
graphene-like materials, this project aims to address the following issues: (i)
fabrication of defect-free graphene nanoribbons with control over size, length
and positioning (registry) on arbitrary substrates; and (ii) nanoscale control
of the chemistry of graphene and other materials nanostructures. The research
team will use experiments, finite elements calculations and density functional
theory simulations for understanding and controlling the nanoscale thermo-
chemical modification of graphene-based materials to fabricate graphene
nanoribbons of high quality with excellent control over positioning and size.
Furthermore, this project aims at developing parallel (up to 100 probes)
patterning using novel concepts of temperature control and software, with the
goal of writing and then reading more than 1 million 10-nm pixels in 1 second.