* 1437923
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Development and Application of Piezoelectric Nanoheterostructures to Reduce the Chemical and Energy Demand of Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nosang Myung, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 213,996.00

Shuai&lt;br/&gt;1437989&lt;br/&gt;Cwiertny&lt;br/&gt;1437122&lt;br/&gt;Nam&lt;br
/&gt;1437923&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Development
and Application of Piezoelectric Nanoheterostructures to Reduce the Chemical and
Energy Demand of Water Treatment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water and wastewater
treatment account for approximately 5 % of all of the energy consumption in the
US. Therefore, in response to the tremendous chemical and energy demands
associated with clean water production, this project will develop nanostructured
piezoelectric catalysts for converting the abundance of waste mechanical energy
available in water treatment (e.g., pump vibrations) into useable forms of
chemical energy for pollutant degradation. The scientific goals are coupled to
educational goals are to train three graduate and several undergraduate students
at the interface of catalysis, environmental chemistry, nanotechnology,
materials science and sustainability science, helping better prepare the
research leaders of tomorrow to address the complex, multi-faceted problems
posed by the energy-water nexus. The education and outreach initiatives center
on underrepresented groups in STEM and K-12, promoting their involvement in
research activities at the George Washington University (GW), U.C. Riverside
(UCR; a Hispanic serving institution (HSI)), and the University of Iowa (UI).
This includes an undergraduate research partnership between UCR and Cal Poly
Pomona (a primarily undergraduate institution and HSI), and PI involvement in
existing mentoring activities at GW (School Without Walls) and UI (Summer
Research Opportunities Scholars Program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation
for this study is the overriding hypothesis that inefficiencies in current
piezocatalysts can be overcome by the smart design of one-dimensional (1D)
hybrid nanostructures optimized for (i) potential and current generation via the
direct piezoelectric effect and (ii) efficient piezogenerated charge separation
via co-catalysts that promote ROS production. The research plan centers on two
main tasks to (i) rationally design, fabricate and optimize the performance of
piezoelectric catalysts, and (ii) demonstrate their application as versatile,
next-generation technologies for pollutant oxidation, disinfection,
antimicrobial surfaces, and chemically reactive filtration membranes. The
studies proposed will focus primarily on a novel class of composite nanofibers
prepared via electro-spinning that blend the resiliency and strength of
polymeric piezoelectric materials (e.g., PVDF) with more reactive inorganic
phases (e.g., ZnO, BaTiO3) that are otherwise too rigid and chemically less
stable to function as stand-alone piezocatalysts. This work is potentially
transformative in that catalytic nanofiber platforms developed will provide a
more sustainable route to advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) and membrane
filtration, high performance technologies that currently are limited in
application due to concerns associated with their chemical demand, cost and
carbon footprint.