* 1437498
* SAVI:  International Institute for Solid Waste Management Life-Cycle Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* James Levis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 498,326.00

1437498 (Barlaz). Globally, over one billion tons of municipal solid waste (MSW)
are generated annually and this is predicted to double by 2025 due to increases
in population, urbanization, and economic development. U.S. solid waste systems
processed approximately 250 million tons of waste in 2011. The direct emissions
from landfilling, composting, and combustion of U.S. waste resulted is an
estimated 2% of U.S. GHG emissions, mostly CO2. MSW contains significant
quantities of materials that can be utilized for resource and energy recovery,
making the solid waste management (SWM) system a highly visible and potentially
high-impact target for enhancing environmental sustainability. The primary goal
of the SAVI (Science Across Virtual Institutes) effort is to establish a self-
supporting virtual (internet-based) institute to enhance research, education,
and outreach related to the life-cycle assessment (LCA) of SWM systems. Two
leading solid waste LCA models are SWOLF developed at NC State University and
EASETECH developed at the Technical University of Denmark, the principal
collaborative partners. It is anticipated that in the U.S. additional
participants in the virtual institute will include faculty at universities such
as Columbia University, Clarkson University, Rutgers University, and the
University of South Carolina, among others. The overall objective is to become
the leading global institute for the application of LCA to SWM. Specific
research objectives are to (1) collaboratively review, gather, analyze, and
report key SWM LCA and cost model data, assumptions, and practices from EASETECH
and SWOLF to identify best practices, data, and future needs, (2) fuse models in
SWOLF and EASTECH frameworks to develop a consolidated set of solid waste
process models and datasets that present consistent descriptions of solid waste
collection, treatment, and disposal processes, (3) develop a public data and
model management repository to encourage and facilitate future collaboration,
knowledge exchange, and model integration, and (4) develop instructional
materials, articles, and workshops that enhance understanding of life-cycle
solid waste resource management from an international perspective. LCA research
on solid waste has broad impacts since it is used to inform decisions on the
environmental sustainability of all products and packaging that require
management at the end of their useful life. The dissemination of advanced
process models will provide a significant service to students and practitioners
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives will be achieved
through three major tasks; (1) develop consistent and unified data and process
models, (2) implement a series of international joint research meetings and
workshops to collaborate, publicize results, and create a framework for future
institute meetings, training sessions, and workshops, and (3) develop the
necessary data and software infrastructure to create a self-sustaining SWM life-
cycle institute that will continue to provide resources, instructional content,
and opportunities for collaboration among solid waste life-cycle researchers,
educators, practitioners, and students from around the world. LCA research on
solid waste has broad impacts since it is used to inform decisions on the
environmental sustainability of all products and packaging that require
management at the end of their useful life. Project impacts include research
advances, as well as international education and dissemination to students,
researchers and practitioners. The work to fuse process models and data will
advance the state-of-the-art of the application of LCA to solid waste systems
analysis. The fused models will provide improved and accessible tools to
researchers, policymakers and private sector decision makers. This SAVI effort
will result in the development of workshops and on-line tools for instruction
and training. Workshops will be recorded and made available for free to promote
learning, understanding and accessibility. This is particularly significant in
consideration of the current state-of-the-practice. There are numerous graduate
students throughout the world working in solid waste LCA that do not have access
to state-of-the-art data or information, and this SAVI will change that.
Furthermore, both the commercially available and open source LCA models are
simplistic in their treatment of waste and materials management, and this SAVI
will address that simplicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is a Science
Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International and Integrative Activities (OIIA), the Office of the Assistant
Director for Engineering (OAD/ENG), and CBET/ENG's Environmental Engineering and
Environmental Sustainability programs.