* 1437362
* Stable Assignment Problems for Staffing: Complete Matchings, Local Stability, and Dynamic Reassignments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ozlem Ergun, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 440,989.00

Assigning personnel to jobs is a large-scale problem faced by many organizations
including the military and multinational organizations, such as United Nations
agencies. Although successful algorithms have been developed that can ensure
stable matchings (matchings without incentive to deviate), not all practical
concerns have been addressed by these algorithms. This research was initiated by
ongoing discussions with the World Food Programme (WFP), the largest
humanitarian agency in the world. The humanitarian impact alone is significant,
since stable matches lead to improved workforce stability, reduced costs of
personnel assignments, and ultimately more dollars that can be used for
beneficiaries. Findings of this research also have the potential to improve
staff rotations in the US military, medical resident assignments, school choice,
and organ allocations.

This research exploits aspects appearing in practical stable matching problems:
(i) centralized organizations often can negotiate with specific agents to change
their preference lists; (ii) for large systems not all staff or jobs will have
complete knowledge of others' preference lists, hence potentially some stability
considerations can be relaxed without introducing incentive issues. The
objective of the proposed research is to develop mathematical models that can
ensure a complete set of matchings even when preference lists are truncated,
where the models are scalable for large organizations, and the algorithms
provide approaches to make dynamic assignments over time. The proposed research
will result in innovative models, algorithms, and approaches to solve large-
scale assignment problems with considerations of user behavior. The
methodologies to solve the problems include integer programming with equilibrium
constraints, relaxation techniques, dynamic programming, and local search. The
proposed research contributes to the intersection of computer science, economics
and optimization, by studying optimization with decentralized decision makers in
the context of developing algorithmic approaches to large-scale and practical
stable matching problems.