* 1437601
* Studies of the impact of plasmonic metal nano-particles on co-catalysts/semiconductor photocatalysts in solar water splitting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 361,750.00

Title: Studies of the impact of plasmonic metal nanoparticles on co-
catalyst/semiconductor photocatalysts in solar water
splitting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Suljo Linic of The
University of Michigan (Ann Arbor) is developing new materials for
photocatalytic splitting of water. The splitting of water driven by solar light
is one of the most important chemical transformations for which no efficient
materials exist. The lack of success in the pursuit of efficient water splitting
photocatalysts clearly indicates that new directions are needed. In their proof-
of-concept studies Prof. Linic and coworkers showed that an entirely new class
of composite photocatalysts, combining plasmonic metal nanoparticles
(characterized by their strong interaction with solar light) with
semiconductors, exhibits a great deal of promise. While they shed light on
multiple factors that play a role in the performance of these composite
photocatalysts, predictive models that can quantify the interplay between these
factors and guide the design of optimized materials need to be developed.
Without such comprehensive predictive models, it is impossible to discuss the
upper performance limits for the composite materials, or to identify the
geometries of composite photocatalysts that could achieve these limits. The
proposed work will develop these predictive models yielding the critical
knowledge base required for the design of optimized composite
photocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It was demonstrated recently that a new
class of composite materials, combining semiconductors with plasmonic
nanoparticles of coinage metals, exhibit improved performance in photo-catalytic
splitting of water using Sun light compared to conventional semiconductor
photocatalysts. The plasmonic nanostructures act to selectively trap light in
the regions of the semiconductor where the water splitting process is taking
place, i.e. the water/semiconductor interface, thereby selectively enhancing the
rates of e-/h+ formation in this region and improving the performance of the
material. The proof-of-concept work focused on photochemical splitting of water
on the composites of nitrogen-doped TiO2 and nanoparticles of Ag. While these
initial studies led to a very vibrant field of photochemistry on the composite
materials, there are many unanswered critical issues. This award will allow
Linic to focus on a number of these issues, including: (i) Establishing that the
underlying mechanisms and critical concepts are transferable to other more
advanced photocatalyst systems. In particular, more efficient multifunctional
photocatalysts that include a co-catalyst and a semiconductor are of interest.
(ii) Identifying critical physical properties that govern the performance of
plasmonic-metal/co-catalyst/semiconductor photocatalysts. Predictive, physically
transparent models that relate optical and geometric properties of
photocatalysts to their performance in photocatalytic splitting of water will be
the deliverables. These predictive structure/performance relationships are
required for the design of composite photocatalysts that can achieve optimal
performance. (iii) Validate these models by synthesizing and testing the
plasmonic-metal/co-catalyst/semiconductor photocatalysts with optimal physical
characteristics. An outreach program developed by Professor Linic to area high
schools is allowing local high school students the opportunity to participate in
this research and to learn about sustainable energy transformations.
Furthermore, significant efforts will be made to expose general public to
various fields of sustainable energy generation using World Wide Web. The
broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from the
discovery of new generation of photocatalysts as well as the development of
training opportunities for students and teachers.