* 1437195
* Locomotion and Transport in a Liquid Crystal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Thomas Powers, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,998.00

The goal of the proposed study is to investigate the fundamentals of swimming of
microorganisms in liquid crystal environments. Swimming and swarming of
microorganisms is a topic of considerable current interest, with a lot of
research left to be done in the case of swimming in fluids that are more complex
than water. Results of this work will deepen our understanding of the behavior
of microorganisms in complex yet very relevant systems, such as mucus and
biofilms. The PI will continue to participate in the Research Experiences for
Teachers program, which invites K-12 teachers from local schools to the Brown
campus to participate in laboratory research and course development projects
during the summer, and in the Brown University Summer High School program ,
giving lectures and demonstrations on the physics of locomotion and liquid
crystals. The PI will also contribute lectures and discussions to the Providence
After School Alliance (PASA), a local organization that provides expanded
learning opportunities to high school students.

The goal of the proposed research is to provide the theoretical framework for
understanding the swimming of microorganisms in liquid crystal solutions. These
liquid crystal solutions are model systems for the study of more complicated
anisotropic biological systems, but are also interesting in their own right as a
means for manipulating active colloidal particles. While the hydrodynamic
interactions between microscopic swimmers in Newtonian fluids, such as water,
have received a lot of attention, bacteria commonly colonize environments laden
with polymers. Since these polymers are typically rod-like and aligned, these
environments are often anisotropic. For example, extracellular DNA forms
parallel bundles in biofilms, and bacteria have been observed to swim
preferentially along the direction of alignment. Furthermore, several
experimental groups have recently begun to study swimming bacteria in nontoxic
synthetic liquid crystal solutions. The proposal is addressing this issue
exactly, the development of a theory that would describe phenomena that are
experimentally observed.