* 1437514
* SFS: Capacity Building: Cybersecurity Education Across Disciplines with Focus on Minorities and Women
* EHR,DGE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Debra Nakama, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 233,444.00

The University of Hawaii Maui College (UHMC) CyberEd project will address the
concern that the current training, education, and readiness in the emerging
realm of cybersecurity is not being met by small businesses and in rural
communities. UHMC will enhance its cybersecurity education program through new
cross-disciplinary courses and course modules that will be embedded in existing
courses and curriculum in a variety of disciplines. The CyberEd project will
target students and faculty who live in rural areas in Maui County, Hawaii, who
do not have ready access to high technology, as well as women, minorities, and
college instructors who are in a position to disseminate training to a wide
selection of students. The project will focus on cyber security issues that are
critical for future owners or employees of small businesses, who usually rely on
their own skills and capabilities to prevent and protect against cybercrime.
This project will meet the needs of Maui County, in the State of Hawaii, a
federally designated rural area.

The learning environments that will be developed will use real-world problems as
project-based scenarios and will be guided by the national articulated core
knowledge and skills in information assurance and cyber defense. The curricula
will be designed in a modular format to facilitate communication and partnership
with other educational institutions, businesses/industries and governmental
stakeholders in cyber defense. A key feature of the project will be the training
of college faculty from a variety of disciplines ranging from accounting to
healthcare. Summer cyber workshops will bring together faculty and students to
learn about cybersecurity issues and challenges, and will prepare them to
disseminate their learning and education to fellow students, peers and the
surrounding community. The participants in these workshops will become mentors
and coaches in their own fields of instruction and promote cybersecurity within
their course modules.

The project will be evaluated on an ongoing basis for rigor, relevance and
effectiveness. The formative/summative assessment process will include ongoing,
short, mid, and longterm evaluation exercises based on specific evaluation
criteria. The criteria will cover the wide section of participants involved in
this project including high school and college students, research students, high
school teachers, college faculty, rural technicians and adult learners. The
project evaluator will utilize site visits, as appropriate, to ensure that the
assessment and evaluation process produces meaningful results.