* 1437851
* Development of an Asymptotically-Reduced, Multiscale Model of Turbulent Boundary Layer Dynamics at Extreme Reynolds Numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Gregory Chini, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 474,391.00

1437851&lt;br/&gt;Chini, Gregory &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed study is to use a combination of theory and unique experiments to
develop a new approach to modeling turbulent flows in the boundary layer. The
capacity to understand, predict, and control turbulent boundary layer dynamics
is important for a multitude of technological applications and scientifically
important processes. Turbulence is prevalent in the world we live in and in the
industry. Success in this research could impact any industrial process that
involves turbulent flow, with consequent societal benefits in the form of new
products, improved energy efficiency, quieter systems, etc. Problems related to
geophysical and astrophysical flows could also be approached in a new, more
accurate way. The educational plan involves the participation of both graduate
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed
research is to develop a multiscale Partial Differential Equation (PDE) model of
turbulent boundary layer dynamics through the integrated useof high Reynolds
number (Re) asymptotics and well-resolved high-Re experiments. By its very
nature, the model development process will elucidate the so-called "inner/outer"
interaction, as these are linked to boundary layer evolution as Re tends to
infinity. In addition, numerical solutions of the multiscale PDEs promise to be
less costly than direct numerical simulations (DNS) of the primitive
Navier?Stokes (NS) equations from which they are derived, thereby enabling
simulations in otherwise inaccessible parameter regimes. The proposed model will
be distinct from other recent efforts, because the model retains a first
principles foundation, with no reliance on system inputs or phenomenological
assumptions. The multiscale analysis on which the model is based brings together
recent advances in the asymptotic analysis of turbulent geophysical flows, of
"exact coherent structures" in high-Re shear flows, and of the mean dynamics in
canonical turbulent wall-flows. The target model is a closed multiscale PDE
system that is self-consistently and systematically simplified relative to the
primitive NS equations. This critical scaling information is only accessible
through well-resolved, high-Re experiments. In this regard, the Univ. of New
Hampshire Flow Physics Facility (FPF), which is the world's largest flow physics
quality boundary layer wind tunnel, allows high-resolution measurements of
velocity and vorticity at extreme Reynolds numbers.