* 1437570
* The Pressure of Active Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

CBET 1437570&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions containing particles that can
propel themselves through a liquid are interesting examples of a class of
materials called active matter. The self-propelled particles, which are
sometimes thought of as swimmers, can contribute to the properties of the
suspension as a whole. This project will explore a novel concept called the swim
pressure that can help characterize the state of such a suspension. The swim
pressure is similar to the usual pressure that molecules in a gas exert on the
walls of a container, but in this case the pressure is exerted by self-propelled
particles that could be microorganisms, chemically reactive particles, or micro-
motors moving through liquid. Preliminary data suggest that the swim pressure
and its dependence on particle concentration can be used to predict changes in
the suspension, including phase changes, deformation and motion, that cannot be
predicted by other theories for active matter. The project will investigate the
swim pressure and its utility in predicting suspension behavior by carrying out
a series of numerical simulations. The results will be useful to scientists and
engineers who process active matter suspensions in pharmaceutical, medicinal,
food and similar industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The micromechanical origin of
spontaneous self-assembly in suspensions of self-propelled particles will be
investigated by focusing on the swim pressure exerted by the particles.
Numerical simulations based on Accelerated Stokesian Dynamics and other methods
will be used to determine the variation of swim pressure with particle
concentration, activity, etc., which can be used to formulate a nonequilibrium
equation of state and pressure-volume phase diagrams for the suspension.
Hydrodynamic interactions among the particles will be included in the
computations. The swim pressure will then be correlated with detailed motions of
the active particles that can lead to spontaneous formation of clusters,
aggregates and other patterns, as well as the overall deformation and motion of
the suspension.