* 1437772
* Fouling Resistant Ultrafiltration Membranes: Effect of Additive Polymer Architecture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ayse Asatekin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 302,247.00

1437772&lt;br/&gt;Asatekin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fouling Resistant
Ultrafiltration Membranes: Effect of Additive Polymer
Architecture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be focused on understanding
how the fouling resistance of ultrafiltration membranes is affected by complex
feed waters, for example in wastewater treatment. The project team will leverage
this knowledge to design and test membranes for wastewater treatment that resist
fouling in environments with high fouling potential, such as simulated municipal
and industrial wastewater. This project will introduce novel fouling resistant
ultrafiltration membranes and provide insights into how they behave in the
presence of complex feeds, specifically demanding water streams such as
municipal wastewater, littoral seawater, and fracking and produced water. These
results will enable more efficient separations in biopharmaceutical, food and
beverage industries, and lead to new approaches to bio-fouling prevention in
biomedical devices and marine vessels. Graduate and undergraduate students will
be involved in this research and they will gain interdisciplinary knowledge and
skills, and disseminate the work through publications and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand how the
fouling resistance of ultrafiltration membranes with zwitterionic copolymer
additives is affected by complex feeds found in domestic and industrial
wastewater treatment, and by the chemical structure and architecture of the
zwitterionic additive. It also aims to clarify the fouling resistance mechanisms
of zwitterions with different foulants using a combination of filtration and
interaction force measurements. This project will focus on ultrafiltration
membranes manufactured using non-solvent induced phase separation by blending an
amphiphilic zwitterionic copolymer into the casting solution. The project is not
only to study the fouling properties of zwitterion-containing membranes, but
also to gain a fundamental understanding of the fouling resistance mechanism
using surface analysis, interaction force measurements, and physicochemical
data. Previous research suggests that zwitterionic surface functionalities
impart fouling resistance to filtration membranes, and zwitterion-containing
additives in ultrafiltration membrane casting mixtures improve membrane flux.
But there is a significant knowledge gap in understanding the fouling resistance
of membranes containing different chemical structures and configurations of
zwitterionic groups, and how fouling of this class of membranes is affected by
feed composition. Hence, this research is potentially transformative for
membrane manufacturers and users in wastewater treatment, seawater pretreatment
for desalination, and biotech applications.