* 1437953
* Methods to Protect Privacy in State Longitudinal Data Systems Research Files
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Eric Hedberg, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2019
* USD 710,614.00

The expansion of federally funded state student longitudinal data systems (SLDS)
provides a rich source of data that has great potential in STEM education
research and evaluation. However, access to that data has been hampered by the
requirements of the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). The
researchers in this study will examine the ways in which two general approaches
to statistical disclosure control will enable states to share data while still
complying with the standards of FERPA. The researchers will use imputation and
data masking of risk strata with the inclusion of cross tabulations of variables
with data from five states that have agreed to authorize the use of their data.
They will create protected datasets, study them to determine whether they
protect against disclosure and carry out a number of analyses to determine
whether they yield essentially the same answers as the corresponding analyses
using the original data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protecting against the loss of
privacy is an essential component of the concerns about the ever-growing data
that are being collected about all members of society. However, collecting data
that are not available for legitimate research and evaluation decreases the
value of that collection. States need better mechanisms to ensure privacy of
data they collect. At the same time they also need assurances that the findings
from the data they release to researchers will provide valid answers to the
research and evaluation questions posed. This project will build and test the
data masking models that are the necessary infrastructure for the effective use
of large scale state longitudinal data systems.