* 1438161
* International Workshop on Recent Developments in the Adaptive Solution of PDEs, August 17-22, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Weizhang Huang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 6,400.00

This award provides support to defray expenses of US-based participants of the
international workshop "Recent Developments in Adaptive Methods for Partial
Differential Equations" to be held on August 17-22 in 2014, on the campus of
Memorial University of Newfoundland, in St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada. Funds
are directed towards students, junior investigators, and researchers from groups
under-represented in the sciences to attend the workshop. The workshop is
motivated by the increased interaction and collaboration between computational
mathematicians and applied researchers in engineering and science. Driven by the
need for robust and efficient numerical simulations, this workshop strives to
bring together researchers currently involved in numerical simulations for real
problems with experts in adaptivity. The workshop consists of three distinct but
uniquely connected components. The first is a two day short course on adaptive
methods for partial differential equations. The second is research level talks
given by experts in adaptivity and applied researchers with a need for adaptive
simulation techniques. The last is breakout interactive sessions coupling short
course participants, adaptivity experts and applied researchers.

The workshop will facilitate greater interaction between researchers in adaptive
methods for partial differential equations and applied researchers in
engineering and science. Moreover, the workshop will provide great opportunities
for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and young researchers to acquaint
themselves with research frontiers, present their own work, and interact with
experts in the field. Furthermore, the workshop will provide strong motivation
for interdisciplinary collaboration between computational mathematicians and
applied researchers in dynamical systems, Earth sciences, and medical imaging.
Finally, the workshop will play an active role in motivating mathematics and
strengthening applied mathematics groups at universities in the region.

Workshop web site: www.math.mun.ca/anasc/workshop.html