* 1438221
* Collaborative Research: Probing Active Fraction and Metabolic Function to Elucidate Mechanisms of Pharmaceutical Biotransformations during Nitrification-Denitrification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* C. Andrew Ramsburg, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 177,162.00

1438578 Chandran 1438221 Ramsburg

The widespread occurrence and environmental impacts of microconstituents has
received increasing attention in recent years. An important class of
microconstituents is pharmaceutically active compounds. There is a growing body
of evidence that suggests chronic exposure to pharmaceutically active compounds,
even at extremely low concentrations could have adverse effects on ecosystems,
such as impaired embryo development, modified feeding and social behavior of
fish, suppression of growth and reduction in respiration in algae. While some of
these effects are reversible, other anatomical, physiological, and genetic
alterations are permanent. Thus, the challenge of assessing, understanding, and
mitigating the deleterious influence of pharmaceutically active compounds, and
microconstituents more broadly, on the environment is one of the great
challenges facing the environmental engineering and science community. Current
approaches to study pharmaceutically active compounds fate in biological
wastewater treatment generally lack a mechanistic basis and therefore cannot
unambiguously pinpoint the protagonist microbial communities and metabolic
pathways that are active in the removal of pharmaceutically active compounds.
This leads to a lack of consensus regarding the identity of active species and
critical attenuation processes. To unravel the conundrum of complexity and site
specific results, the PIs propose a fundamental approach to understanding the
fate of pharmaceutically active compounds - one that can guide future research
and implementation efforts. This project aims to develop a clear understanding
of the microbial "active fraction" in activated sludge which is responsible for
the transformation and removal of pharmaceutically active compounds, and to
elucidate the constituent metabolic pathways. A secondary objective is to
quantify and differentiate between growth associated (linked to anabolism) and
non-growth associated (linked to catabolism or fortuitous reactions)
pharmaceutically active compounds transformation and degradation. Understanding
the interplay of microbial processes acting on contaminants of emerging concern
is critical to meeting the scientific challenges now facing water quality
researchers and professionals. The approach to understanding these processes
offered in the proposed research may seed future scientific investigations aimed
at understanding biodegradation mechanisms throughout the environment.

The influence of anthropogenic chemical mixtures present within the environment
at low concentration is one of the great challenges facing scientists and
engineers in the 21st century. Effective wastewater treatment is critical to
maintaining water quality, but what is traditionally thought of as effective may
need to also include microconstituents - compounds that these facilities were
never specifically designed to treat. This study will further the development
and application of advanced microbial-ecological techniques to shed new light on
how bacteria within activated sludge interact with pharmaceutically active
compounds. The advanced understanding enabled by these state-of-the-art
molecular tools can be extended to interrogate pharmaceutically active compound
metabolism in different activated sludge configurations. Further, the knowledge
of the "active fraction" and metabolic pathways can help improve standardized
protocols that can be used by future studies to estimate the extant biokinetic
parameters and to construct more accurate predictive models for pharmaceutically
active compounds removal. From a fundamental perspective, there is no metabolic
model to date, that can describe pharmaceutically active compounds degradation
pathways. This is possibly due to a lack of detailed studies related to
understanding the mechanisms by which pharmaceutically active compounds are
biodegraded within mixed communities of bacteria. As part of this project, the
PIs propose to develop and parameterize such a model.