* 1438331
* Obtaining Unbiased Math and Science Achievement Effect Estimates from Nonrandomized Studies
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mark Lipsey, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 233,660.00

The researchers in this project will use large longitudinal datasets that
include rich arrays of descriptive variables as well as measures of science and
mathematics achievement to identify promising covariates that may eliminate or
greatly reduce selection bias in nonrandomized estimates of program effects in
research and evaluations of interventions or programs for K-12 students.
Simulated nonrandomized intervention and comparison groups with selection bias
will be created from a selection of data from five de-identified, publically
available longitudinal datasets. The researchers will then create propensity
scores for each simulation based on the examination of the magnitude of the
multiple correlations between covariates and the outcome and use these scores to
assess how much of the selection bias they might eliminate. The identification
of covariates that sufficiently account for enough selection bias so that the
remaining selection bias might be ignored will strengthen the use of quasi-
experimental study design in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randomized
control designs in STEM education are well known as being the strongest causal
design with the ability to provide unbiased estimates of the effects of programs
or interventions on intended outcomes. With an adequate sample size to minimize
the likelihood of chance differences, random assignment can be expected to
equate the experimental groups on all baseline characteristics that might
influence the outcomes of interest. However, randomized experiments are not
always possible in situations where the effects of STEM education programs are
of interest. For many practical and occasionally, ethical reasons, nonrandomized
comparison group designs are frequently used in STEM education research and
evaluation studies. The findings of this study will provide empirical evidence
of what covariate data should be collected to reduce selection bias in quasi-
experimental designs.