* 1438992
* XPS: FULL: CCA: An Initial Exploration of Architecture and System Support for Sparsity in Science and Engineering Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Mark Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,995.00

Scientific computing remains a key driving force in the evolution of high-
performance computer systems, because of its inherent value and its ability to
drive computer-systems advances that benefit many demanding applications. This
project is an initial exploratory investigation into optimizations that cut
across algorithms, systems, and computer architecture to improve application
performance and reduce energy through heterogeneous systems that combine
latency-oriented cores and throughput-oriented cores. This activity will
identify optimizations with the potential to significantly advance important
emerging applications that are on the verge of attaining practical
utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a novel adaptive computational fluid
dynamics code as a driver, this research seeks to identify the benefits and
bottlenecks of both current and emerging heterogeneous systems. Using both
measurements on existing hardware and detailed simulation of emerging and
proposed systems, this activity will identify architectural mechanisms for
coordinating communication and computation with the potential to significantly
increase performance and energy efficiency. This activity will also develop an
initial design of a heterogeneous virtual machine model that virtualizes
proposed hardware mechanisms, yet provides applications with enough knowledge of
the physical hardware to optimize execution without losing the abstraction
benefits of virtualization.