* 1438340
* Collaborative proposal: Developing a battery of methods for the study of the trafficking mechanisms and transformations of silver and gold nanomaterials in human cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Norma Adragna, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

PI: Ioana Pavel Sizemore/Adam de la Zerda&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1438340/1434465&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Wright State University/Stanford
University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative proposal: Developing a battery of
methods for the study of the trafficking mechanisms and transformations of
silver and gold nanomaterials in human cells &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extensive
use of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) in consumer products and industry and the
use of many kinds of NPs in healthcare as diagnostic and therapeutic tools
require an understanding of their potential toxicities. However, as observed by
the National Nanotechnology Initiative, there are only a limited number of
techniques that could expand our understanding of the mechanisms by which
nanomaterials influence cell behavior. The main scientific goal of this project
is to fill these knowledge gaps by developing a battery of tools for the study
of the trafficking mechanisms and transformations of environmentally
representative AgNPs and biomedically relevant gold nanorods (AuNRs) in human
cells. Key parameters, which will be considered in order to test the efficiency
and practicality of the proposed methods, will include nanomaterial shape,
surface charge, dose, and exposure time. The methods that are to be developed
will be captured and shared through Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). In
addition, the knowledge gained from the proposed research will be used in
setting up new course modules and will be disseminated into the broader
community, e.g., through interactions with a local museum and development of two
hour hands-on laboratory modules for over 100 K-6 through K-9 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A battery of interdisciplinary methods (ICP-OES/TFF,
Raman-SERS/MatLab codes, and electron microscopy /bioassays) will be used for
the study of the trafficking mechanisms and transformations of environmentally
representative silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) and biomedically relevant gold
nanoparticles (AuNRs) in human cells. Key parameters that will be considered to
test the efficiency and practicality of the proposed methods will include
nanomaterial shape, surface charge, dose, and exposure time. To accomplish their
goals, The PIs propose two specific aims. In Aim1, the PIs will characterize the
physico-chemical properties of NPs, according to the U.S. EPA standards, before
cellular exposure and then at various benchmark times during cellular
trafficking. In Aim 2, using their suite of tools, the investigators will study
the trafficking mechanisms of AgNPs and AuNRs in human cells as a function of
nanomaterial shape, surface charge, dose, and exposure time.