* 1438332
* SusChEM: Novel 1,2-Propanediol Biosynthesis from Renewable Feedstocks through Enzyme Discovery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jiantao Guo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 317,611.00

SusChEM: Novel 1,2-Propanediol Biosynthesis from Renewable Feedstocks Through
Enzyme Discovery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After many years of practice, the chemical
industry faces sustainability challenges that arise from both the potentially
dwindling feedstocks and intermediates that are derived from fossil fuels, and
from the increasingly undesirable environmental costs associated with their
production. Biocatalytic syntheses, based on enzymatic conversion or microbial
whole-cell synthesis, are increasingly explored as the alternate platform of
chemical production. Key advantages of microbial synthesis over chemical
syntheses include reaction selectivity, molecular diversity, and reduced
environmental impact, and the utilization of renewable feedstocks, such as
plant-based cellulosic material, instead of hydrocarbons. The successful
implementation of microbial syntheses inherently addresses the sustainability
challenges currently facing the chemical industry. Because natural pathways are
often not suitable for large-scale chemical production, and do not lead to
desired chemical products, efforts are needed into the discovery and the
development of novel biosynthetic pathways for industrial chemicals. Professors
Wei Niu and Jiantao Guo at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln propose to achieve
sustainable production of an industrial bulk chemical, 1,2-propanediol
(1,2-PDO), by developing a new biosynthetic route. 1,2 PDO may be integrated
into the production of other chemicals, such as n-propanol and propylene. This
study combines both the discovery and the engineering aspects of scientific
research. UN-L Students participating in this work will gain perspectives on the
important aspects and synergistic effects of integrating basic science and
engineering. The multidisciplinary research activities will be used to support
active recruitment of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students to
pursue studies and careers in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of the proposed work is to establish the de novo biosynthesis of
1,2-propanediol, an industrial bulk chemical and a natural product, from
renewable feedstocks through the reduction of a common fermentation product,
lactic acid. Application of the two known 1,2-PDO biosynthetic routes is limited
either by the scarce availability of the starting material or the involvement of
cytotoxic biosynthetic intermediate. The PIs seek to overcome these limitations
by establishing novel 1,2-PDO pathways using two parallel approaches. The first
one is a discovery-driven approach that focuses on identifying the genetic and
catalytic elements that function in the poorly understood lactic acid reduction
pathway in Lactobacillus buchneri, which produces 1,2-PDO under anoxic growth
conditions. The second one is a design and engineering-driven approach that
focuses on the development of a novel artificial 1,2-PDO biosynthetic pathway,
which entails the activation of lactic acid as lactoyl-CoA followed by two
sequential reduction steps to form 1,2-PDO. This pathway would also enable the
stereospecific biosynthesis of R- and S-1,2-PDO stereoisomers. Niu and Guo will
apply protein engineering to improve the catalytic efficiency of the bottleneck
enzyme, the CoA-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase. To facilitate rational
mutagenesis, efforts will be directed to obtain the crystal structure of the
protein, of which the family is underrepresented in available protein structure
database. In addition, the proposed work will establish a novel growth-coupled
selection scheme to allow rapid sampling of large number of enzyme mutants. The
selection scheme has the potential to be adapted for directed evolution of other
enzymes that have similar cofactor requirement.