* 1438644
* Clean Water Matters: Challenges and Research Perspectives Workshop in Beijing, China, April 18, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Nada Assaf-Anid, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

1438644 Assaf-Anid

This grant is for partial support of a workshop entitled "Clean Water Matters:
Challenges and Research Perspectives Workshop," to be held in Beijing, April 18,
2014. These funds will be used to support plane fares and subsistence for the
U.S. delegation. The overarching goal of this workshop is to initiate joint
research collaborations among scholars in China and the United States to address
pressing water challenges affecting both nations, with potential applicability
to other regions of the world. Specific objectives are to: 1) build a research
platform for collaboration across the US and China that supports active
engagement and joint approaches to clean water challenges facing both nations
and 2) form a U.S. - China water research and education community and set the
grounds for the establishment of a joint research consortium. The proposed
collaboration will enhance scientific cooperation between Chinese and US
scholars and junior fellows, and provide students from both nations
opportunities for international research experience. The event is structured to
favor dialogue and collaborations among participants with various perspectives
and backgrounds. It will bring together lead water protection and management
scholars, seasoned policy professionals, agencies that support sciences and
research advances, together with young investigators in their early stages of
their careers, and post-doc fellows and graduate students interested in pursuing
research in this area. This grant is co-funded by the Global Venture Fund (GVF)
of NSF's International Science and Engineering section (ISE) as well as the
Environmental Sustainability program in the CBET division of NSF's Engineering
Directorate.