* 1438622
* The Role of Cell-to-Cell Communication in Microcystis Aeruginosa Blooms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Heather Shipley, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 290,468.00

1438622&lt;br/&gt;Pei, Ruoting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of cell-to-cell
communication in Microcystis aeruginosa blooms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microcystis
aeruginosa is the dominant cyanobacterial species causing harmful algal blooms
in lakes and estuarine water bodies worldwide. The blooms release potent toxins
and pose severe public health hazards to humans using the water, including
sickness and death. Despite the devastating effects, currently there is
remarkably little understanding of the M. aeruginosa biology regulating bloom
formation and toxin production. Thus research is much needed to develop more
effective controlling strategies for M. aeruginosa blooms based on the
understanding of basic biology. The focus of the proposed research is quorum
sensing, the key cell-cell communication mechanism via chemical "languages",
which control population behaviors such as toxin production and cell growth in
diverse bacteria, but is poorly understood in M. aeruginosa. The understanding
of the basic biology of Microcystis quorum sensing will lead to novel strategies
for controlling M. aeruginosa blooms in various water bodies by modulating the
quorum sensing pathways. The education program targets local high school
students and the undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Texas
at San Antonio, a Hispanic serving institution with about 60 % underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results have identified two
chemical "languages", also called autoinducers, including N-acyl homoserine
lactones and autoinducer-2 in M. aeruginosa. Building on these findings, the
proposed research will be performed to elucidate the mechanisms of quorum
sensing in regulating bloom formation and toxin production. The PI will approach
these studies by elucidating the N-acyl homoserine lactones and
autoinducer-2-induced quorum sensing pathways in M. aeruginosa. Specifically,
the synthase genes responsible for synthesis of N-acyl homoserine lactones and
autoinducer-2 will be cloned and the physiological responses regulated by N-acyl
homoserine lactones and autoinducer-2 will be identified. Then the PI will
dDetermine whether there is crosstalk among quorum sensing, toxin production and
cell aggregation. The crosstalk will be validated by blocking each function and
examine the effects on the other two functions. And, finally the PI will examine
the role of quorum sensing in the development of M. aeruginosa blooms. The focus
is on examining the role of quorum sensing in the interaction between M.
aeruginosa and other heterotrophic bacteria, an important component of bloom
formation. At the conclusion of the study, a better understanding of biological
mechanisms of M. aeruginosa blooms will be achieved. The pathways of quorum
sensing in M. aeruginosa will be determined including identification the
chemical structures of the autoinducers and the genes responsible for
synthesizing the autoinducers. Whether toxin production, cell aggregation, cell
growth and cell buoyancy are among the social behaviors regulated by the quorum
sensing autoinducers will be determined. More importantly, whether quorum
sensing contributes to the interaction between M. aeruginosa and heterotrophic
bacteria and hence the development of M. aeruginosa blooms will be determined.
Overall, this will contribute to answering the question "what causes M.
aeruginosa blooms" that has long puzzled the field.