* 1438982
* XPS: FULL: FP: Collaborative Research:  Model-based, Event Driven Scalable Programming for the Mobile Cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gul Agha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 682,665.00

Title: XPS: FULL: FP: Collaborative Research: Model-based, Event Driven Scalable
Programming for the Mobile Cloud

Applications running on mobile devices backed by cloud servers and storage
(mobile cloud apps) are an important paradigm that is not well supported by
current programming technology. Although cloud computing technology makes
massive computational resources readily available, current frameworks for
developing applications provide no simple and flexible way to map user-level
application code to these resources. The intellectual merits of this project are
to develop a new methodology for building mobile cloud applications that can
leverage cloud resources in a scalable way while dramatically simplifying the
development effort. The project's broader significance and importance are that
it will provide a method for software development teams to build and deploy
distributed mobile applications that exploit massive concurrency and data
storage with less effort than is required to build simple web applications
today. Applications built following the proposed methodology have two distinct
levels: a user level specifying the semantics of user interaction, and an
architecture level specifying the allocation of computational resources. At each
level, behavior can be expressed in a simple but powerful language thus
providing modularity. The research project involves: (a) developing these
languages; (b) devising automatic semantics-preserving translation from the user
to the architecture level that allows the developer to adjust the application
semantics and tune performance independently; (c) building a toolset that
enables a range of analyses (including new forms of testing, model checking, and
static analysis) that are less costly and more effective than traditional
testing.