* 1438211
* Managing mixotrophic algae cultivation for efficient water treatment and biofuel production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jean VanderGheynst, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2019
* USD 317,505.00

PI Name: Jean VanderGheynst Number: 1438211

Microalgae have remarkable potential for producing biofuels and bioproducts, and
for sequestering carbon dioxide from industrial flue gases. Economical
production of algal biofuels will require using nutrients from wastewater and a
free source of carbon. The proposed research will involve managing wastewater
treatment by mixotrophic microalgae to achieve efficient biofuel production.
Mixotrophic algae can grow on either organic carbon sources or atmospheric
carbon dioxide. The research has the practical goal of providing an alternative
system for biofuel production leading to new industries with high global impact
in the areas of energy and agriculture sustainability. Specifically, the use of
biofuels produced from microalgal lipids and polysaccharides has been proposed
as a potential solution to worldwide challenges related to fossil fuel scarcity
and global warming. Furthermore, culturing microalgae in wastewater can improve
water quality, and prevent problems associated with "food vs. fuel" competition
on limited agriculture lands. This project will also train research and
educational leaders who will gain knowledge of fundamental principles and
applications of biological engineering and biotechnology. Students will develop
an ability to work in multidisciplinary teams to achieve research goals, and
gain understanding of the broader issues (global environmental and economic
impacts, public/societal views) in the field, preparing them to contribute to
science and policy related to energy sustainability. This research will benefit
K-12 education through integration of algal research into elementary school
science curriculums. It will also benefit undergraduate education through
enhanced integration of algal research into an engineering design class at
University of California, Davis. Technical Description

Microalgae have been considered as a viable biofuel feedstock due to their
productivity and associated higher-value by-products. Recent reports indicate
that sustainable economic production of algae for bioenergy will require
mixotrophic production on wastewater and waste carbon dioxide. The growth rate
of microalgae, uptake of organic carbon, and accumulation of intracellular lipid
and polysaccharide products resulting from mixotrophic production will likely be
different from heterotrophic and autotrophic production that have been primarily
studied to date. Mixotrophic conditions can improve lipid productivity by an
order of magnitude. However, these cultures can exhibit low efficiency in
converting the carbon source into biofuel precursors. For example, when cultured
on glucose, glycerol, and acetate, a model strain of microalgae converted only
10-40% of the substrate energy into lipids and starch. In contrast, yeast
cultures can convert glucose to ethanol with 70% efficiency on an energy basis.
Elucidating what contributes to lower efficiency in algae is critical for
designing algal-based systems for wastewater treatment and biofuel production.
The goal of the proposed research is to develop algae cultivation and wastewater
management systems that lead to higher substrate utilization efficiencies for
biofuel production and organic matter removal from wastewater. Management
options include strain selection and algae acclimation, rate and timing of
substrate addition and management of wastewater composition. An additional goal
is to determine bottlenecks in substrate utilization by microalgae. These goals
will be achieved through three objectives. The first objective is to determine
if acclimation of microalgae to organic carbon reduces substrate utilization
efficiency and develop strategies to overcome this challenge. The second
objective is to vary organic carbon and co-factor addition to algae using fed-
batch reactors to determine if substrate supply rate impacts conversion
efficiency, and the third objective is to use results from objectives 1 and 2 to
tailor microalgae production variables for cultivation on food processing
wastewaters. This may include application of substrate supply strategies
developed in earlier objectives and supplementation of co-factors deficient in
wastewaters. Metabolomic profiling techniques will be used to elucidate
metabolic responses to different management strategies. This research is
expected to inform the decision making process on how to manage microalgae and
wastewater for achieving sustainable biofuel production.