* 1438889
* Expanding Collaborative Opportunities for High Resolution AMS 14C Research in Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 207,879.00

With National Science Foundation (NSF) support, Dr. Douglas Kennett and his
colleagues at The Pennsylvania State University (PSU) will expand radiocarbon
dating capabilities to support archaeological applications and student training
that articulate with a developing high-resolution Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
(AMS) radiocarbon facility on campus (PSU-AMS). Archaeological studies of past
human behaviors and environment interactions are providing scientists with
critical information on how to sustain favorable conditions for future humanity
by understanding peoples' past impacts and adaptations. Next-generation
radiocarbon technologies are revolutionizing research capabilities to sharply
focus the lens into the past to clarify and enhance this understanding. Funds
from NSF will be used to improve existing sample preparation infrastructure and
techniques for archaeological materials (e.g., bone, shell, charcoal) and
develop new methods to expand capabilities and integrate archaeological research
more effectively with the environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMS
radiocarbon facilities are limited in the US and research capabilities in
archaeology and environmental sciences are being eclipsed by the proliferation
of facilities abroad, particularly regarding access to high precision
facilities. The emphasis of the PSU-AMS facility on human-earth interaction will
have a transformative impact on archaeological research. This AMS radiocarbon
initiative will foster the development of inter-disciplinary archaeological
research and greater articulation with the earth and environmental sciences.
This approach is essential for archaeologists to contribute to debates about the
long-term effects of environmental change on populations into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training the next generation of interdisciplinary
archaeological researchers in AMS radiocarbon technology and interpretation is
also a key aspect of addressing long-term effects of environmental change. NSF
funds will be used to develop a visiting scholar program and a summer short
course that will serve as prototypes for annual programs moving into the future.
Collaborative research efforts will be expanded and existing PSU programs will
be used to attract individuals from under-represented groups from nearby urban
areas. These programs will provide a unique educational opportunity that is rare
given the small number of AMS facilities in the US. The proposed project will
facilitate engagement between faculty and students at PSU that will benefit
greatly from visiting scholars and participants in the summer short course.