* 1438105
* Bioavailability of Tetracycline in Water and Soil to Bacteria for Expressing Antibiotic Resistance Response
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Stephen Boyd, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 328,419.00

1438105 Li

Bioavailability of Tetracycline in Water and Soil to Bacteria for Expressing
Antibiotic Resistance Response

Tetracyclines are the most common group of antibiotics for livestock and people,
and the proliferation of tetracycline-resistant bacteria has become an ever-
increasing global threat to human health. Tetracyclines are widely distributed
in water and soils, where they exert selective pressure on indigenous microbial
communities. A prerequisite for development of antibiotic resistance is
bacterial uptake of tetracycline, but little is known about the relative
bioavailabilities to bacteria of the many possible aqueous and sorbed
tetracycline forms. The concurrent increases in environmental tetracyclines and
antibiotic resistance genes suggest that trace amounts of tetracycline exert
selective pressure on indigenous microbial communities. However, no
relationships have been demonstrated at the primary nexuses of tetracyclines and
bacteria, such as wastewater treatment plants or animal feeding facilities. The
proposed project attacks a pressing social problem, the threats to the efficacy
of antibiotics. The unifying concept of bioavailability in this project
integrates environmental and analytical chemistry with microbial ecology. All
students and postdocs develop multiple complementary experimental approaches and
disciplinary perspectives. Women and underrepresented groups are encouraged at
all levels, including work-study undergraduates and interns. Results and
approaches will be presented in multiple graduate and undergraduate courses, and
disseminated more widely through PIs involvement in international and multi-
state working groups, multiple departments, centers, and grants. The PIs have
two synergistic research projects, one on transport of antibiotics from soils to
surface water by runoff, and one on bioavailability of dioxins which are
strongly sequestered by soils. Due to the projects broad social relevance,
opportunities for environmental education and outreach are promising for the
public and K-12, regulators, and practitioners, and will be pursued by the PIs
in conjunction with MSU Extension.

This proposal seeks to develop a mechanistic understanding of the effect of
tetracycline speciation (among its sorbed and aqueous species) on the
development of antibiotic resistance in natural and engineered systems. The PIs
hypothesize that; a) certain aqueous tetracycline species will be preferentially
bioavailable to bacteria, and, b) tetracycline sequestration in soil geosorbents
will limit its bioavailability. An E. coli bioreporter constructed by
transcriptional fusions between a tetR-regulated tetracycline-inducible promoter
and green fluorescent protein will be used in this study. In each experiment,
the project team will measure intracellular concentrations of tetracycline in
the bioreporter and also estimate the expression of antibiotic resistance by
quantifying bioreporter fluorescence. Specific aims are: (1) to identify the
tetracycline species that optimizes bioavailability and activation of antibiotic
resistance genes in aqueous solutions, (2) to evaluate the bioavailabilities of
tetracycline sorbed to whole soils and soil components, and, (3) to determine
the expression of antibiotic resistance evoked by sorbed tetracycline as
functions of soil water content, biofilm formation on geosorbent surfaces, and
potential uptake of sorbent particles by bacterial cells. The PIs hypothesize
that bacterial tetracycline resistance is not a simple function of total
tetracycline concentration, but instead depends on the detailed environmental
speciation of the antibiotic. The PIs propose to discover such speciation
linkages. This project will advance the mechanistic knowledge of tetracycline
uptake by bacteria as functions of biogeochemical factors (pH, metal cations,
and natural organic ligands), tetracycline sorption to various geosorbents, soil
moisture content, and biofilm formation. Data will be used in chemical
speciation modeling to identify the preferentially bioavailable tetracycline
species that maximize the development of antibiotic resistance in E. coli. This
improved mechanistic understanding of biogeochemical controls on the induction
of antibiotic resistance should allow the rational development of improved
environmental waste management schemes. For example, liming before waste
application would increase aqueous Ca2+ and pH, which both may suppress the
bioavailability of tetracyclines to bacteria. Furthermore, in-situ sorbent
amendments such as biochar may sequester tetracycline, decrease bioavailability,
and thereby diminish natural selection for antibiotic resistance.