* 1438203
* Resolving the Structure of Turbulence in Rough Wall Channel Flows Using 3D, Time Resolved, Multiscale Velocity Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 159,015.00

PI: Katz, Joseph&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1438203 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research aims to explore how turbulence is generated and sustained
close to solid boundaries. It will use findings from very accurate experiments
to clarify the way that energy is transferred in turbulent flows between the
different regions of the flow. As such, this research would allow the
development of correct models for the design of flow systems where solid walls
are present, which are in fact the most common cases of turbulent flows in
industry and the environment. Educational activities involve graduate and
undergraduate students for the development and implementation of the proposed
measurement system. There are also activities planned for Baltimore City high-
school students to work yearlong in the PI?s laboratory as part of their
required Research Practicum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will investigate how
the roughness height, wavelength, spatial arrangement and uniformity, affect the
generation of vortices, their evolution in time, their interactions with
vortices away from the wall, and impact of these interactions on turbulence
statistics. A rather comprehensive and non-trivial experimental approach is
proposed: A 3D time-resolved tomographic PIV will resolve small-scale turbulence
near the wall, while digital holographic microscopy (DHM) will be used to
simultaneously observe the large scale structures away from the wall. The
combined TPIV-DHM instrument would resolve 3.5 orders of magnitude of length
scales.