* 1438447
* EAGER: Fungal Bioleaching for Recovery of Lithium and Cobalt from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Valerie Harwood, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,998.00

1438477&lt;br/&gt;Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Fungal Bioleaching for
Recovery of Lithium and Cobalt from Spent Lithium-Ion &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
personal electronic devices (telephones, computers, cameras, MP3 players, etc.)
now employ rechargeable lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, as do electric and
hybrid-electric vehicles. The demand for lithium and cobalt to supply these
batteries has grown markedly in recent years, to the point where demand may soon
exceed available supply. Simultaneously, because rechargeable Li-ion batteries
have a finite lifetime, the rate at which these batteries enter the solid waste
stream is growing, and will continue to grow in the coming decades. From the
standpoint of environmental sustainability, a method for recovering Li and Co
from spent Li-ion batteries is therefore required. This project will serve
multiple purposes for meeting growing demand for Li and Co, creating a market
for the "waste" product of spent batteries (thereby keeping them out of
landfills), and reducing environmental harm incurred by mining of virgin Li and
Co. Traditional or pyrometallurgical methods for recovering metals from wastes
(spent catalysts, spent batteries, ash, etc.) typically emit toxic gases as by-
products. Hydrometallurgical methods require extreme conditions of temperature,
pressure, and chemical environment. Therefore, biological methods may be
preferable for recovery of metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial leaching of Li
and Co from spent batteries has been demonstrated at lab scale, but fungal
leaching has not yet been evaluated. The PIs propose fungal leaching for these
project because fungi are typically more tolerant than bacteria to low-pH
environments, fungal leaching often exhibits faster kinetics and/or more
complete extraction than bacteria, and organic acids excreted by fungi can form
complexes with leached metals, thereby reducing their toxicity. The principal
intellectual merit of this work resides in the assessment of the ability of
three candidate fungal species to extract valuable metals from an important
"waste" product, and to do so in an environmentally acceptable manner. The
overall objective of this project is to conduct preliminarily studies to assess
the potential of three fungal species (Aspergillus niger, Penicillium
simplicissimum, and Penicillium chrysogenum) to extract Li and Co ions from
spent rechargeable batteries. The central hypothesis of this project is that
fungal strains that have been cultured in the presence of battery materials (and
thereby acclimated to otherwise unfavorable conditions) can, under realistic
operating conditions, produce organic acids capable of extracting at least 80 %
of both Li and Co. The overall objective of the project will be achieved in two
stages: (1) Quantify the acclimation/adaptation and growth pattern of fungi in
the presence of single and multiple metallic ions; (2) Quantify the production
of organic acids and the recovery of Li and Co during bioleaching of spent
batteries under "baseline" conditions. For both stages, strains of the three
identified fungal species will be assessed. This research will (1) characterize
the metal content of spent Li-ion batteries, including the toxicity
characteristic leaching potential of those metals. This information will be
beneficial in estimating the economic potential of metals recovery from spent
batteries, and/or in estimating the potential environmental consequences of
landfill disposal of spent batteries. (2) quantify how three strains of fungi
acclimate/adapt over time to different concentrations of the toxic metals
present in spent Li-ion batteries. This information is likely to be beneficial
to fungal bioleaching of many different types of solid wastes, not just spent
batteries. (3) contribute to the development of an economic market for a "waste"
product, which offers both economic and environmental advantages. (4)
disseminate the results (via journal papers, conference presentations, web
pages, etc.) to researchers in environmental engineering and to the public.