* 1438619
* Formation of Silver and Copper "Nanopatches" in Ceramic Porous Media and Application for Point-of-Use Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* James Smith, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2019
* USD 387,796.00

1438619 (Smith). In the U.S. and other developed nations, high quality drinking
water is typically provided through centralized water treatment and
distributions systems. In the developing world, these systems are often
unreliable, unable to meet the demand for treated water, or simply do not exist.
As a result, 3-4 billion people do not receive reliable, high-quality water
delivered to their households. The World Health Organization has indicated that
one possible solution to this problem is to decentralize water treatment so that
people treat their water right before they consume it in their homes. Designing
such "point-of-use" water treatment technologies is a challenging problem, as
they must be low cost, technologically effective, simple to use, and socially
acceptable. For this study, a porous ceramic tablet infused with nanoscale
patches of silver and/or copper is proposed for point-of-use water treatment.
The ceramic tablet is most applicable to developing-world water treatment and
further, it addresses the three elements of the Triple Bottom Line: social,
economic, and environmental sustainability. The ceramic tablet will be simple
and inexpensive to manufacture. For use, the tablet would be placed into a
10-20-L household water storage container, where it gradually would release
ionic silver and/or copper into the water. The tablet design is such that
silver/copper concentrations in the drinking water will be sufficient to
disinfect waterborne pathogens while not exceeding the drinking water standards
of 0.1 mg/L (silver) or 1.0 mg/L (copper). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, multiple tablets will be fabricated using different raw materials,
including two clay types, sawdust with varying particle sizes, silver and copper
nitrate at different concentrations, and with and without the use of different
reducing and capping agents. During firing, ionic silver and copper will be
reduced to zero-valent metallic oxidation states, forming "nanopatches"
throughout the porous ceramic. The tablets will be characterized using
transmission electron microscopy to determine nanopatch morphology and size
distribution and using mercury porosimetry to evaluate ceramic pore-size
distribution. Through simulation and fundamental experiments on porous media
diffusion, sorption to ceramic pore walls, and oxidation kinetics, the relative
importance of these transport processes will be determined and the tablet design
will in turn be optimized. Disinfection kinetics will be quantified for viral,
bacterial, and protozoan pathogens for a range of water chemistries and
turbidities. Both short- (24-hr) and long-term (6-month) performance tests will
be conducted. A field test of this technology will be performed in conjunction
with the University of Venda (UNIVEN) and three rural communities located in
Limpopo Province, South Africa. Local potters working at a previously
established ceramic filter factory in Ha-Mashamba, S. Africa will be taught to
produce ceramic tablets. These tablets will then be field tested in two nearby
rural S. African communities. The tablets will be evaluated as stand-alone water
purifiers, and in combination with more conventional ceramic water filters.
Field work will leverage resources of a recently awarded Research Experiences
for Undergraduates Site Program called "Water, Society, and Health." A life-
cycle analysis of this technology will be performed with consideration of
economic, environmental, and social factors. Its performance in these categories
will be compared to centralized water-treatment and distribution systems and
other point-of-use water treatment technologies. Existing point-of-use water
treatment technologies have either a relatively high entry-level price point
(&gt; $30) or are depleted after a single use (Aquatabs, Pur sachets, etc.). By
comparison, the ceramic tablet water purifier is a potentially disruptive
technology that that likely could be sold for $5 or $6 while lasting for 6
months without any special action by the end user.