* 1438451
* Advanced Discretization Techniques and Applications (ADTA)
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Raytcho Lazarov, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

The Advanced Discretization Techniques and Applications (ADTA) workshop will be
held at Texas A&amp;M University, May 11-15, 2015. During the last few decades,
finite element methods (FEM) have come to be among the most important tools for
numerically approximating solutions of partial differential equations. FEM are a
powerful research tool in subsurface engineering, structural engineering,
failure analysis, earthquake engineering, progressive collapse, biophysics,
electromagnetics, acoustics, solar and fuel cell, batteries, and material
sciences, to mention but a few. Despite considerable work on their analysis,
many aspects of the method continue to be improved. The novel techniques allow
us to pursue comprehensive understanding and reliability of the numerical
results, to improve the accuracy, reduce computational costs, and guarantee
product credibility. The objective of this workshop is to bring researchers
working on advanced discretization techniques and multiscale algorithms and
promote interaction among these different groups. By bringing these researchers
together, we expect to have an impact in many areas and promote progress in
designing efficient multiscale discretization techniques for a wide range of
problems. By holding this conference at Texas A&amp;M University, a university
traditionally strong in engineering and natural sciences, we expect to
disseminate the know-how to researchers not only in mathematics, but also in
other disciplines. We will actively pursue participation by non-mathematicians.
This conference will therefore help researchers and practitioners improve their
theoretical tools and deepen their knowledge of modern trends in numerical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will cover a range of topics in
finite element methods (FEM) and applications. Recent advances in finite element
methodologies, in particular, the discontinuous Galerkin method (DG-FEM), weak
Galerkin finite element methods (WG-FEM), and multiscale methods, will be some
of the central workshop topics. The workshop will bring together researchers
working on various finite element discretization techniques and multiscale
methods and promote interaction among different groups.