* 1438042
* Collaborative Research: Use of 13C-labeling and flux modeling to analyze metabolic reactions and gas-liquid mass transfer during syngas fermentations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Zhiyou Wen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Collaborative Research: Use of 13C-labeling and flux modeling to analyze
metabolic reactions and gas-liquid mass transfer during syngas
fermentations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ziyou Wen (Iowa State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yinjie Tang (Washington University at St.
Louis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal IDs: 1438042 (Wen), 1438125
(Tang)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sugar-based feedstocks
or oil-rich crops are primarily used in today?s biofuel industry. These biofuel
production approaches pose a threat to the global food supply. As an
alternative, this research will use inexpensive lignocellulosic biomass (e.g.,
corn stover or switchgrass) as a feedstock for producing biofuel. The conversion
process proposed is based on the gasification of the biomass into syngas (mainly
CO, CO2 and H2), and the subsequent fermentation of those gaseous molecules into
fuels (such as ethanol). The objectives of this project aim to address two
important fundamental issues in syngas fermentations: 1. the mass transfer
limitations of transporting gaseous substrates (CO, CO2 and H2) into microbes;
2. the bottleneck enzymes in microbes to convert syngas into biofuels. This
study will advance the current research on syngas fermentation using methods in
systems biology. By linking macroscopic syngas mass transfer conditions to
intracellular enzyme reaction rates in biofuel producing microbes, a holistic
view of syngas fermentation will be provided. Ultimately, this project will also
produce guidelines for developing other gas-to-liquid
biorefineries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transient 13C techniques and metabolic
models will be used to examine syngas mass transfer and biological utilization
by Clostridium carboxidivorans. The first task will incorporate 13C tracing to
accurately determine gas-liquid mass transfer parameters and analyze their
influence on cellular carbon assimilation. The second task will be to develop a
flux balance model to predict microbial growth and ethanol production in
response to bioreactor control parameters, such as gas flow rate and mixing. The
third task will include pilot scale syngas fermentation at the flux-model-
predicted conditions. This project will determine the mass transfer coefficient
(KLa) of different syngas composition under complex fermentation conditions, and
improve the understandings of the bioavailability of gaseous substrates under
various bioreactor operations. Meanwhile, 13C-assisted flux balance analysis
will also reveal key enzymatic reactions, which control syngas bioconversion
into ethanol. The combination of a metabolic flux model with gas-liquid mass
transfer dynamics will offer rational approaches for further work in syngas
fermentation development. This research is a partnership between Iowa State
University and Washington University in St. Louis. The PIs, with their
complementary skills, will provide excellent training and interdisciplinary
educational opportunities (including summer research, workshop, international
studies, etc.) for students to study reaction engineering, bioprocessing,
analytical chemistry, and metabolic modeling.