* 1438431
* Collaborative Research: Mesoscale Investigation of Microstructure-Transport Interaction of High-Capacity Electrodes for Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Partha Mukherjee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 10/31/2017
* USD 214,740.00

Collaborative Research: Mesoscale Investigation of Microstructure-Transport
Interaction of High-Capacity Electrodes for Energy Storage&lt;br/&gt;1438431 -
Partha P. Mukherjee (Texas A&amp;M University), 1438683 - George J. Nelson
(University of Alabama in Huntsville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage is a
key enabler for vehicle electrification. The lithium-ion battery (LIB) is being
considered as one of the candidates for vehicular energy storage. It is,
however, critical to accelerate innovation toward improved performance, life and
safety of lithium-ion batteries. One factor that needs to be addressed is
increasing the drive range of electric vehicles, that is the distance the
vehicle can go without having to be recharged. This requires dramatic
improvement in the LIB "energy density." Nanostructured materials have spurred
recent breakthroughs in high-performance electrode development, particularly
with respect to energy storage capacity. For example, high-capacity anodes based
on nanostructured tin alloys can achieve significant increase in battery
capacity compared to conventional graphite anodes. However, these materials
undergo excessive volume change when reacting with lithium, leading to dramatic
changes in the electrode structure that causes deterioration of battery
performance. This research aims to develop an integrated computational and
experimental approach that will lead to fundamental insights into the
microstructure, electrochemical and transport phenomena interactions in high-
capacity LIB electrodes. Development of high-performance LIB electrodes with
cyclic stability and longer life could provide a major breakthrough in energy
storage technology for automotive and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to foster
fundamental understanding of the microstructural and phase evolution mechanisms
that drive performance decay in high-capacity Li-ion battery electrodes, e.g.
tin-based mesoporous intermetallic anodes. In this regard, a synergistic
computational and experimental investigation is planned that will focus on
mesoscale transport, reaction and mechanics interplay in electrode structures.
The PIs anticipate that the tomography, mesoscle modeling and electrochemical
studies will have a significant impact on the development of high-capacity LIB
electrodes. The tomographic data obtained and the related mesoscale models will
broaden the set of 3D microstructural data for energy storage materials and
related analysis tools that are currently available to the research community.
The integrated education and outreach plan will bring together graduate,
undergraduate and high school students, along with a strong emphasis on the
participation of underrepresented and minority students. Research findings will
also be integrated into curriculum development efforts. It is envisioned that
this synergistic approach will have significant benefits in the broader context
of clean and sustainable energy.