* 1438560
* GOALI: Developing Sensor-Mediated Control Strategies that Allow Innovative Treatment of Nitrogen in Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Nancy Love, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

1438560&lt;br/&gt;Love&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Developing Sensor-Mediated
Control Strategies that Allow Innovative Treatment of Nitrogen in
Wastewater&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal brings together Hampton Roads
Sanitation District and the University of Michigan to develop a sensor-mediated
control strategy for achieving efficient nitrogen removal from next generation
mainstream wastewater systems, and to demonstrate that strategy through pilot-
scale systems. The nitrogen removal technologies being considered are novel and
undeveloped for mainstream implementation, but hold great promise by
significantly reducing the energy, carbon and land footprint of treatment
processes that meet stringent nutrient regulations for a significant percentage
of the U.S. wastewater flow. To fully understand how sensor-mediated control
strategies confer sustained performance and resiliency to microbiological
communities that comprise these treatment systems, a strong university
partnership is needed. In the bioreactors being evaluated, University of
Michigan will be responsible for performing molecular microbiological analyses
to evaluate the impact of sensor-mediated control strategies on the composition
and metabolic function of the microbial consortia. Experimental lab-scale
systems will be operated at University of Michigan while existing pilot-scale
systems will be operated at both University of Michigan and Hampton Roads
Sanitation District. All experimental systems will be fully automated with
sensor-mediated control strategies. Performance-based computational models will
be developed during the first year and further refined in subsequent years to
develop a useful design tool for the industry to use once these technologies are
implemented. One or more graduate students will be funded on this project and
will work both on-campus and at Hampton Roads Sanitation District over the
course of their Ph.D. degree program. The industrial co-PI will serve as co-
advisor to the graduate student(s). This project will demonstrate a utility-
university research partnership that will serve as a national
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been rapid development of sidestream
treatment of ammonia-ladened wastewaters that use nitrite repression to prevent
complete ammonia oxidation, and anaerobic ammonia oxidation (anammox) to remove
N. However, comparable development for mainstream treatment where the ammonia
concentrations are more than an order of magnitude lower and flows are vastly
larger has not occurred. There are unique challenges to implementing sensor-
mediated partial ammonia oxidation, nitrite repression (NOB out-selection) and
anammox at the mainstream that will be addressed through this project. The PIs
will also address denitrifying anaerobic methane oxidation, a new microbial
metabolism, as well as anaerobic sulfide oxidation. The team will evaluate the
impact that sensor-mediated control strategies have on the structure and
function of microbial communities that comprise these systems. This, in turn,
will advance our broader understanding of sensor-mediated control strategies for
wastewater treatment at a mechanistic level. Due to the collaborative effort in
advancing use of sensor-mediated control strategies with next-generation
treatment systems, the research team is more likely to get "buy-in" from an
industry that has traditionally been wary of advanced automation.