* 1438858
* Collaborative Research:  Enhancing Curriculum and Faculty Development on Information Assurance and Security through Real World Relevant Portable Laboratory
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Dan Lo, Southern Polytechnic Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 01/31/2016
* USD 159,104.00

Southern Polytechnic State University (SPSU), and Tennessee State University
(TSU) are jointly developing a new information assurance and security (IAS)
teaching methodology. Curricular materials based on a portable lab are being
developed and integrated into Computer Science (CS) and Information Technology
(IT) courses. This work is renovating the content of the IAS curriculum by
emphasizing mobile security through hands-on experience using a portable Lab.
The result is a full set of materials covering the core knowledge area on IAS,
and a portable lab that can be used in online courses on IAS, providing hands-on
experience with real-world situations. This work is having a significant impact
on the national IAS workforce and is targeting students from underrepresented
groups.

The labware is designed according to the IAS curriculum recommendations in the
IEEE/ACM Computer Science Curricula 2013, and based on the PIs? teaching and
research experience in information security. The labware consists of 5 self-
contained learning modules. Learning modules may be tailored to accommodate an
instructor's need based on content and time of a course. The labware covers
fundamental concepts in security and important mobile threats/attacks along with
countermeasures. Each module includes pre-lab activities (concept introduction
and lab preparation), hands-on lab activities (pairs of hands-on labs on domain
concepts and security issues in each subject), and post-lab activities (review
questions, assignments, and case study).

The project is being evaluated to determine the impact of the learning modules
on student learning outcomes and teaching effectiveness. Both internal (self)
and external evaluations are being used. Internal evaluations are conducted by
each of the PIs for the project and external evaluations are conducted by
individuals from academia and industry. Evaluation data is assessed by a team of
external evaluators consisting of an evaluator from academia and an evaluator
from industry.