* 1438240
* Self and Programmable Assembly of Nanoparticles with Multicompartment Polymer Brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 298,661.00

CBET 1438240

Nanometer-sized particles are often used as building blocks to fabricate
materials with advanced functionality and unique properties. To take advantage
of their fascinating optical, electronic and magnetic properties, nanoparticles
must be assembled into desired structures for specific technological
applications. Most studies of nanoparticle assembly use spherical nanoparticles
that are uniformly coated with surfactants and/or polymers. Assembly of these
particles leads to phases with simple symmetries. However, if "patches" with
distinct chemical properties can be introduced onto the surfaces of the
nanoparticles, the resulting ensemble structures can be much more complex with
properties that can be better tailored for specific applications. This project
aims to investigate a novel method to synthesize patchy nanoparticles and to
explore their self-assembled structures for optical and electronic applications.

While computer simulation suggests that a wide range of structures can be
obtained by patchy particles, limited experimental work has been reported. The
main reason is the lack of experimental approaches to synthesize particles with
controlled patches. The newly developed polymer-single-crystal-templating method
will be used to synthesize 5-100 nm diameter multicompartment nanoparticles, and
to form complex multicompartment ensembles using self- and programmable
assembly. The nanoparticles will have a uniform central core and a shell made up
of multicompartment polymer brushes. The conformation of the polymer chains and
the corresponding nanoparticle ensembles can be made responsive to external
stimuli such as pH, temperature and/or solvents. The project will lead to a
library of new nanoparticle structures for fundamental scientific study and
technological applications.