* 1438231
* Continuous Wafer Production for Solar Cells by Horizontal Ribbon Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Aditya Khair, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2018
* USD 349,389.00

1438231 - Ydstie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology for the direct conversion
of sunlight to electricity using solar cells has not yet advanced to a point
where it can have a significant impact in markets that do not benefit from
government subsidies. The cost of solar cells is still very high and the
technologies used to produce solar cells do not easily scale up. At the current
rate of growth (20-30% per year) it will take many decades to build enough
plants and infra-structure for solar electricity to displace fossil energy
sources. Solar energy has so far not measured up to its potential due to the
high cost of producing high purity silicon and mono-crystalline silicon wafers.
Significant progress has been made in developing cheaper processes for making
high purity poly-silicon in fluid bed reactors. Very limited progress has been
made in finding alternatives to the expensive band-saw process for wafering. The
ideas described in this proposal may contribute towards solving these important
problems. The proposed process draws inspiration from the Pilkington glass
process, which revolutionized the glass industry. The major objective is to
reduce the cost of solar electricity by theoretical development and experimental
verification of a continuous process for making silicon wafers. The proposed
process could reduce the cost of a solar module by a factor of two relative to
current technology and it can be rapidly scaled up since it is continuous. Sub-
objectives include the development of models and control theory for coupled
fluid flow, heat transfer and solidification in the context of horizontal ribbon
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop scientific foundations for a continuous process to
produce crystalline silicon wafers from high purity poly-silicon. In this
process the PIs plan to freeze a very thin (less than 0.3 mm) silicon sheet on
top of a silicon melt in a float chamber. Solid silicon floats like ice on water
and by careful control it is possible to produce mono-crystalline silicon sheets
suitable for solar cells. The sheet can then be withdrawn continuously while
silicon raw material is continuously fed to the process at the same rate. The
production cost will be low relative to expensive wire saw processes since the
new process is continuous and does not incur silicon loss. The PIs plan to study
the stabilization and control of a freezing front on a molten substrate and how
to design and control systems with several interfaces (gas,solid, liquid).
Systems of this type may exhibit several types of instabilities and active
control is needed to stabilize the system. These instabilities include the
dynamics of the crystallization front, how impurities segregate and the dynamics
of the exit meniscus. They will develop multi-scale process models capable and a
theory capable of analyzing stability properties for process design and control.
The models will be matched to a physical system using experimental data obtained
from a large pilot plant at CMU. The simultaneous goal is to develop a theory
for how to model, analyze and control complex flow and solidification
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most
important broader impacts of this research are in the area of alternative energy
- producing solar panels more economically. The research could lead to new
methods for multi-scale modeling and stabilization and control of solidification
fronts and multi-phase flow problems. These problems turn up in a number of
application areas, including the drying of paints, film processing and coating.