* 1438398
* Characterization and Modeling of Multimechanistic Flow Behaviors from Nano- to Macro-scale in Shale Matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Derek Elsworth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 330,000.00

PI: Liu, Shimin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1438398&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed research in to
study gas flow in tight pores, such as those found in shale formations. Flow,
adsorption, desorption, slippage and deformation of the surrounding rock are
proposed to be studied with both experiments and theory. This is a timely
research project with implications in an area of critical importance for the
economy and the energy production of the U.S. Results for the proposed work
would be of benefit to the oil and gas production industry, to public policy
makers and to carbon management entities. Accurate prediction of the flow of
gases in shales is also important for developing CO2 sequestration
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to advance
fluid dynamics knowledge for flow through tight shales -- critical for shale gas
production. There are multiple physical mechanisms that affect the flow, such as
sorption, diffusion, advection, and sorption-induced organic matter deformation
with the progressive decrease in reservoir pressure as the gas is produce.
Experiments are proposed to quantify the characteristics of the flow and the
interactions with the sorption-induced deformation of the pore organic matter. A
series of laboratory and theoretical studies will be conducted that will
include: pore structure characterization using small-angle neutron scattering
(SANS) and ultra-small-angle neutron scattering (USANS) instruments at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), which will provide reliable pore architecture
for the subsequent flow measurement and modeling studies, sorption and
diffusivity measurement at in situ conditions, sorption-induced deformation
measurement, and apparent permeability measurement. The modeling effort would
result to an apparent permeability model by considering sorption, diffusion and
sorption-induced deformation, and would be validated by the measured
experimental data. The educational plan centers on an interdisciplinary
educational experience that will be offered to the graduate and undergraduate
students involved. Educational efforts will be leveraged through the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program, which was funded by
NSF to encourage underrepresented minority students in the STEM disciplines.