* 1438652
* Hydroxyapatite Formation during Hydrothermal Liquefaction of Algae: Synthesis and Catalytic Implications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Susan Stagg-Williams, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 409,653.00

Abstract Title: Understanding the role of calcium phosphate in improving oil
properties during thermochemical conversion of wastewater-fed algae to biocrude
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algae have long been investigated as a potential feedstock
for renewable, affordable, and reduced carbon-footprint fuels. Hydrothermal
liquefaction (HTL) is a process to convert wet algae to a carbon-rich biocrude.
HTL processing of algae grown in municipal wastewater has been shown to produce
a biocrude with properties similar to conventional petroleum crude. Furthermore,
the HTL of wastewater-fed algae results in the production of a solid biochar
product, which has hitherto been considered a waste product. However, evidence
shows that wastewater-derived biochar contains a form of calcium phosphate,
which may act as a catalyst to improve biocrude composition and stability. An
award is made to Professors Susan Stagg-Williams and Belinda Sturm of the
University of Kansas to understand the fundamental relationships between growth
conditions, the formation of biochar during the HTL reaction, the formation of
calcium phosphate crystals, and the ultimate impact on biocrude yield and
properties. This knowledge is necessary for the ultimate commercialization of
algal technology for renewable fuels and chemicals. Various educational programs
are planned by the investigators which will increase public awareness and
engagement with sustainable energy production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal liquefaction has emerged as a promising whole
cell conversion technology utilizing subcritical water to convert algal biomass
to a carbon-rich biocrude. Preliminary work at the University of Kansas has
demonstrated that HTL of wastewater-cultivated algae leads to high biocrude
yields, low biocrude O/C ratios, low levels of high boiling point compounds in
the biocrude, and high production of biochar. Characterization studies have
shown that the biochar produced is a calcium-deficient substituted
hydroxyapatite (HAp) form of calcium phosphate. HAp has been shown to have acid-
base properties and be catalytically active for the dehydration and
dehydrogenation reactions. In this study, the liquefaction of algae and model
compounds will be investigated to determine: 1) the impact of algal growth
conditions (Ca, N, P) on the crystallization of HAp in the HTL reactor and the
resultant impact on biocrude composition, 2) the impact of the HAp crystallite
formation on the macromolecule monomers formed during the liquefaction reaction,
and 3) the ability of HAp synthesized during liquefaction to catalytically alter
the biocrude composition through dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions.
Coupling controlled HAp crystal growth with the production of biocrude is novel.
Generating an understanding of the relationship between growth conditions, the
formation of HAp, and the ultimate impact on biocrude yield and properties has
significant merit for the ultimate commercialization of algal HTL technology.
Another aspect of this project supporting the recommendation for award is the
environmental focus. Increasing the fundamental knowledge about the application
of algal treatment systems for phosphorus removal and recovery from municipal
and agricultural wastewater should yield positive environmental and economic
impacts. Utilizing algal treatment systems as a low-cost alternative to nutrient
removal, while generating biocrude and high-value catalysts and biomaterials,
has the potential to turn a historically regulatory operation (wastewater
treatment) into a revenue-generating operation.