* 1438440
* Combined Catalytic Conversion of CH4 and CO2 to Value-added Products over the Oxide Supported Metal Catalysts from DFT-based Multiscale Study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Qingfeng Ge, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 366,462.00

Abstract Title: Combined Catalytic Conversion of Methane and Carbon Dioxide to
Value-added Products over the Oxide Supported Metal Catalysts from Multiscale
Modeling

Climate change resulting from anthropogenic green house gases, mainly carbon
dioxide, is widely considered as a major threat faced by mankind. Recycling
carbon dioxide in the production of useful chemicals or liquid fuel will
complement carbon capture and sequestration and have a positive impact on global
carbon dioxide levels, but such a process requires energy or hydrogen sources.
Professor Qingfeng Ge of Southern Illinois University (SIU) Carbondale proposes
to exploit methane as both hydrogen and energy source in a combined catalytic
conversion process. Coupling methane partial oxidation reaction with the methane
and carbon dioxide coupling reaction overcomes the thermodynamic limitation of
the coupling reaction, thereby providing an atomically efficient route to
utilize methane and carbon dioxide. Elucidating the catalytic mechanism of
combined methane and carbon dioxide conversion will help improve the working
catalysts and aid the rationale design of the new ones. Professor Ge will
utilize the existing mechanisms at SIU Carbondale to recruit students from
underrepresented groups to participate in the proposed cutting-edge research
activities. The proposed research program contributes to the SIU Carbondale?s
effort to build a student-centered research university with research strength in
areas including energy and nanomaterials by enhancing the infrastructure for
research and education.

The proposed research program applies a first principles based multiscale
approach to investigate metal-support interaction and its effect on catalytic
conversion of CH4 and CO2 to value-added products, including acetic acid,
alcohols, etc. A great challenge in developing a process that couples oxidation
reaction with C-C coupling is to control the strength of oxidants?a too strong
oxidant would over-oxidize methane and drive the reaction away from the coupling
pathway. One focus of the proposed research is to test the reducible ZrO2, CeO2,
and mixed oxides as oxygen carrier as well as support for selected transition
metals, including Fe, Co, Ni and Rh. Thermodynamics analyses of the oxide
surfaces together with the supported metal clusters of varying sizes will be
performed to establish the effect of reaction environment on the stability of
supporting oxides and supported metal clusters under reaction conditions.
Elementary bond breaking and making steps, including C-H and C-O bond breaking
and C-C bond formation, will be followed. The mechanistic understanding and
energetic information will be integrated into a kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) or
mean-field approximation based micro-kinetic simulation to provide apparent
kinetic parameters that may be compared directly with the experimental
measurements. The proposed research will help to design catalysts that prevent
complete combustion of methane. The proposed research program is built upon the
experiences of the PI in surface science and catalysis and recent work on CO2
activation and hydrogenation. Collaborations with external experimental groups
will provide a mechanism to test and validate the predictions and ideas from
proposed research.