* 1438047
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Collection and Analysis of Atmospheric Deposition
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Clifton Buck, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2017
* USD 264,219.00

In this project, a group of investigators participating in the 2015 U.S.
GEOTRACES Arctic Ocean expedition will study the distribution of a variety of
trace elements in seawater, sea ice, and marine air. It is important to
understand where they are and how they move in the Arctic because some trace
elements are essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still
others are important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of
physical, chemical, and biological processes in the sea. In common with other
multinational initiatives in the International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of
the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and quantify fluxes that
control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and
to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental
conditions. This multi-institutional team of ocean trace element experts will
focus its attention on the importance of aerosol, precipitation, and sea ice
melt water in trace element cycling. Results from this work will be disseminated
through public educational initiatives, such as web communications and outreach
to members of the public, including indigenous populations in Alaska. The
project will also provide training for graduate and undergraduate students in
biology and chemistry.

Atmospheric deposition is an important pathway and transport mechanism of both
natural aerosols and contaminants to the ocean. Relative to other regions,
atmospheric deposition rates in the Arctic are low and aerosols and dissolved
chemicals in precipitation may be deposited directly to the sea surface or,
unique to polar regions, onto sea ice. Given the unique biogeochemical processes
of the region and its rapid changes in response to global climate change,
quantifying the current atmospheric deposition of trace elements and isotopes to
differing catchments (ocean, sea ice, and melt ponds) in the Arctic is critical
to our ability to predict how their distribution may evolve over time. In this
study, aerosol, precipitation, and melt water samples will be collected and
analyzed for trace elements and isotopes in order to evaluate the impacts on the
surface ocean and sea ice chemistry from natural and anthropogenic aerosols.
Through this project, collected atmospheric samples from the Arctic will also be
made available for distribution to the broader scientific community.