* 1438033
* Motion of Uni-Flagellated Bacteria in Visco-elastic Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jay Tang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 361,630.00

PI: Tang, Jay X.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1438033&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed study is to investigate how bacteria interact in a non-
aquaeous fluid environment, which is often found in biological fluids. Findings
from this work will be applicable to a general set of bacteria that swim using
the same basic mechanics and could explain why bacteria in aqueous environments
are uni-flagellar while other bacteria are multi-flagellar. Results of this work
are important, since microscopic swimmers like bacteria are most often found in
body fluids and liquids that are complex and non-Newtonian. There is a need for
both data and models in this area, in order to better understand the spreading
of decease and ways to stop it. There is also involvement of K-12 students in
the outreach part of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
proposal is on explaining flagellar swimming in viscoelastic media at a
fundamental level. In particular, this experimental study will focus on uni-
flagellated swimmers and how their motion is different than multi flagellated in
viscoelastic media. The approach is to use single flagellum model bacteria in
different viscoelastic solutions. The experimental measurements will include
quantitative observations of swimming trajectories, speed, and cell body
kinematics using optical microscopy techniques. In addition, rheological models
will be generated to interpret the experimental results.