* 1438223
* SusChEM: Ultra-High Li+ Ion Conductivity Chemically Stable Mechanically Strong Mixed Oxy-Sulfide Solid Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Steve Martin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Principal Investigator: Steve W. Martin&lt;br/&gt;Number:
1438223&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium batteries used in electric and hybrid
vehicles suffer from many problems. Current designs can hold 10% of their
theoretical amount of energy content, contain highly flammable organic liquids,
are relatively costly, and do not last as long as a typical automobile. New
materials are needed to address these problems. In particular, advanced ceramic
materials have the potential to solve these problems by enabling the manufacture
of high capacity, safe, low-cost, and long-lasting solid state lithium
batteries. Towards this end, this research will incorporate both oxygen and
sulfur into the ceramic material used in these batteries to make new oxygen-
sulfide ceramic materials with desirable properties. The overall goal of this
project is to develop and study this new class of mixed oxy-sulfide ceramic
materials for lithium batteries. Oxide materials are safe and have good
mechanical strength, whereas sulfide materials allow for the fast lithium ion
transfer needed for rapid electricity discharge and re-charging. The project is
also designed to promote student learning and professional development in the
context of this research through mentoring and leadership activities. To broaden
participation, existing successful programs at Iowa State University will be
used to collaborate with minority-focused institutions and minority programs to
provide research experiences for students from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. The project will also collaborate with federal
government laboratories and automotive companies engaged in automotive battery
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to develop and study a new class of mixed oxy-
sulfide ceramics for use in solid-state lithium batteries in scalable
electrochemical energy storage systems. All-oxide solid electrolytes possess
excellent chemical durability and good mechanical strength, but have to be
processed at very high temperatures, and possess lithium ion conductivities that
are too low for automotive applications. All-sulfide solid electrolytes possess
extremely high lithium ion conductivities, can be easily processed at room
temperature, but are very reactive with both air and moisture. This project will
investigate the potential of mixed oxy-sulfide solid electrolytes to provide
desirable characteristics associated with both oxide and sulfide ceramic
materials. Preliminary work on all-sulfide solid electrolytes has demonstrated
that the addition of molecular oxygen to the electrolyte decreased the
volumetric strain energy for lithium ion conduction by replacing bridging
sulfurs. This project will study this new mixed oxy-sulfide mixed network for
the potential to simultaneously reduce both the strain and coulomb components of
the conductivity activation energy. The new solid-state chemistries are expected
to lead to high conductivity, high chemical durability, and mechanically strong
mixed oxy-sulfide based solid electrolytes. The project is also designed to
promote student learning and professional development in the context of this
research through mentoring and leadership activities. To broaden participation,
existing successful programs at Iowa State University will be used to
collaborate with minority-focused institutions and minority programs to provide
research experiences for students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering. The project will also collaborate with federal government
laboratories and automotive companies engaged in automotive battery research.