* 1438838
* Academics and Training for the Advancement of Cybersecurity Knowledge in Puerto Rico (ATACK PR)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,982.00

Academics and Training for the Advancement of Cybersecurity Knowledge in Puerto
Rico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio
Piedras, is the first step in creating a research, development, and education
program in cybersecurity at the institution. The project team will focus on the
infusion of cybersecurity educational activities into the computer science core
courses, along with the development of new cybersecurity courses and a
cybersecurity laboratory. In addition, the project team will increase student
awareness and mastery of cybersecurity concepts and skills through invited
speakers, trainings with outside experts, student research projects, and travel
to cybersecurity conferences. The team will also develop web materials that will
be available in both English and Spanish, improving the dissemination of
relevant cybersecurity information throughout Latin America. This project will
be funded by the Division of Graduate Education through the Cybercorps:SFS
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cybersecurity laboratory, new courses, and
curricular infusions will make it possible for students to learn about numerous
aspects of cybersecurity. Through the new laboratory, students will be able to
do experiments involving digital forensic analysis, network traffic analysis,
malware analysis, and suitable countermeasures. Through infusion into existing
courses, students will study topics such as the role of regular expressions in
input validation which can help prevent malware injection into existing
programs. The new courses will cover topics such as systems and networks
security, secure and trusted hardware, as well as an introductory level course
for students outside of computer science, including students in the information
systems program. The project team will carry out extensive development and
refinement of course materials, subsequently working with members of the
computer science department to adopt the materials into their courses. Project
evaluation will be done primarily using the ADDIE (Analysis, Design,
Development, Implementation, and Evaluation) model, combining quantitative and
qualitative data. This approach will track aspects such as student knowledge,
identification of learning gaps, and the quality of learning achievement.