* 1438143
* Investigation of the lift and virtual mass force in gas-liquid flows with particle-resolved direct numerical simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shankar Subramaniam, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2018
* USD 344,465.00

CBET 1438143

Many chemical manufacturing processes are carried out in bubble column reactors
in which gas bubbles are dispersed throughout a liquid to perform chemical
reactions. These reactors are designed to contain a large number of small
bubbles to increase the contact area between the gas and liquid phases. The
dynamics of gas-liquid flow inside these reactors and in similar multiphase
processes is often described using mathematical models called two-fluid models.
This project focuses on improving two-fluid models by explicitly taking into
account the effects of interactions among the bubbles on certain terms in the
models. The investigators will evaluate these critical terms by using
computational simulations of bubble motions that account for interactions among
bubbles and the development of bubble assemblies in flow. The improved two-fluid
model will then be used in computational fluid dynamic simulations to compare
with experimental data and help validate the model. The results of the project
will be useful to design and optimize a broad array of manufacturing processes
such as fermentation, wastewater treatment, algae growth, and antibiotic
production.

The accuracy of volume averaged two-fluid models for gas-liquid flow depends on
terms that estimate momentum transfer between gas and liquid phases. These terms
include several forces such as drag, lift and virtual mass forces. These forces
are usually evaluated for the case of an isolated bubble in the flow. This
project will study the effects of assemblies of interacting bubbles in the flow
on the lift and virtual mass forces, and will use the results to develop
improved momentum exchange terms for two-fluid models. The forces will be
determined by conducting particle-resolved direct numerical simulations of
spherical buoyant particles, which are a surrogate for bubbles in the limit
where bubble deformation can be neglected. The simulations will be used to
develop expressions for the lift and virtual mass forces for use in the two-
fluid equations. The improved two-fluid models will then be used in
computational fluid dynamics simulations over a wide range of operating
conditions for which experimental data are available to validate the newly
developed terms.