* 1438634
* Probing Dynamics and Structure of the Nanoparticle Protein Corona to Understand Its Impacts on Environmental Health and Safety
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Christy Landes, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Link, Stephan Proposal Number: 1438634 Institution: William Marsh Rice
University Title: Probing Dynamics and Structure of the Nanoparticle Protein
Corona to Understand Its Impacts on Environmental Health and Safety

The properties of nanoparticles (NPs) in biological fluids differ from their
behavior in water due to the association of different proteins to the NP
surface, forming a "protein corona" around the NPs. These proteins bind strongly
to the NPs and affect the NPs' interactions with their environment. The goal of
this proposal is to quantify the dynamics of proteins binding to NPs and to
determine how the proteins may change their structure upon binding. The project
will investigate model proteins, as well as proteins in blood plasma. The
inclusion of experiments with whole plasma is an attractive feature of this
proposed work, as whole plasma reflects the complexity of real-world conditions.
The results of this research will be important for the understanding of the fate
of nanoparticles, particularly, the bio-accumulation of nanoparticles in the
food chain. In addition, understanding the dynamics of protein coating of NPs
can be useful for the development of approaches that intentionally coat NPs with
proteins in order to prevent other proteins from binding as a strategy to ensure
that the NPs do not cause adverse effects on the environment. The PI and Co-PI
are both active in outreach to the K-12 community and mentoring of undergraduate
and graduate students.

While it is believed that the corona changes over time, as initially the most
abundant proteins bind, but are then replaced with proteins that have the
largest affinity, very little is known about the time scales of this dynamic
exchange among different proteins. The goal of this proposal is to quantify the
time-scales of protein-binding to NPs and to determine binding-induced
structural changes of the proteins. Correlation spectroscopy will be used to
determine the equilibrium protein-NP binding constant and number of bound
proteins. The approach will be extended to measure competitive binding among
different proteins to the same or possibly different nanoparticles. For protein
folding/unfolding on NPs, the PIs will use CD spectroscopy on individual
nanoparticles (with the goal of achieving single protein detection levels) and
smFRET (single molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer) microscopy of
donor-acceptor labeled proteins. The investigators have unique and complementary
strong expertise in the proposed area of research.