* 1438681
* Organometal Halide Perovskites: Sequential Vapor Deposition  And Device Study Toward Highly Efficient Thin-Film Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Zhaoyang Fan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2018
* USD 345,000.00

Principal Investigator: Zhaoyang Fan&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1438681&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-
free energy on earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials
that absorb the sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process
called photovoltaics. The search for the best photovoltaic material is an active
area of solar cell research. Recently, an exciting new class of photovoltaic
materials called organo-metal perovskites has emerged. These materials are
promising because they have low production cost, use elements and materials
abundant in the earth's crust, and currently possess solar energy conversion
efficiencies of over 15%. Perovskite based solar materials must be cast as a
very thin film to be active for photovoltaics. A fundamental challenge for
improving the solar energy conversion efficiency of these materials to is make
crystalline thin films that are free of defects. The goal of this project is to
make uniform, highly crystalline, and pin-hole free films designed to achieve
efficiencies over 20% through a new chemical vapor deposition process. In this
process, the chemical materials used to make the perovskites are added a chamber
is a gaseous state in a prescribed sequence and then allowed to react on a
surface at defined temperatures. This project will develop this process and
study the material and photovoltaic properties of the perovskite thin films.
With respect to educational activities, this project will train two PhD students
and several undergraduate students in the fundamental aspects of solar cell
material and device development, areas that are essential to the U.S.
competitiveness in the renewable and clean energy economy. Outreach activities
on solar and renewable energy will be also developed through the Student Chapter
of Engineers for a Sustainable World at Texas Tech University, where trained
students will serve as ambassadors for future K-12 outreach efforts through the
institution's T-STEM Center.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, organo-metal perovskites have emerged
as an exciting new class of earth-abundant photovoltaic materials with solar
energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 15% and potential for low manufacturing
cost. The goals of this project are to develop a sequential vapor deposition
process for synthesis of organometal halide thin films with high crystalline
quality, and then study the charge transport and recombination processes to
probe for efficiency bottlenecks. The proposed vapor deposition process is based
on sequential vapor phase transport deposition or sequential vacuum vapor
deposition, and is designed to make uniform and crystalline thin films while
maintaining the attributes of low cost thin film manufacturing scheme.
Fundamental material studies, particularly the role of chlorine in the
perovskite mixture, will provide knowledge basis for material and device design.
Specifically, charge transport and recombination will be studied at the
perovskite material level, and include micro-scale mapping characterization.
Device level studies with two interface junctions will be performed to provide
guidelines on material and interface structure design. Together, this integrated
investigation of thin film synthesis, photovoltaic material characterization,
and device performance characterization studies for highly crystalline
perovskite based thin film solar cells has the potential to make fundamental
advances in thin film solar cell technology.