* 1438004
* Temporal Resolution in Fast Pyrolysis of Lignocellulosic Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Young-Jin Lee, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Principal Investigator: Young-Jin Lee Number: 1438004

Biomass from plants is a feedstock for the production of biofuels. One route for
processing plant biomass into liquid transportation fuels is to rapidly heat up
the solid biomass material in the absence of air, a process called pyrolysis.
Pyrolysis initiaties a series of complicated decomposition reactions to produce
a complex mixture of liquid hydrocarbons, gases, and carbon-rich char. This
research project will use a novel apparatus to study the complicated reactions
of pyrolysis in real time and measure pyrolysis products very accurately at
reaction times of under one second. From this fundamental information, detailed
reaction models will be developed, which can be used to improve the performance
of pyrolysis processes to produce liquid hydrocarbon fuels, guide chemical
reactor design and scale-up, and accellerate process development leading to
commercialization. Education and broadening participation activities provided
through this project feature a summer academy for middle school science teachers
on the subject of biorenewables and the bioeconomy.

Technical Description

Pyrolysis is a process for conversion of biomass to a complex mixture of
hydrocarbon liquids, gases, and carbon-rich char where solid biomass material is
rapidly heated in the absence of air to initiate a series of thermal
decomposition reactions. The goal of this project is to study the product
distribution in fast pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass in real time. This
research will be enabled by a unique micro reactor where a fast-scanning, high-
resolution mass spectrometer is attached to a drop-tube micro-furnace pyrolyzer.
This configuration is capable of monitoring the fate of each molecular product
with sub-second temporal resolution. The research will characterize the
molecular kinetics for fast pyrolysis of glucose-based carbohydrates,
investigate molten phase and conduction effect in cellulose pyrolysis, and
explore lignin pyrolysis in high temporal resolution. It is hypothesized that
cellulose pyrolysis occurs in two distinct time steps, one narrow-time profile
and one broad profile, which are attributed to solid surface pyrolysis and
molten phase pyrolysis, respectively. The pure reaction kinetics of cellulose
and lignin pyrolysis on extremely thin film where molten phase reaction is can
be ignored will be investigated. Details of elementary chemical reactions in
cellulose pyrolysis will be further explored by systematically studying the
pyrolysis of glucose-based carbohydrates for various chain lengths and
glycosidic bondage types. A wide range of film thicknesses will be studied in
order to monitor the transition from isothermal kinetics to conduction-limited
kinetics. This will also reveal how molten phase pyrolysis is influenced by
sample size and how it contributes to the final product distributions.

Education and broadening participation activities provided through this project
feature a summer academy for middle school science teachers on the subject of
biorenewables and the bioeconomy, sponsored by the NSF Engineering Research
Center for Biorenewable Chemicals (CBiRC) and the NSF EPSCoR program at Iowa
State University. This project will support and closely collaborate with one of
the participating teachers in the preparation of classroom materials about bio-
oils. College and high school students will be exposed to the biorenewables
technology through this project, including under-represented minority students
in Science Bound program.