* 1438694
* Managing soil organic matter amendment and microbial community structure to enhance soil heating during solarization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Jean VanderGheynst, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,007.00

1438694 (VanderGheynst). Soil fumigation with synthetic chemicals including
methyl bromide, 1,3-dichloropropene, and chloropicrin, is an effective practice
for controlling soil borne pests. However, it also results in accumulation of
volatile organic compounds in the atmosphere, contributing to significant levels
of air pollution. A promising alternative to toxicant-based soil fumigation
involves combining organic soil amendments with soil solarization, in which soil
is covered with a transparent plastic film, resulting in passive solar heating
of the soil and inactivation of soilborne pathogens. Although combining soil
amendments with solarization is very effective, it is not widely used because
current practices require treatment during the time in which many crops are
produced. The basis of this research is that solarization of amended soil would
be utilized more widely if growers could adopt the practice without losing
production. It is proposed that two lines of investigation might contribute to
greater utilization of solarization: 1) exploration of techniques involving
organic matter amendment that increase soil temperature, thereby reducing the
time required for solarization and allowing treatment during off-peak production
periods; and 2) elucidation of the contributions of microbial communities to
organic matter decomposition and soil heating during solarization. Knowledge of
the interaction between organic matter decomposition, community structure and
organic acid accumulation will allow farmers to make more informed decisions on
managing soil organic matter and microbial community amendment for enhanced
solarization. Validation experiments will be part of demonstration activities
directed towards UC Cooperative Extension educators so that the information
gained from the project is disseminated and readily applied to benefit society
at large. Also, the results from this research will become part of a 6th grade
lesson and activity in the GK-12 program directed by the PI. This program pairs
PhD students with 6th grade teachers to develop and deliver STEM curriculum
related to renewable energy and environmental sustainability. The lesson and
activity will incorporate the effects of short and long-wave radiation on
thermal heating and pasteurization of soil. Once tested in classrooms with
feedback from teachers, the lesson will be submitted to TeachEngineering.org.
Student training will be highly interdisciplinary in engineering and biology.

The overall approach to be pursued involves 1) experiments that examine how
organic matter composition and microbial community inoculum can be tailored to
facilitate heat generation associated with thermophilic fermentation in soil, 2)
an in-depth characterization of microbial community dynamics, and 3) laboratory
and field validation experiments. Soil heating studies will be conducted first
using laboratory soil columns in temperature-controlled incubators. This will
allow investigation conditions under which organic matter soil amendments
stimulate aerobic microbial activity, and therefore metabolic heating. To
elucidate the role of the microbial community on soil heating, inoculum
composition and soil factors will be varied and the resulting community dynamics
measured using high-throughput sequencing of extracted DNA. Soil amenability for
supporting plant growth will be assessed using phytotoxicity assays. Field
studies will be completed to confirm laboratory results and further investigate
the effects of organic matter amendment and initial microbial community
structure on soil heating and phytotoxicity of solarized soil. This research
proposed will improve understanding of microbial activity dynamics and
associated soil heating during soil solarization. Preliminary data indicate
communities amended with organic matter enhance the rate of biological activity
in the soil, however, little is known about the spatial and temporal changes in
these communities and how they contribute to organic matter decomposition and
production of organic acids that cause phytotoxicity. Next generation high-
throughput sequencing will provide fundamental insight into the microbial
community dynamics during soil solarization, and the role microbial communities
play in soil heating during solarization.