* 1438825
* Facilitating Museum Evaluation with Real-Time Data Mining
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 797,972.00

This project is making novel use of familiar technology (smartphones and
tablets) to address the immediate and pressing challenge of affordable, ongoing,
large-scale museum evaluation, while encouraging museum visitors to engage
deeply with museum content. Using a smartphone app, museum visitors pose
questions to a 'virtual scientist' called Dr. Discovery (Dr. D). Dr. D provides
answers and the chance to complete fun mini-challenges. The questions visitors
ask are gathered in a large database. An analytics system analyzes these data
and a password-protected website provides continuous, accessible evaluation data
to museum staff, helping them make just-in-time tweaks (or longer term changes)
to exhibit-related content (such as multimedia, lecture topics, docent training,
experience carts, etc.) as current events and visitors' needs and interests
change. The intellectual merit of this project is that it is building evaluation
capacity among informal educators, advancing the fields of visitor studies,
museum evaluation, informal science learning, and situated engagement, and is
contributing to the development of novel evaluation techniques in museums. This
project has many broader impacts: The Ask Dr. Discovery system is available to
any venue that wishes to use or adapt it to their context. By enhancing the
visitor experience and improving museum access to data for evaluation and data-
driven decision making across the country, Ask Dr. Discovery has both a direct
and indirect impact on museums and visitors of all types. This project is also
training the next generation of STEM and education innovators by employing a
diverse team of undergraduate students.