* 1438486
* Control of Photopolymerization Kinetics and Thermodynamics in Self-assembled Surfactant Systems to Direct Polymer Nanostructure
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Allan Guymon, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 344,932.00

Title: Control of Photopolymerization Kinetics and Thermodynamics in Self-
assembled Surfactant Systems to Direct Polymer Nanostructure&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1438486&lt;br/&gt;PI: C. Allan Guymon&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has shown that nanotechnology, or the
ability to control material structures at very small size scales, can provide
unique and useful properties not accessible in traditional materials.
Controlling organic polymer structure in materials similar to plastics and
contact lenses at the nanometer scale has shown great promise in improving
performance. There have been recent advances in developing nanoscale structure
in polymer networks using surfactant, or soap, have involved self-assemblies,
which are of particular interest. These surfactant (soap) molecules form
lyotropic liquid crystals (LLC) in the presence of water that organize into
ordered nanometer scale features which can be used to direct, or template,
polymer structures. Materials made up of polymers templated by LLC phases have
shown great potential in their response to temperature. They can be used as
membranes and scaffolds to regenerate biological tissue. Controlling the
structure during the polymerization is still difficult with structures typically
being much different than the original template, and thus less useful. For this
project the PI will use the speed of polymerization in systems with optimized
stability to direct polymer structure evolution within LLC templates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to control photopolymerization
kinetics and thermodynamics before and during polymerization, and
surfactant/monomer chemistry to understand and direct the structural evolution
of polymers formed using LLC media. The PI will modulate surfactant and monomer
chemical structure and reactivity to reinforce thermodynamic stability of the
LLC-self-assembly to improve interactions between the growing polymer network
and the template. These systems will be modeled using computational methods to
evaluate the thermodynamic stability of the templating mixtures. It is believed
that the use of radical photopolymerization will play a pivotal role in
successful completion of this work. Photopolymerization provides the ability to
polymerize in fractions of a second at a wide range of temperatures, thereby
allowing kinetic trapping of otherwise thermodynamically unfavorable polymer
nanostructures. Polymer nanostructures formed from both traditional chain and
thiol-ene step growth photopolymerization mechanisms will be investigated.
Critical for project success is the connection between the polymerization
kinetics and polymer structure evolution. Polymerization rate, conversion, and
phase separation will be monitored in real time using photo-differential
scanning calorimetry and through infra-red and Raman spectroscopy experiments.
Thermodynamics and kinetics will be correlated to nanostructure before, during,
and after polymerization using numerous characterization techniques (small angle
X-ray scattering, electron microscopy, solid state and solution NMR). The PI
believes that this research will outline the kinetic and thermodynamic factors
necessary to direct and control the ultimate polymer
nanostructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a relatively
simple approach to controllably produce nanostructured organic polymeric
materials. Polymers with controlled nano-scale geometries will exhibit unique
transport properties and size selectivity, which are critical for advances in
applications such as water purification, stimuli response, tissue scaffolds, and
hydrogels. A prevailing theme for this research will be student education.
Extensive involvement of undergraduate and graduate researchers in a discovery
learning environment will be emphasized. Minority undergraduate and graduate
researchers will be recruited as part of the NSF REU Program in Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology. Additionally, the importance of polymers, nanotechnology, and
chemical engineering will be brought to high school students as part of two
modules presented yearly to chemistry classes at both local and rural high
schools.