* 1438684
* Expanding Capacity to Train Cyber Security Professionals
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jeanette Smith-Perrone, Tacoma Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 599,790.00

The "Expanding Capacity to Train Cyber Security Professionals" project at Tacoma
community College (TCC), is a direct response to the President's call to action
for changes in policies, technologies, education, and laws to protect
cyberspace, and the pronounced shortage of cybersecurity professionals. The goal
of this project will be to increase the capacity of TCC's Networking and Cyber
Security associate degree program to prepare students for the workforce to
address the unprecedented need for cybersecurity professionals. The project will
target separating/retiring military personnel and veterans, particularly those
with prior networking knowledge and/or active security clearances. A critical
element of this project will also involve working with industry partners for
direct placement of students and graduates in internships and/or employment in
cyber security and related fields. This project will build upon TCC's proven
success in program development and significant experience planning and
implementing NSF projects, along with its recognition as one of the most
military-friendly schools in the country.

The specific objectives of this project will be to (1) Double the capacity of
TCC's existing Networking & Cyber Security Associate in Applied Sciences Degree;
(2) Expand curriculum to address industry needs and the ever-changing cyber
ecosystem, and to position the college to apply for Center of Academic
Excellence for Information Assurance/Cyber Defense for Two-Year Education
(CAE-2Y) designation in 2016-2017; (3) Develop and modify accelerated Cyber
Security training pathway(s) within the existing degree program for individuals
with prior networking experience and industry-recognized credentials and
transition into the cybersecurity workforce with little or no replication of
prior learning; and (4) Place 70% of program completers/graduates in employment,
internships, and/or transfer to a baccalaureate degree in cybersecurity or
related field. The expanded curriculum will include a virtual lab environment
(using NDG NETLAB+ and VMware vSphere) for greater hands-on experience equipping
students with valuable VMware technical skills resulting in more highly trained
cybersecurity professionals with increased opportunities for specialization.