* 1438227
* CO Hydrogenation to Long-chain Terminal Alcohols and Aldehydes: A Combined Approach by Transient Kinetics and Theoretical Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Norbert Kruse, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2019
* USD 475,160.00

Abstract Title: CO Hydrogenation to Long-chain Terminal Alcohols and Aldehydes:
A Combined Approach by Transient Kinetics and Theoretical
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homogeneous catalysts are widely used
in industrial chemical processes for the production of long chain alcohols and
aldehydes, which can then be used as feedstock for other chemical processes.
This production process has several disadvantages as it involves several process
steps and because the expensive precious noble metals in the catalysts have to
be carefully recovered. An alternative way to produce long chain alcohols is by
using a heterogeneous catalyst which adds hydrogen to carbon monoxide, employing
catalysts made of earth abundant metals such as cobalt or iron. Such technology
plays a major role in the petrochemical industry where the interest is in the
production of long-chain hydrocarbons. There has been less application when it
comes to the production of long chain oxygenated hydrocarbons. While it is known
that different metals have different catalytic properties, the rational design
of catalysts which can produce mostly useful products with minimum production of
side-products remains a major challenge in industrial laboratories. However,
recent research findings have shown that the heterogeneous catalysis route can
in fact be a 'one-step, one-pot' process with no risk of valuable noble metal
loss. This award, made to Professors Norbert Kruse and Jean-Sabin McEwen in the
Center for Catalysis at Washington State University, aims at providing the
essential scientific basis for the design of catalysts with superior catalytic
activity and performance for the production of long-chain oxygenates from carbon
monoxide. The implications of such a process are especially important in terms
of closing the cost gap between chemical products that are traditionally based
on fossil fuels and those which could be based on carbon monoxide instead. The
PIs will also establish a partnership with the Phillips 66 Company Ferndale, WA
refinery, where undergraduate and graduate students will be given the
opportunity to meet with the company's representatives so as to discuss their
project results, visit the company's production site and, consequently,
understand industrial-scale and commercial implications of their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted design of
catalysts for long-chain oxygenate production via the Fischer Tropsch technology
becomes possible by using oxalate co-precipitation of metal precursors as
developed in the laboratories Washington State. This preparation technique
involves all metal components in a single step, so no classical support material
is needed. Relative amounts of metal precursors can be straightforwardly varied
so as to tune the composition for selective oxygenates production via CO
hydrogenation. Catalysts will be comprised of Co and Cu metal functions, of the
Co core-Cu shell structures. Microkinetic data as provided in combined chemical
transient kinetics and density functional theory calculations will include a
'surface atom counting' of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen at any instant until
steady state conditions are reached. Energy profiles for bimetallic CoCu
particles on various oxide surfaces at high surface coverages will be performed
and correlated to the transient kinetic data so as to optimize the high pressure
CO hydrogenation process to long-chain oxygenates. It is anticipated that these
research efforts will lead to a new generation of catalysts for selective C8-14
oxygenates production.