* 1438530
* Highly efficient numerical solution of the Boltzmann equation for practical applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Philip Varghese, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 316,371.00

PI: Varghese, Philip L.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1438530&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to develop an
improved method to compute flows under conditions where the conventional
continuum equations are invalid. If successful, the work would result in
solution strategies for a broad range of applications where continuum equations
fail. The work proposed will advance the state-of-the-art for hybrid flow
simulations that are important in design and simulation of wafer fabrication
machines, plasma processing equipment, and micro-
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuum approach to fluid mechanics reaches
its limitations in rarefied flows and in micro- and nanoflows. A commonly used
approach for computing non-continuum flows is the direct simulation Monte Carlo
(DSMC) method, which can be thought of as providing a statistical representation
of solutions of the Boltzmann equation by modeling the behavior of a large
number of the molecules in the flow. This proposal is about a novel scheme to
solve the Boltzmann equation numerically that has the potential to alleviate
many of the limitations of DSMC, including feasibility for large scales. The
proposed work is based on a new idea on how to compute the collisional integral,
which appears in the Boltzmann equation and has been the reason for inefficient
solutions and approximations to-date, using a projection into a discrete yet
conservative velocity space. This approach can be viewed as a variation of DSMC
that uses variable-mass fixed-velocity quasi-particles, rather than fixed-mass
variable-velocity particles. Preliminary results show good agreement with
theoretical predictions. The software developed during this project will be
given to other academic and government laboratory users on request. The research
center within the Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences at UT
Austin will be utilized for dissemination - it has established high standards
for software documentation and code verification and validation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Fluid Dynamics Program of the CBET
Division is co-funded by CIF 21 Software Reuse Venture Fund Program of the
CISE/ACI Division.