* 1438103
* Solving the Mystery of Humidity's Effect on Viability of Airborne Microorganisms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 336,000.00

1438103&lt;br/&gt;Marr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solving the Mystery of Humidity's
Effect on Viability of Airborne Microorganisms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will benefit society by enhancing the understanding of transmission of
infectious disease via the airborne route. Results could be used to improve
prediction of the spread of infectious disease and may help explain the
seasonality of some diseases. Application of the results could lead to
interventions such as manipulating liquid-phase chemistry to reduce the
viability of pathogens in aerosols generated from the liquid. If humidity is
proven to play a controlling role in airborne pathogen viability, then
recommendations about indoor humidity levels could be developed. The project
will build interdisciplinary ties between atmospheric science and microbiology,
which are needed for progress in understanding infectious disease transmission.
By developing new educational material on airborne microorganisms for students
ranging from the preschool to undergraduate level, we will improve scientific
literacy and will hopefully help prevent at least one case of infectious
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to develop
new, fundamental knowledge about how ambient humidity and aerosol chemistry
interact to affect the survival of airborne microorganisms. This project is
based upon the hypothesis that evaporation-induced changes in the chemical
composition of an aerosol, such as increases in salt and protein concentrations,
shifts in pH, crystallization of solutes, and phase separation, affect the
viability of microorganisms contained in the aerosol. By applying environmental
engineering tools to this problem, we are poised to make potentially
transformative advances in understanding and potentially controlling the
dynamics of microorganisms in the atmosphere Recent studies employing high-
throughput sequencing have found a surprisingly diverse, complex, and dynamic
microbiome in the natural and built environments. There are many opportunities
for aerosolization of microorganisms, such as from wastewater treatment plants,
animal feeding operations, land application of biosolids, toilets, showers, and
humidifiers. Environmental engineers have made large gains in understanding how
environmental conditions affect microorganisms in water, but a parallel
understanding for microorganisms in air does not yet exist. An interdisciplinary
approach is critical to progress in this area. This project unites environmental
engineering, aerosol science, and microbiology to develop a new
interdisciplinary understanding of the dynamics of microorganisms in the
atmosphere. Specific objectives are to (1) characterize evaporation-induced
changes in aerosol composition in terms of solute concentrations, pH,
crystallization, and phase separation; (2) determine the relationship between
microorganism viability and solute concentrations, pH, crystallization, and
phase separation in aerosols; (3) describe the partitioning of microorganisms in
aerosols and examine structural changes in them as a function of aerosol
chemistry; and (4) broaden the scientific literacy of students and the general
public regarding airborne microorganisms and infectious disease transmission.
The research team will produce droplets and aerosols of varying initial chemical
composition (inorganic salts, organic material, pH) and size, expose the them to
varying relative humidity in an environmental chamber, determine their final
chemical composition after equilibration, measure the inactivation rate of
microorganisms contained in the droplets and aerosols, and visualize the
microorganisms using electron microscopy.