* 1438278
* Geochemical Controls on Hazardous Element Mobilization in Shales and Precipitation in Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Fitts, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,484.00

1438278&lt;br/&gt;Peters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geochemical controls on hazardous
element mobilization in shales and precipitation in wastewater treatment
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unconventional gas production, that is hydraulic
fracturing or "fracking", holds the potential of making the US energy positive.
However, during the fracking process it is possible to produce vast quantities
of flow-back and production wastewaters. Flow-back water results from the
fracking process itself where some of that water may return to the surface, and
is known as flow-back water. It is also possible that water that has been in the
shale formation may also come back to the surface and is referred to as produced
water. In both cases one of the fears is that this water may contaminate either
or both subsurface and surface waters. This project will study the chemistry of
these waters to help inform others on the potential of environmental
degradation. Also, as part of this project, through educational and outreach
activities centered on the topics of energy and the environment, another goal is
to inspire and excite young people about science and engineering in the context
of relevant contemporary issues, and to instill confidence for academic
achievement. Through a partnership with Princeton University's PACE Center, an
educational program will be developed for middle-school children at Princeton's
Community House, a program that seeks to close the minority achievement gap in
the local community. For this project, after-school activities will be developed
to introduce topics of energy production and environmental
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a scientific point of view, this project
will provide a better understanding of the geochemical controls on hazardous
element mobilization in flow-back and production wastewaters during fracking and
shale gas extraction. The project will generate first-of-a-kind information
about how barium (Ba), uranium (U) and radium (Ra) in shale formation rocks are
distributed among mineral and organic phases. This information is critical for
the development of geochemical models that predict hazardous element
mobilization due to selective dissolution of mineral phases. Collectively the
new knowledge gained will lead to a generalizable approach to assess hazardous
element contamination in flow-back and production wastewaters. This project will
use the advanced understanding of flow-back and production wastewaters content
to generate fundamentally new knowledge about the factors that affect Ba and Ra
co-precipitation relevant to industrial treatment operations, and how fracking
fluid additives may inhibit or foster this process.