* 1438007
* Polymer/Inorganic-Solid Composites for Rechargeable Battery Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* John Goodenough, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 10/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

1438007 - Goodenough&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is the
development of a new strategy for a rechargeable battery that can store energy
at a price that is competitive with fossil fuels. The strategy is to develop an
inexpensive thin, flexible, mechanically strong electrolyte membrane scalable at
low cost to large areas that is chemically stable to temperatures above 100Â°C on
contact with a metallic alkali metal. The PI plans to explore the design of a
rechargeable battery using an alkali-metal anode to enhance the energy density
and lower the cost of battery manufacture and management. The broad impact of
this development would be the enabling of alternative strategy for the
development of Li-ion or Na-ion batteries that can power an all-electric highway
vehicle or provide storage for the grid of electrical energy generated by solar
or wind energy at an affordable cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present strategies
for Li-ion or Na-ion batteries use an organic liquid electrolyte having a
lowest-unoccupied-molecular-orbital (LUMO) energy about 1 eV below the Fermi
energy EF of a Li anode, 0.7 eV below the EF of a Na anode. Formation of a
passivating solidelectrolyte-interphase (SEI) layer on an alkali-metal anode
surface having EF &gt; LUMO causes dendrites to form and grow across the
electrolyte to the cathode on repeated charge/discharge cycles; with an organic
liquid electrolyte, the resulting internal short-circuit has incendiary
consequences. As a result, existing Li-ion rechargeable battery cells are
fabricated in the discharged state with an anode free of an alkali metal.
Nevertheless, on the initial charge, a passivating SEI layer permeable to Li+ or
Na+ is formed if the anode has an EF &gt; LUMO; the Li+ or Na+ of the SEI layer
is supplied by the cathode, which is an insertion compound of limited solid-
solution range for Li or Na. These features limit the energy density of existing
cells, which makes it difficult to develop a safe battery at an affordable cost
for either powering an all-electric highway vehicle or providing storage for the
grid of electrical energy generated by solar or wind energy. The PI proposes to
develop composite membranes in which a solid-state component is embedded in a
polymer having a LUMO &gt; EF of Li0 and/or Na0. These membranes may be designed
to be either a membrane separator that blocks dendrites from an alkali-metal
anode or a solid electrolyte of an all-solid-state battery. The membranes can be
made at low cost with easy scale-up in size; they can be thin, flexible, and
mechanically robust. The separator membranes contain a main-group oxide that
blocks dendrites; the solid state component of the all-solid-state battery acts
as a salt releasing the working alkali ion to the polymer component that
conducts the ions in its dry state.