* 1438996
* XPS: FULL: CCA:  Scalable Approximate Computing for Data Parallel Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Scott Mahlke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 850,000.00

Data parallel applications are an important class of problems where energy
consumption is a barrier to future performance scaling. These applications
provide a paradigm where thousands of threads are concurrently executed on
parallel hardware. A key characteristic shared by many of these applications is
that absolute correctness of the output is not essential for proper operation.
This opens up a new design dimension for microprocessors to trade off
performance and energy consumption with output correctness. Image and video
processing applications are well known candidates for approximation as users can
tolerate occasional dropped frames or small losses in resolution during video
playback. Machine learning and data analysis on massive data sets provide
opportunities to process subsets of input data in a fraction of the time, while
still yielding representative results. This project will design and develop the
enabling application analysis, compiler, and run-time software technologies to
facilitate scalable approximate computing. Our goal is to increase the execution
efficiency of data-parallel applications by an order of magnitude on commodity
hardware by trading off small, user-controlled levels of output accuracy for
increased efficiency. By creating enabling technologies, we expect approximate
computing to become pervasive, enabling data-intensive computing to be
integrated into more aspects of life. Outreach activities will introduce data-
parallel computing and energy efficiency to a new generation of high school
students through an effort to reach out to local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a vertically integrated approach
that combines deep application analysis, automatic generation of approximate
kernels, and a run-time system that seamlessly manages approximate execution.
First, deep analysis of compute-intensive mobile and datacenter applications
will automatically identify code regions that are amenable to approximation.
Second, an idiom recognition and replacement approach is used to identify common
computation patterns and synthesize approximate versions with varying degrees of
accuracy. Third, sampling-based approaches as well as predictive strategies that
perform approximate checking will be explored to ensure that output quality
degradation does not exceed a user-specified threshold. Finally, a run-time
compiler and management layer orchestrates the usage of approximate kernels and
error checking while ensuring user error thresholds are honored.