* 1438417
* Collaborative Research: Digital Generation and Cognitive Evaluation of Flow Maps for Movement Visualization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Eugene Zhang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 156,630.00

Flow maps are powerful tools for visualizing the direction and volume of
movements for many different variables, including commodities, services,
commuters, armies, bird migration, maritime traffic, telecommunications traffic,
and financial transactions. Although flow maps are useful and aesthetically
pleasing communication tools, few computational techniques exist for creating
flow maps that are both explicit and easy to read. This research project will
identify design principles and develop algorithms to facilitate the creation of
easy-to-read flow maps with curved flow lines. The design of a computational
technique for creating flow maps and the distribution of the new technique as
open-source software will enhance capabilities for users to create effective and
informative flow maps, which will increase the geographic literacy of specific
users as well as the general public. This project will contribute to the
development of methods for visual analysis of various types of movement data in
space and time that often are voluminous. The project will contribute to
cartographic theory and practice by ascertaining and articulating the design
principles underpinning the creation of effective flow visualizations, and it
will provide interdisciplinary education and training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students. The open-source software modules to be developed
during the course of this project will make interactive and animated flow maps
easier to produce and interpret than flow representations created with current
digital tools.

This research project will concentrate on origin-destination flow maps with
curved flow lines, where the specific geometry of the paths between pairs of
origin and destination locations is either unknown or unimportant. Research in
information visualization and graph drawing has resulted in techniques for
creating flow diagrams, but the specific requirements for geospatial flow maps
have received little attention. Despite the long history and aesthetic qualities
of flow maps, there is little scientific knowledge concerning the effective
design of flow maps. The investigators therefore will develop greater
understanding of the effectiveness of traditional design principles for flow
maps, and they will convert these principles into computational techniques for
creating origin-destination flow maps. They will conduct content analyses and
human-subject experiments for evaluating design techniques used in manually
designed flow maps. They will identify the manual design principles that are
found to be most relevant and useful and transform these into a multi-criteria
cost function, and they will derive a map layout using heuristic optimization
methods. The resulting techniques will be verified in a user study to assess
efficiency and interpretation accurateness.