* 1438625
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Energy Extraction and Coal-Fired Power Plants on Disinfection By-Product Formation in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Michael Plewa, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

1438625&lt;br/&gt;Richardson, Susan D.&lt;br/&gt;1438326&lt;br/&gt;VanBriesen,
Jeanne&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Impacts of Energy Extraction
and Coal-Fired Power Plants on Disinfection By-product Formation in
Water&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased energy extraction activities, including
shale gas extraction and conventional oil and gas extraction, are resulting in
high releases of bromide (and potentially iodide) to U.S. surface waters. New
pollution controls being installed at coal-fired power plants are also resulting
in high releases of bromide ion. These activities are presenting new issues for
human and ecological health because when these high-bromide/iodide waters are
chlorinated (a disinfection processes used in water treatment), they can result
in the formation of highly toxic disinfection by-products, several of which may
have adverse human health effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
interdisciplinary research would comprehensively characterize and quantify
brominated and iodinated disinfection by-products formed in source waters
impacted by energy extraction and coal-fired power plant releases, determine
potential human and ecological health risks, and use modeling to establish and
quantify the linkage between impacted source waters and human exposures, and
estimate maximum loadings of bromide and iodide that will minimize human risks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is known that high levels of bromide and iodide
can contribute to the formation of brominated and iodinated DBPs in chlorinated
drinking water, even "conventional" disinfection by-products formed by reaction
of chlorine with bromide, iodide, and natural organic matter (NOM) are not fully
characterized, such that &gt;50 % of the halogenated disinfection by-products
remains unknown. This situation is even more complex when considering the
possibility of additional chemicals used in energy extraction/utilization
processes that are often unknown (particularly for hydraulic fracturing). No
longer are the disinfection by-product precursors only from natural organic
matter, and low levels of contaminants in domestic wastewater, but there are now
additional precursors from these new energy extraction/utilization releases,
which are largely uncharacterized. This is already resulting in significantly
different exposures to both humans and aquatic organisms. Understanding the
formation of these brominated and iodinated disinfection by-products and their
potential human and ecological risks could ultimately inform decisions regarding
control of bromide and iodide releases and what levels would be deemed safe.