* 1438325
* Mechanism for Heterogeneously Catalyzed Sugar Alcohol Reactions: Hierarchical Modeling and Experimental Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Bruce, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 358,386.00

Abstract Title: Molecular-level simulations of the chemistry of hydrogen
generation from alcohols in aqueous solutions &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
drivers of sustainability and environmental impact have led to processes for
converting plant-derived chemicals into useful products for energy and specialty
chemicals. In many cases, the technologies used to convert these compounds rely
on expensive catalysts. For example, hydrogen for use as a pollutant-free fuel
can be produced from plant-derived alcohols using catalysts comprised of
platinum, palladium, rhodium, and other noble metals. The high costs of these
catalyst materials percolate into the alcohol conversion costs, limiting the
economic viability of these plant-derived raw materials, as well as their
competitiveness with conventional petroleum-derived chemicals. Theoretically,
less expensive conversion catalysts could be designed. One of the major
challenges to finding good catalysts arises from the aqueous phase reaction
environment used to process these plant-derived raw materials. These dense,
aqueous environments significantly increase the number of molecules that are
involved at the molecular level, making it difficult to evaluate their precise
roles. This award is to Professors Rachel Getman and David Bruce of Clemson
University to utilize a hierarchy of molecular simulation techniques as well as
experiments to identify specific ways that water influences molecular-level
chemistry for hydrogen production from methanol and glycerol, which are
available byproducts of biofuel production. This study will also serve as an
excellent training platform for undergraduate and graduate students, exposing
them to computational and experimental techniques, and empowering them to
intelligently address future scientific and societal problems. Web-based videos
and presentations will enable a wider audience to follow the progress of the
project and learn about key research findings. Future work will be aimed at
designing less expensive catalysts for methanol and glycerol conversions as well
as other solution-phase transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many catalyzed
reactions occur in the liquid phase, and understanding molecular-level phenomena
in liquids is at the forefront of catalysis research. Few fundamental reaction
studies have explored how an aqueous solvent environment impacts the entropic
and enthalpic driving forces involved in heterogeneous catalysis. To acquire the
insight needed to optimize aqueous reaction systems, the objectives of this
project are to elucidate the molecular-level mechanisms of two important aqueous
phase reactions, specifically methanol oxidation and glycerol reforming, which
are currently carried out over heterogeneous catalysts containing platinum and
other noble metals (similar to many other reactions involved in biomass
processing). This project employs a hierarchy of molecular-level modeling and
experiments to identify the most prominent steps in the methanol oxidation and
glycerol reforming mechanisms. Quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, Monte
Carlo, and molecular dynamics will be used to model how the aqueous environment
influences catalytic phenomena. Ultimately, quantum data and detailed
microkinetic models will identify overall product selectivities, and simulation
results will be compared with experimental observations for both validation and
model improvement purposes. This research is potentially transformative in that
it will elucidate adsorbate-intermediate interactions, adsorbate-fluid
interactions, and their coupling, thus, providing a complete analysis of
catalytic mechanisms in the liquid phase, and facilitating future work in
catalyst design for a vital class of liquid phase reactions.