* 1438582
* RAPID: Assessment of a Coal-Ash Spill in Dan River on Water Resources downstream Using Numerical Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Mustafa Altinakar, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2015
* USD 49,999.00

1438582&lt;br/&gt;Altinakar, Mustafa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
provides a unique first opportunity to study a major coal-ash spill event while
it is still happening, with the added benefits of guiding data collection
efforts and immediately interpreting data to gain a better understanding of the
consequences of coal ash spills on river-reservoir system, and developing
mitigation strategies. Although coal ash spills have occurred many times in the
past with disastrous consequences on humans, water resources and the ecosystem,
this will be the first time a complete investigation based on coupled one and
two-dimensional modeling of unsteady hydrodynamics, sediment transport and
morphodynamics and contaminant transport and fate can be undertaken. The models
established for the research will also serve for long term monitoring and
development of remediation approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
has already published one- and two-dimensional models in the lower reaches of
the Dan River/Roanoke River system, downstream from the proposed research site.
The results of this research can serve to bridge engineering and policy making
by providing fundamental information of the hydraulic flow in the river systems.
Several graduate students and two undergraduate work study students will be
involved in this research contributing to STEM and research-based education.