* 1438898
* Twitter and Informal Science Learning and Engagement
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Daniel Light, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 11/30/2017
* USD 215,209.00

The project will develop a set of research instruments to assess and evaluate
the role of social media micro-blogging platforms (e.g., Twitter) in fostering
informal science learning. The Internet and social media are rapidly
transforming the nature of public discourse and the ways in which adults learn
about the changing world. Highly respected informal science institutions, such
as museums, scientific foundations and societies, and government scientific
agencies are trusted curators of science knowledge to whom the public looks for
up-to-date information in their respective fields. These organizations are
increasingly using social media tools, such as Twitter, to reach the public and
disseminate information. To complement the highly quantitative and often market-
driven perspectives of current research, the project will develop research tools
to assess the role of Twitter in supporting informal science learning.

The project will develop, pilot, and validate two instruments. The first is an
informal science social engagement index or indices, based on a content analysis
of social media comments. Researchers will extract online conversation threads
constructed by media followers. The second measure will survey followers of the
sites studied regarding motivations, objectives for their interest in science
and for following these organizations, perceptions about their use of Twitter,
and their perceptions about their use of Twitter. Twitter data will be gathered
from several organizations, such as the National Geographic and the Field Museum
of Natural History. The project will make available the two research tools for
use in research on the role of Twitter in informal science education and will
provide a foundation for future research on the topic.