* 1438172
* SusChEM: Time-series Characterization and Modeling of Non-model Microalgae at the Systems-level for Sustainable Chemical Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gunes Atilla-Gokcumen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

PI Name: Gunes E. Atilla-Gokcumen Number: 1438172

One of the grand challenges of engineering in the 21st century is to provide
sustainable and economically-viable commodity products while easing the pressure
of population increase, global climate change, and limited natural resources.
One plausible approach is to utilize renewable feedstocks that can accommodate
these many criteria in long-term adaption and mitigation strategies. Towards
this end, microalgae can efficiently convert sunlight and carbon dioxide into
high-value products such as biofuels, nutritional supplements, and therapeutic
agents. However, the global cellular metabolic processes underlying biofuel and
sustainable chemical production from microalgae are not well understood. This
project will develop fundamental and applied engineering tools and metrics to
better understand how photosynthetic organisms can be exploited to produce high-
value products with applications in energy, health, and food industries. The
theme of sustainable fuel and chemical production through microalgae-based
processes has compelling broad societal impacts, and these topics will be
communicated through academic and civic engagement activities that are
integrated with the proposed research.

Technical Description

In microalgae, several complex and linked internal mechanisms dictate
hydrocarbon biosynthesis, degradation, and, ultimately, the prospect for their
accumulation. In fact, preliminary data suggests stress conditions such as
nutrient deprivation in microalgae not only trigger lipid and terpenoid
biosynthesis but also up-regulate several enzymes responsible for lipid
degradation in lysosomes and peroxisomes. The relationship between the
expression and interaction of anabolic and catabolic reactions will be
investigated with the goal of maximizing hydrocarbon formation that will extend
the current understanding of hydrocarbon biosynthesis in microalgae. More
specifically, in order to maximize carbon dioxide fixation efficiency and lipid
and terpenoid accumulation, a comprehensive experimental and theoretical
approach will be employed to understand basic metabolism and improve final
metabolite production metrics in non-model oleaginous microalgae. In this work,
the microalga Neochloris oleoabundans will be grown under varying nitrogen and
phosphorous nutrient levels, and sampled in time-series for transcriptomic and
metabolomic analyses designed to characterize and optimize lipid and terpenoid
formation. Steady state and dynamic stoichiometric metabolic modeling will be
used to determine and predict systems-level responses to critical substrate
uptake rates and stress-induced anabolic and catabolic gene activity as they
pertain to maximized lipid and terpenoid accumulation. In parallel, a
mutagenesis and high-resolution screening design will be applied to further
improve non-model microalgae production metrics and, more importantly, provide a
comparative basis across all three aims for intracellular metabolism
representative of improved hydrocarbon production.