* 1438181
* Addressing Dynamic Donor:Acceptor and Electrode Interfaces in Organic Bulk-Heterojunction and Perovskite Solar Cells Under Device-Operating Condition
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Bin Hu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2019
* USD 383,866.00

Principal Investigator: Bin Hu Number: 1438181

Nontechnical Description

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-free energy
on earth. Solar cells for the conversion of sunlight to electricity, also known
as photovoltaic (PV) solar cells, suffer from a variety of complicated
electrical processes during their operation that lower the overall solar energy
conversion efficiency. This project will develop and use a novel technique based
on magnetic field measurements to probe these electrical processes at material
interfaces within two major classes of photovoltaic devices, organic polymer
based photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells, and perovskite material based
semiconductor solar PV cells, while these devices are in actual operation. OPV
devices offer promise because they can be made from relatively inexpensive
organic polymer materials, and perovskite materials offer promise because they
are obtained from minerals abundant in the earth?s crust and have relatively
high solar energy conversion efficiencies. Fundamental understanding of the
useful and non-useful photovoltaic processes at material interfaces within these
PV materials will suggest materials synthesis pathways and device engineering
that can potentially lead to increased solar energy conversion efficiency in
both PV device classes. The proposed activities will also offer
interdisciplinary opportunities to enhance class teaching, research training
opportunities for students from under-represented groups in science and
engineering, and outreach activities for high-school students on the topic of
organic polymer based solar cells.

Technical Description

In a photovoltaic (PV) device, when a photon from sunlight is absorbed and
converted into an electron-hole pair, there are several loss mechanisms which
prevent the charge from being carried away from the device as electric current,
resulting in lowered solar energy conversion efficiency. The overall goal of
this project is to gain a fundamental understanding of these recombination loss
mechanisms at material interfaces though a unique magnetic field measurement
technique. Specifically, the project will make measurements of magnetic field
induced photocurrent and photo-induced capacitance to probe the binding energy
and charge transfer states of the dynamic donor/acceptor interface in excitonic
organic polymer based photovoltaic (OPV) devices, and the electrode interface
non-excitonic perovskite thin-film photovoltaic devices respectively, using real
operating devices under device operating conditions. The proposed research will
gain insights on how to tune the electron-hole binding energies at the
donor/acceptor interface for excitonic, bulk hetero-junction OPV devices through
control of polarization and energy parameters, and on how to enhance the charge
collection at the electrode interface in non-excitonic perovskite thin-film PV
devices through dielectric effects. The research plan will focus on three tasks,
including materials processing and device engineering to tune polarization and
energy parameters at donor/acceptor and electrode interfaces, experimental
studies on the useful and non-useful photovoltaic processes occurring at
donor/acceptor and electrode interfaces, and finally, elucidation on the key
parameters that control the electron-hole binding energies at the donor/acceptor
interface and the charge collection at electrode interfaces. Fundamental
understanding of the useful and non-useful photovoltaic processes at dynamic
donor/acceptor and electrode interfaces will suggest materials synthesis
pathways and device engineering that can potentially lead to increased solar
energy conversion efficiency in both excitonic, bulk-hetero-junction OPVs and
non-excitonic perovskite thin-film PV devices. With respect to education and
broadening participation, the proposed activities will also offer
interdisciplinary opportunities to enhance class teaching, research training
opportunities for students from under-represented groups in science and
engineering, and outreach activities for high-school students on the topic of
organic polymer based solar cells.