* 1438865
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancing Undergraduate Research Experience in the Chemistry Curriculum at WSSU
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Maria Ngu-Schwemlein, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2018
* USD 480,834.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Winston-Salem State
University seeks to enhance the quality of the undergraduate research experience
in the Chemistry undergraduate degree program by laying the foundation for
effective research skills that will ultimately promote student success.

This project explores foundational research skill-building as an intervention to
enhance learning and professional identification, which are two important
determinants for increasing student retention and success in STEM fields. The
mediation also seeks to incorporate high-impact practices to increase
underrepresented student achievement in the chemical sciences, and thereby to
promote student diversity in STEM.

Student retention and achievement will be assessed by adapting previously
established evaluation tools. The project activities to support this goal are:
(i) to implement two research foundation courses (Introduction to Research
Methods and Computational Analysis Lab), and a capstone interdisciplinary
research-oriented upper-level laboratory course; (ii) to adapt and infuse short
guided research-oriented projects into laboratory courses; and (iii) to provide
instrumentation to support the research-oriented laboratory experiments and
research efforts toward preparing students to be more perceptive to modern
instrumentation used in current scientific research and industry. Effective
laboratory instruction and learning approaches will also be adapted or developed
to motivate higher-level critical thinking skills and to improve student
understanding of the research process.

The expected outcomes of this project are: (i) increased student retention and
achievement in the chemistry degree program; (ii) improved preparation of
undergraduate students for graduate programs and/or chemical careers; and (iii)
increased undergraduate research presentation and publication with faculty.
Measurable outcomes include: (i) an increase in student retention and
achievement, including underrepresented students, in the chemistry program, and
ii) a resultant increase in graduates who will enter advanced degree programs or
join the workforce in research or industry. These expected project outcomes
support WSSU's vision to produce graduates of distinction who will lead and
compete successfully in the global economy. By integrating modern
instrumentation into laboratory instruction and undergraduate research projects,
it is anticipated that students will have hands-on experiences and training on
state-of-the-art equipment that better prepares them for the workforce. The
project activities and outcomes will be published in appropriate journals,
disseminated at local and national meetings, and made available via websites to
promote teaching, training, and learning.