* 1438385
* GOALI: Engineered Metal-Ligand Interfaces for Selective Electrochemical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* John Flake, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 443,382.00

Title: Electrochemical Conversion of Carbon Dioxide and Nitrogen to High-Value
Products Using Engineered Metal-Ligand Interfaces &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
do a wonderful job of converting gases like carbon dioxide and nitrogen into
products like cellulose and nutrients. The reactions are driven by sunlight and
provide a critical balance to life - including oxygen in the atmosphere and our
food supply. In the last century, man is responsible for significant changes in
the balance; atmospheric carbon dioxide levels have risen by about 30% and more
than 50% of the world population now relies on man-made fertilizers for food.
Unfortunately, there are no commercial processes that can duplicate the ability
of nature to use sunlight, atmospheric gases and water to make fuels, plastics
or fertilizers. However, this remains a grand challenge for science and
technology and efforts to achieve some measure of success still require funding.
This GOALI award is made to a team comprised of Professors John Flake and Ye Xu
and Dr. Joe Sauer of Louisiana State University and A&amp;M College and Dr. Anne
Sauer of Albemarle Corporation. The aim of this work is to mimic nature and
design new catalysts that can produce valuable products from these basic
feedstocks. Catalyst surfaces and interfaces will be created using highly active
metal clusters and functional ligand molecules that promote the selective
formation of one particular product over another. The energy to power the
reaction is ideally provided solely by electricity from solar or wind energy (no
fossil fuels). The research will shed light on the fundamental behavior of
electrocatalysts and the team of academic and industry investigators will work
to commercialize "green" processes to make chemicals, fertilizers and fuels
using purely renewable resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of
this project are to: (1) build a fundamental framework for understanding the
behavior of ligand-functionalized metal nanoclusters as electrocatalysts and (2)
leverage this understanding to create electrocatalysts by design. The team will
explore the roles of metal type, nanocluster size, ligand chemistry and their
behavior in electrolytic reactions using a combined theoretical and experimental
approach. While there has been a renewed interest in electrochemical CO2
reduction in recent years (including for solar fuels), the reaction pathways and
selectivity-controlling mechanisms are not well understood. Likewise, the
mechanisms involved in N2 reduction are also poorly understood. The
investigators will explore reduction pathways as a function of nanocluster
size/type (Au, Ag, Cu, Ni, Fe) and ligand chemistry (e.g. thiols, sulfides,
amides, amines, imines and other sulfo- or amino-functional groups) using
voltammetry, surface analyses and other product characterization tools. The work
will include a special in-operando spectroscopic study of electrocatalytic
reactions using synchrotron-source XANES (X-ray Absorption Near Edge
Spectroscopy) analysis to probe reactions as they occur. These experimental
results will be complemented by density functional theory (DFT) based modeling
techniques to generate an in-depth understanding of the nature of the active
electrode interface, the key steps in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 and
N2, and the cooperative effects between the electrode and the ligand. The
versatility and accuracy of modern DFT methods will be leveraged to identify the
fundamental factors that systematically control the efficiency and selectivity
of the reactions, and subsequently to predict the performance of new
electrode/ligand combinations. Results from this work will yield new insights
into reactions mechanisms, a framework for predicting and controlling
selectivity, and new electrocatalysts to produce fuels, fertilizers, and
chemicals.