* 1438238
* Dynamic discrete choice modeling of plug-in electric vehicle use and charging using stated preference data.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Don MacKenzie, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 263,968.00

1438238 (MacKenzie). The lack of empirically based models of charging behavior
is increasingly acknowledged as a limitation of existing Plug-in Electric
Vehicle (PEV) research. This project will expand knowledge of charging behavior
by quantifying the effects of multiple factors on drivers' choices over (1)
whether to use a PEV or an alternate vehicle for a particular travel day, and
(2) whether or not to charge their PEV at various points throughout their day.
An important innovation lies in modeling the interdependence of these choices.
Data will be analyzed using dynamic discrete choice models, which have seen
considerable development in economics but relatively little use in
transportation. The investigators will test whether the dynamic choice modeling
framework can better predict PEV owners' decisions about vehicle use and
charging than can the static choice modeling approaches more commonly used in
transportation engineering. Additionally, the work will provide insights into
the monetary value that PEV drivers place on reducing gasoline consumption and
greenhouse gas emissions, and how this value compares to the price of gasoline.
Plug-in electric vehicles contribute to improved national security and enhanced
economic competitiveness by reducing spending on oil imports, insulating the
economy from oil price shocks, and reducing the country's strategic interests in
geopolitically unstable regions. They enhance the wellbeing of individuals in
society by reducing the impacts of transportation on local and global
environmental quality. This research will facilitate a shift to a more
environmentally and economically sustainable transportation system by (1)
supporting the design of vehicles and charging infrastructure networks that
better match consumers' actual behavior, and (2) allowing policymakers to design
cost-effective incentives for PEVs and charging infrastructure, based on more
accurate assessments of their potential benefits. This research will enrich STEM
education by highlighting the importance of multidisciplinary competence for the
modern engineer. The PI plans to incorporate products from this research into
assignments and materials for a new course he is offering on Transportation
Energy &amp; Sustainability. The investigators have professional networks
spanning the public, private, and academic sectors, and are committed to
transferring to practitioners the knowledge created through this research. They
anticipate benefits for automobile manufacturers and charging network operators,
more effective policymaking, and strengthened relationships among these groups
to result from this work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A stated preference choice
experiment will be administered via a customized, web-based interface to a
sample of PEV drivers. The survey will collect key background information on
demographics and vehicle ownership, then present respondents with a set of
tailored choice situations. Respondents will be presented with a planned travel
day that includes one or more segments of driving (of specified distances)
interspersed with potential charging opportunities (characterized by the length
of the stop and the cost, power, and typical availability of charging
equipment). They will be asked whether they would use their PEV or an alternate
vehicle for the specified travel day. Those who indicate that they would use
their PEV will be taken through a simulation of the travel day, in which they
will be asked whether or not they would charge their vehicle at each
opportunity. The survey data will be analyzed using a dynamic discrete choice
modeling approach. In this framework, choices made in earlier periods affect the
potential payoffs of subsequent choices, and the earlier choices are assumed to
be made with this foresight in mind. The PI hypothesizes that this modeling
approach can better represent the decision processes of PEV drivers, who
consider the likelihood of finding appropriate charging opportunities later in
the day when deciding whether to drive or charge a PEV earlier in the day. A key
product of this work will be a model of the probability of a PEV driver choosing
to use and charge a PEV, conditional on (potentially uncertain) information
about travel plans and subsequent charging opportunities.