* 1438204
* Role of Attractions in Modifying the Confined Flow of Colloids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,479.00

CBET 1438204&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a concentrated suspension of particles
such as rigid spheres flows through a narrow channel, there is a tendency for
the particles to migrate away from the walls and toward the center of the
channel. This phenomenon is called shear-induced migration. It affects the
arrangement of the particles flowing through the channel and the structures that
the particles form as a result of the flow. Flows of concentrated suspensions in
narrow channels occur in several novel technological applications, including
semi-solid flow batteries and concentrated nanoparticle inks for 3D printing.
This project will investigate the effects of attractive forces between the
particles. Preliminary data show that interparticle attractions can suppress
shear-induced migration. A series of experiments will be conducted to determine
whether attractive forces between particles give rise to transient clusters or
aggregates of particles that reduce migration, which could provide a way to
better tailor particulate materials for specific applications of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will quantify effects of
interparticle attraction on shear-induced migration and will correlate
suspension microstructure with the extent of shear-induced migration. The
interparticle attraction will be achieved by adding small amounts of polymer to
suspensions of hard spheres to create a depletion force between particles. The
effects of attraction range and strength, colloid volume fraction, and flow rate
on shear-induced migration and the structure of the resulting suspension will be
measured. Deviations from phenomenological models for shear-induced migration
that involve only hard sphere interactions will be determined. Suspension
microstructure will be correlated with the extent of shear-induced migration by
using 3-D confocal imaging and tracking to measure particle distribution
functions, cluster sizes, and velocity fluctuations during flow. Effects of
boundary conditions at channel walls will also be investigated by chemically
modifying the walls to change their surface energy.