* 1438126
* Probing Mechanical Biomarkers with Microacoustofluidics: A Fluid-Structure Interaction Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Tony Jun Huang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Costanzo, Francesco&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1438126&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed work is to study the
hydrodynamic interactions between deformable microparticles, and specifically
between a micro-bubble and a cell. The idea is to create a micro-bubble using a
laser next to the cell, and then use acoustic methods to obtain information
about the mechanical properties of the cell. Such information would be used
mainly for diagnostic purposes, but also for therapeutic purposes. This idea
that a cell's mechanical properties can be used as a biomarker for pathogenic
processes is currently being used to diagnose malaria, and there is some
evidence that mechanical biomarkers may be used to diagnose cancer. The proposed
work could lead directly from fluid dynamics research to applications. The
proposed research will lead to more effective, cheaper, and faster cell-based
on-chip diagnostic and therapeutic devices. As such, this research can have a
major impact on public health world-wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular
mechanical properties have been found to be valuable indicators for pathogenesis
and pathophysiology. This has led to the identification of a new class of
biomarkers: mechanical biomarkers that offer some advantages over traditional
biochemical biomarkers. While a number of mechanical biomarker-based
microfluidic devices have already been proposed in the literature, the full
potential of mechanical biomarkers in microfluidic-based diagnostics and
therapeutics has yet to be revealed. One reason is the fact that no techniques
are currently available for the quantitative assessment of cell deformability in
relation to the forces acting on them. Current approaches for estimating the
radiation forces on objects in streaming flows are based on classical solutions
for idealized geometries (typically spheres) and small deformation of elastic
inclusions in the flow. The proposed research will use computational techniques
based on the immersed finite element method to advance knowledge in these areas.
The goal is to relate cell deformability to the hydrodynamic forces imposed on a
cell or on a group of cells in a microfluidic device. The validation of the
proposed computational framework will be done against experiments with cancer
cells in an opto-thermally-generated and acoustically-activated surface bubbles
microfluidic device. The co-PIs propose to involve undergraduate students in
research and to leverage already existing initiatives at Penn State in order to
reach underrepresented minority students: the Women in Engineering Program and
the Multicultural Engineering Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Fluid Dynamics Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Instrument
Development for Biological Research (IDBR) Program of the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.