* 1438092
* Collaborative Research: Engineering salt marsh restoration to maximize denitrification - elevation and species interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Behzad Mortazavi, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 181,418.00

1438092 (Mortazavi) and 1438235 (Ortmann). Coastal wetlands represent a small
fraction of all wetland areas, but are unique as they also host more than a
significant fraction of the world's population. Coastal marsh ecosystems are
dynamically linked to human dwellings and industry, and the impact humans have
on these ecosystems can be considerable. This coupled human - marsh system has
important implications, as the marshes provide desirable ecosystem services such
as nutrient filtering, flood control, and carbon sequestration. Because of these
services and the loss of marshes through urbanization, restoration of marshes
has become an important tool in coastal management. Nitrogen (N) removal is an
important service of marshes, which contributes to the sustainability of coastal
ecosystems by mitigating eutrophication. Currently marshes are constructed with
the assumption that denitrification will contribute significantly to N removal
once vegetation is in place; however, studies suggest that only some of
desirable ecosystem services are restored by such efforts. Specific information
is missing from marsh restoration literature, which could be used to engineer
marshes that are more effective at N removal. This research specifically
addresses this issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
research is to elucidate the impact of species identity and marsh elevation on
the N removal capacity of restored marsh ecosystems to provide guidance in the
engineering of sustainable marsh ecosystem which also maximize N removal. To
achieve this objective the project addresses the following hypotheses: (i) rates
of N removal in Juncus romerianus are higher than in Spartina alterniflora
marshes (species effect), (ii) there exists an optimum marsh surface elevation
where N removal is maximized (elevation effect), and (iii) at this optimal
elevation, the marsh will be most resilient to increased nutrients (response to
elevated N input). These hypotheses will be addressed in the field as well as
with field-mesocosms in Alabama coastal marshes over a three-year period. This
approach enables us to manipulate marsh surface elevation with respect to mean
sea level to identify optimum conditions for N removal. Project results will be
used to develop specific guidelines for marsh engineering projects to ensure N
removal, an important ecosystem service, is maximized. Furthermore, a better
understanding of the vegetation-elevation-microbial community interactions,
providing fundamental knowledge about N cycling in coastal marshes, will be
achieved. The synthesis of results from the research will provide the necessary
data to inform restoration strategies, including sediment subsidy and species
selection, to optimize N removal, and thus mitigate eutrophication, by
engineered marshes. Coastal marshes provide important ecosystem services such as
filtering sediments, moderating flooding and protecting inland developments from
periodic storms, and provide nutrition and habitat for commercially important
resources. The research is significant because it will help advance our
understanding of a complex ecological system, and will help us refine efforts
for maximizing an ecosystem service (i.e. N removal) provided by engineered
marshes. The data collected during this project will be immediately applicable
to coastal managers and groups carrying out marsh reconstruction projects.
Results will disseminated to the local stakeholders including land managers,
local government decision makers, and residents. To place the findings in a
broader context, teaching material will be developed that can be used by the
education and outreach (E&amp;O) program of the Dauphin Island Sea Lab, known as
the Discovery Hall Programs (DHP), one of the largest coastal science E&amp;O
programs in the northern Gulf of Mexico region.