* 1438147
* Ultrafast multiexciton kinetics in solar photovoltaics beyond the Shockley-Queisser limit
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Chee Wei Wong, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/28/2015
* USD 332,170.00

Principal Investigator: Chee Wei Wong&lt;br/&gt;Number:
1438147&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential
source of pollution-free energy on earth. Solar cells for producing electricity
require materials that absorb the sun's energy and convert its photons to
electrons, a process called photovoltaics. To be competitive with fossil fuels,
the cost of solar photovoltaic (PV) systems must be reduced, which is realized
in part by increasing the solar energy conversion efficiency and by reducing the
cost of solar PV materials. Recently, new photovoltaic materials have been
discovered that harness the quantum physics behavior of inorganic semiconductor
compounds ordered at the nanoscale to increase the solar energy conversion
efficiency. The discovery of new and inexpensive materials for this next
generation of photovoltaic devices is enabled by fundamental understanding of
the interaction of light with these materials. The goal of this project is to
develop a fundamental understanding of quantum physics processes in
nanostructured photovoltaic materials which convert a single photon from light
into multiple electrons, and thus surpass the single electron Shockley Queisser
limit. The research will make use of advanced spectroscopic techniques which can
probe multiexciton generation processes at ultrafast scales. Educational
activities offered by the project focus on the development of a series of
teaching and laboratory modules on solar energy, nanoscience, and sustainable
energy, with content targeted separately to grade-school level students, low
income, college-bound high school students in the New York City area, and
undergraduate students at Columbia University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop
a fundamental understanding of multi-exciton generation in nanostructured
photovoltaic materials. The proposed research will study ultrafast multiexciton
kinetics and generation in zero-dimensional and surface-modified nanostructures,
as well as ultrafast multiexciton kinetics and collection in one-dimensional
nanostructures and assemblies. This information will be used to harness
multiexciton energy and electron transfer processes in nanostructured
photovoltaics for improved solar energy conversion efficiency. Super-continuum
ultrafast spectroscopy will be used to probe multiexciton kinetics and
multiexciton efficiencies in semiconducting nanocrystals, nanorods, and
nanostructures to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms. These studies will be
extended to examine exciton and electron transfer of nanostructures in
transparent high-mobility graphene electrode photovoltaics, using time- and
spectrally-resolved studies and fast exciton quenching through blinking
statistics of single nanostructures. Educational and outreach activities offered
by the project focus on the development and delivery of a series of teaching and
laboratory modules on solar energy, nanoscience, and sustainable energy, with
content targeted separately to grade-school level students, low income, college-
bound high school students in the New York City area, and undergraduate students
at Columbia University.