* 1438324
* Impacts of urbanization and climate change on the energy infrastructure of tropical coastal regions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Nazario Ramirez, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 375,835.00

1438324 (Gonzalez). This research has three objectives: a) investigate the
environmental and energy sustainability of urbanized tropical coastal systems;
b) engage and educate a broad audience on the sustainability of tropical coastal
areas; and c) create new data sets, modeling tools and best practice guides for
local stakeholders. The project will be led by the CUNY Remote Sensing Earth
System Institute, based at the City College of New York (CCNY), in partnership
with a long-term academic partner in Puerto Rico (University of Puerto Rico-
Mayaguez), joining efforts with NOAA, and local and regional stakeholders in the
Caribbean and in Puerto Rico. It will be a trans-regional educational and
training resource through developing data, products, and educational strategies
to engage students and the general public on the subject of sustainability of
sensitive tropical coastal regions. The program will be applied directly in the
Caribbean, Puerto Rico and specifically in San Juan City, a coastal location
that offers excellent opportunities for knowledge creation on energy and
environmental sustainability. Tropical coastal areas contain almost one-third of
the total world population and are highly vulnerable to Earth's changing
climate. The rapid growth of these locations to accommodate growing populations
and economic development is manifested in significant land use changes for
urbanization. These two combined processes - climate change &amp; urbanization-
present a compounded risk to the well-being of the coupled human-natural system
in these sensitive regions. This is the origin for this research effort guided
by the fundamental science question: How is the energy sustainability of
urbanized tropical coastal systems being modified by human interventions and
climate change? Energy demands in tropical coastal regions are directly linked
to warming environments due to the large demands from the built environment for
human comfort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research setting of the Caribbean,
and in San Juan, Puerto Rico, there is clear evidence of a warming regional
environment and local impacts of rapid urbanization. A multi-disciplinary
observation and modeling framework will be organized in which regional climate
records and global climate predictions are dynamically downscaled to the region
of interest using high resolution regional climate models taking into
consideration the surrounding ocean areas, and their interplay with the regional
and local climate and landscape. The large scale coupling is extremely important
to capture signals of the Pacific and the Atlantic Oceans that result in
Caribbean sea surface temperature modulation. The energy variable will be
investigated with climate and energy records and using state-of-the-art building
energy models at the city scale, coupled to the climate models. The modeling
will be complemented by a regional and local data integration effort that will
draw from existing environmental networks from multiple sources and from new
data to be gathered from remote sensing capabilities to quantify environmental
variables relevant to the energy activity. The detailed modeling approaches and
integrated observations will be coupled with methodologies to involve key
stakeholders.