* 1438099
* Innovative Dual-Rotor Wind Turbine (DRWT) Designs for Improved Turbine Performance and Wind Farm Efficiency
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Principal Investigator: Hui Hu&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1438099&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Innovative Dual-Rotor Wind Turbine (DRWT) Designs for Improved Turbine
Performance and Wind Farm Efficiency&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although wind turbines are widely used for
conversion of wind energy to electrical power, there are still many
opportunities for improvements in their design and operation to increase the
efficiency of wind energy harvesting, and the reduction in cost that results
from these improvements. A key area for improvement is the design of the turbine
rotor blade. Structural, manufacturing, and transportation constraints in
utility-scale wind turbines lead to aerodynamically imperfect blade designs,
especially in the root region near the hub joining the rotor blade. Root loss is
estimated to cause about 5% loss in wind energy extraction for a single wind
turbine. This problem is compounded in wind farms containing many wind turbines,
where mixing of air creates a wake. Wake losses in wind farms resulting from the
ingestion of upstream turbine wakes by downstream turbines range between 8 to
40% of wind energy harvesting efficiency, depending on onshore vs. off shore
wind farm location, turbine layout, and atmospheric stability conditions. The
goal of this research is to conduct a comprehensive theoretical and experimental
study to explore a novel dual-rotor wind turbine (DRWT) concept to mitigate
these losses for improved turbine performance and wind farm efficiency. In this
dual-rotor concept, a smaller set of turbine blades is positioned near the
larger blades to reduce the root loss and improve wind turbine efficiency using
aerodynamic principles. This novel dual-rotor wind turbine configuration will be
studied experimentally using scale models in a wind tunnel. Experimental studies
will be complimented by advanced computer simulations to identify the best
design for the dual rotor system. With respect to education and broadening
participation, course modules developed from these research efforts will be
incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate mechanical and aerospace
engineering courses at Iowa State University (ISU). Existing programs at ISU
will be used to recruit students from under-represented groups in engineering
for participation in the research project. The project results will also be used
to prepare seminars and demonstrations on Renewable Energy and Wind Turbine
Technology for presentation at local K-12 schools to increase public awareness
about recent advances in wind energy. The project will also continue existing
collaborations with wind turbine manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural, manufacturing, and transportation
constraints in utility-scale wind turbines lead to aerodynamically imperfect
blade designs, especially in the root region near the hub joining the rotor
blade. Root loss is estimated to cause about 5% loss in wind energy extraction
for a single wind turbine. The goal of this research is to conduct a
comprehensive theoretical, numerical, and experimental study to explore a novel
dual-rotor wind turbine (DRWT) concept to mitigate root losses for improved
turbine performance and wind farm efficiency. The proposed DRWT concept will
employ a secondary, smaller, co-axial rotor that is intended to mitigate losses
incurred in the root region of the main rotor by using an aerodynamically
optimized secondary rotor, and also mitigate wake losses in wind farms through
rapid mixing of turbine wake and increased upper-layer flow entrainment. The
integration of experimental and numerical modeling studies will enable a first-
principles based evaluation of the proposed DRWT concept. Numerical simulations
will first be used to design an aerodynamically optimum DRWT. Aerodynamic
performance of the optimized DRWT will be investigated for operation of a single
turbine and then a turbine array sited in non-homogenous atmospheric boundary
layer (ABL) flows. Towards this end, the large-scale Aerodynamic/Atmospheric
Boundary Layer (AABL) wind tunnel at Iowa State University (ISU) will be used
for the experimental study. In addition to measuring turbine power outputs and
dynamic wind loads acting on model DRWTs, a high-resolution Particle Image
Velocimetry (PIV) system will measure the flow field to characterize turbine
wake-vortex system dynamics relative to conventional single-rotor wind turbines.
Highly resolved Large Eddy Simulations (LES) will be also performed in
coordination with the experimental study to elucidate the underlying flow
physics. With respect to broader impacts in education and outreach, the project
results will also be used to prepare seminars and demonstrations on Renewable
Energy and Wind Turbine Technology for presentation at local K-12 schools to
increase public awareness about recent advances in wind energy. The project will
also continue existing collaborations with wind turbine manufacturers.