* 1438584
* Acquisition of a Rheometer for Interdisciplinary Rheology Research at New Mexico State University
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Elba Serrano, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 98,758.00

This is a small equipment proposal to purchase a rheometer (Discovery Series
HR-2). Obtaining this instrument will advance emerging and established research
at New Mexico State University (NMSU). The availability of a high-end instrument
that can give accurate measurements for fluids that are more complex than water
(e.g., polymers, pastes, biological fluids, suspensions etc.) will foster a
rheology-centered community among the materials engineering research strengths
at NMSU, and form the core of a multidisciplinary "Viscoelastic Measurement
Laboratory?. Using the instrument will also support a number of research faculty
who are working between the disciplines of fluid dynamics of complex fluids,
chemistry, biological sciences, and engineering. NMSU is a Hispanic-serving
Institution; therefore, the number of underrepresented minorities in STEM is
quite large. Upon installing the instrument for use in research, the co-PIs will
implement educational activities for undergraduates and graduate students with
particular engagement of underrepresented minorities. The rheometer will be used
in a variety of undergraduate and graduate classes. The equipment will also be
used to provide technical workshops for graduate students through the NMSU NIH
RISE program, reach out to the New Mexico Farm and Ranch Heritage Museum, and to
improve the interaction of faculty members with local industries in food
processing, petrochemicals, refinery, plastics, and composites manufacturing -
all of which impact regional economy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The departments to
be directly influenced include chemical engineering, food science and
technology, chemistry and biochemistry, and biology. The research projects to be
studied with the rheometer include (i) the dynamics of polymer chains during
asymmetric phase separation, which is controlled by viscoelasticity, (ii)
rheology of cells sorted through flow cytometry, (iii) the rheology of healthy
and cancerous laboratory-cultured cells, (iv) rheology of mechanosensory organs
and engineered neural cultures, and (v) interfacial rheology of a new emulsifier
for food products derived from cotton seed meal.