* 1438813
* EAGER: A Low-Cost Integrated Agent-based Modeling and Physical Computing Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 12/31/2018
* USD 144,451.00

The 21st century workforce needs to have high levels of technological literacy,
including skills ranging from computer use to software and hardware development.
There are many barriers to the development of such skills including the high
cost and inaccessibility of computing platforms, the relative lack of curriculum
to learn computing, and the opportunity for learners to apply these skills in
informal ways before using them in the workforce. In particular, while the cost
of software development is decreasing, and curriculum for software development
are beginning to emerge, there are extremely few learner-centric environments
that allow people to explore the connection between technology software and
hardware. This project modifies an existing, proven, learner-friendly software
environment called NetLogo to run on cheap $25 computers instead of expensive
desktop computers. In addition, the project will develop and test curriculum for
youth to learn about the connections between hardware and software by building
circuits that connect to these computers. The project will likely help increase
opportunities to learn about the connection between hardware and software, due
to the low cost and increasing popularity of these inexpensive computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project rests in the
technical development of this novel hardware/software environment, in studying
whether and how agent-based modelling platforms can be used to support learners
in computational thinking, and in documenting the affordances of the single-
board computing platform for teaching computer science and engineering
principles at the intersection between hardware and software. In addition to
porting the NetLogo programming language to the Raspbian operating system for
the Raspberry Pi single board computer, the project will develop curricula
(covering basic programming, circuits, and agent-based modelling), and conduct
research on how curricula to teach these concepts should be developed in the
future. The thirty hour curriculum will be reviewed by experts, and pilot tested
through two rounds of design trials in the lab and one field trial with young
learners. These results are expected to inform both the field of learning
sciences and the field of human-computer interaction research; and have broader
impact through the dissemination of the curricula and bundling of the software
with the Raspberry Pi low cost computers.