* 1438864
* Collaborative Research:  CyberWorkshops:  Resources and Strategies for Teaching Cybersecurity in Computer Science (CReST)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Blair Taylor, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 127,028.00

CyberWorkshops: Resources and Strategies for Teaching Cybersecurity in Computer
Science (CReST)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between
Tennessee Tech University and Towson University. The project team will address
cybersecurity workforce issues by improving faculty expertise in cybersecurity.
This will be accomplished by a series of workshops for computer science faculty
that will be taught by cybersecurity faculty. The workshops will provide faculty
with teaching resources and prepare them to incorporate cybersecurity concepts
into their courses. The project will be funded by the Division of Graduate
Education through the Cybercorps:SFS program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modelled
after the successful Tapestry project for high school CS teachers (developed at
the University of Virginia), through a series of workshops across the nation,
the project team will develop a community of trainers (faculty in cybersecurity)
with skills and resources to organize professional development workshops for
computer science faculty. CReST workshop participants and cybersecurity faculty
will share security integration strategies, research-based practices, and field-
tested security resources. In the context of this project, workshops will focus
on dissemination of course materials developed as part of the Security
Injections @ Towson and the SecKnitKit projects. The project will also
facilitate dissemination of other effective security educational resources
developed by security faculty across nation. The direct effect will build a
community among CS faculty teaching security and significantly increase faculty
awareness and understanding of secure coding concepts. This will lead to an
increase in the number of students with cybersecurity knowledge and skills,
increase student ability to apply secure coding principles , and increase
student awareness of security issues in core computer science subject matters
such as software engineering, database, networks and operating systems. Project
evaluation will include pre-workshop and post-workshop surveys, workshop
observations, and aggregation across all workshop participants.