* 1438266
* Houseplants Genetically Modified for Degradation of Common Carcinogenic Indoor Air Pollutants
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* long Zhang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 342,028.00

1438266 (Strand). Home air can contain gaseous carcinogens at levels that exceed
health standards for indoor environments. This project will transform a common
houseplant with genes normally expressed in mammals, that are involved in the
detoxification of air pollutants, including benzene, dichlorobenzene,
chloroform, and acrolein, and with bacterial genes for the degradation of
formaldehyde. These transgenic houseplants are expected to have the capability
to help decrease the levels of carcinogens common in indoor air. The
investigators will test the plants' efficacy under ambient conditions and their
biosafety. This project will add to the arsenal of methods for decreasing
carcinogens in the home, which make up a significant fraction of human exposures
to cancer risk. This research will also clarify the widely varying rates
observed by labs working on houseplant effects on air borne
pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will introduce students and faculty
to important techniques that are relatively new to the environmental engineering
field. Results will be disseminated by presentations at national and
international environmental engineering conferences. A web site will be prepared
to showcase the results of the project. Underrepresented groups at the K-12 and
undergraduate level will be reached through the minority science and engineering
program, MESP, and the mathematics, science, engineering achievement program,
MESA, at the University of Washington.