* 1438564
* The transformation of existing green wall technology to provide urban heat rejection infrastructure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Graeme Berlyn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2017
* USD 314,960.00

1438564 (Felson). Green walls provide benefits that have fostered the growth of
a new industry as they can passively moderate exterior wall surface temperatures
and thereby reduce building heating and cooling loads, attenuate surface
temperature variations and solar exposure that degrade exterior wall finishes,
and provide ecosystem service benefits including air pollution and particulate
removal, mitigation of urban heat island effects, and urban wildlife habitats.
To date, these benefits do not offset the costs of green walls, and therefore,
the market for green walls remains limited. This research will address problems
that must be resolved to transform existing green wall technology into an active
technology for process heat rejection (i.e., principally, here, for chilled
water generation), and thereby expand the market to a wide range of applications
from households to institutions and industry. The objective is to provide a
sustainable alternative to wet cooling tower technology that maintains the
benefits of existing green walls, employing their methods of construction and
operation, while avoiding the shortcomings of wet cooling tower technologies
(i.e., single use and contamination of cooling water). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators are targeting the creation of a green wall heat rejection
technology with integrated water biofiltration capabilities and a mathematical
transport model to simulate the thermal and biofiltration performance of the
technology for experimental and design purposes. The performance of these
"thermoGreenWallTM" (tGW) systems will be investigated through coordinated
experimental and modeling methods using lab-scale tGW panels and full-scale
prototypes and a tanks-in-series model developed by the PIs. The lab-scale tGW
panels will be constructed as mesocosm experiments to systematically investigate
plant/substrate compatibility/productivity (e.g., using a root area meter and
destructive sampling for root biomass determination), plant health (e.g., using
chlorophyll fluorescence), water biofiltration methods, performance, and
interaction with plant/substrate systems, and heat rejection transport
mechanisms and performance.