* 1438286
* XPS: Full: CCA: Enhancing Scalability and Energy Efficiency in Extreme-Scale Parallel Systems through Application-Aware Communication Reduction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* David Lilja, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 666,000.00

The high-performance computing systems available today are far from meeting the
performance and energy efficiency targets necessary to satisfy the needs of
future computing systems. With processor clock frequencies leveling off over the
past several years, the only way to achieve the expected levels of performance
within the same physical size and the same or lower energy requirements is to
have more processors computing in parallel. However, increasing concurrency
among the processors increases inter-processor communication, which then becomes
the critical bottleneck. This work proposes an application-centric approach to
minimize communication-induced overheads in order to enable extreme scalability.
The implicit fault tolerance of future parallel applications can be exploited to
mitigate the degraded locality and increased communication costs of highly
concurrent systems while ensuring an acceptable level of application output
quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work specifically focuses on (i) how data to
be transferred can be compressed, and possibly discarded, and (ii) how
communication and synchronization can be avoided or relaxed in certain
application contexts, all while maintaining an acceptable level of output
quality for the specific application. The intellectual merit of this work stems
from its exploration of cross-layer communication and synchronization techniques
that exploit application characteristics to significantly reduce the cost of
communication and synchronization. This approach will enable a wider array of
applications to exploit parallelism and thereby increase their scalability. This
work will enable extreme scalability of domain-specific applications executing
on large-scale computing systems by quantifying the costs and benefits
associated with application-aware communication and synchronization, designing
application-aware scalable communication and synchronization primitives,
developing software to support application-aware scalable communication, and
designing new micro-architectural and system supports for application-aware
scalable communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research
lies in significantly reducing the costs of communication and synchronization
for a wide spectrum of applications and consequently enabling new levels of
parallel scalability and energy efficiency across a range of application
programs. This project will produce open source tools for analyzing and
enhancing the scalability of parallel applications, and will provide new
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students to participate in
cutting-edge computer systems research.