* 1438518
* Tuning Activated Carbon Nanofiber Nonwoven Membranes for Selective Sorption of Micropollutants.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Allison MacKay, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 337,617.00

1438518&lt;br/&gt;Vadas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuning Activated Carbon Nanofiber
Nonwoven Membranes for Selective Sorption of
Micropollutants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing demand for water, in the
face of declining high quality source availability, has led to the development
of alternative sources, such as reclaimed wastewater, that contain low-levels of
contaminants, or micropollutants. Many micropollutants are not amenable to
removal by conventional water and wastewater treatment systems. Available
tertiary treatments that target micropollutant properties have high energy
requirements, poor scalability, and/or byproduct formation. Advances in material
processing to produce activated carbon nanofiber nonwoven materials, coupled
with innovations in chemical synthesis techniques, provide opportunities to
develop innovative water treatment technologies that are based on sorptive
processes that: (i) are not limited by mass transfer kinetics; (ii) are targeted
to the physico-chemical properties of polar and/or ionic micropollutants, and
(iii) have high sorptive capacity per unit mass and are selective towards target
contaminants. The activated carbon nanofiber nonwoven material has a high
specific surface area externally available which overcomes mass transfer
limitations, while its macroporosity enables high fluxes of water. In addition,
the material can be surface-functionalized to enhance sorption of neutral,
cationic, or anionic organic or inorganic micropollutants. The ultimate goal of
this research is to identify pathways to the creation of a novel high surface
area sorbent with tunable surface chemistry for use in water treatment. The PIs
will develop a teaching module on water treatment for middle- and high-school
teachers participating in the University of Connecticut daVinci Program.
Teachers will continue to disseminate these concepts with students in their
classes. PIs will continue engaging student researchers as they mentor graduate
and undergraduate researchers. Students will have a unique opportunity to work
with a guiding PI team with expertise in environmental engineering, chemical
engineering, and synthetic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
generate a sorbent with high surface area, high flux and tunable surface
chemistry. Systematic studies of fabrication and activation procedures will
guide design of materials for specific sorbent applications based on pore
distributions. The approach to surface modification explored here enables new
protocols to functionalize nanofibrous carbons with specific physico-chemical
properties, while maintaining the structural integrity of the material. In
addition, contaminant specificity is enhanced due to the defined pore structure
and adjacent functional groups attached. This opens the door to developing low-
profile point-of-use treatment devices with modular assembly to target multiple
contaminants. Three major research activities will be pursued to achieve the
objective. Task 1: Optimize the conditions of experimental ACNFN material
fabrication to enhance mechanical properties. Fabrication parameters, including
solvent vapor exposure and calendaring to reinforce fiber bonding, and pyrolysis
temperature and activation technique on ACNFN material porosity and strength
will be examined using electron microscopy, porosimetry, nitrogen adsorption,
tensile strength and elastic modulus. Task 2: Functionalize the surface of ACNFN
with groups targeted to micropollutants of differing physico-chemical properties
(e.g. quaternary ammonium for anionic organic compounds or chelating groups for
cationic inorganic compounds) through the use of novel derivatization
methodologies (e.g. osmylation or ozonation). Task 3: Characterize both the
equilibrium capacity and sorption kinetics of our newly generated ACNFN sorbent
in synthetic and real waters. The focus is on two representative
micropollutants, ibuprofen and Cd, selected based on contaminant concern, the
ionization state at the working pH (6-8), the ease of quantification, and the
primary interaction mechanism with potential sorption sites.