* 1438834
* Targeted Infusion Project - Upgrade Physics Lab Technology Infrastructure and Develop Supplemental Instruction and Summer undergraduate research
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Ayivi Huisso, Florida Memorial University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 377,366.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Florida Memorial University will
implement a Targeted Infusion Project entitled: Physics Laboratory Technology
Infrastructure Enhancement and Summer Undergraduate Research. This project
involves the development of pedagogical methodologies for providing instruction
in physics. The aim is to engage students in an interactive learning process
using digital media to stimulate learning and comprehension. This project will
aid in the recruitment, retention, and preparation for graduate school and the
workforce of physics, chemistry, biology and mathematics majors at the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the teaching and learning
process moves from the traditional method of instruction to a blended method of
computer-based, web and internet assisted instruction. Specific objectives
include: upgrading the physics laboratory; establishing a faculty and student
led learning community via supplemental instruction; providing tutoring sessions
in Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics and Physics; and providing intensive problem
solving sessions for Algebra, Pre-calculus, Trigonometry, Chemistry and Physics
courses. Summer research experiences will enable undergraduate students to
develop critical thinking skills and work with a mentor.