* 1438198
* Fundamental Understanding of Ionic Insertion/Extraction Mechanism of Organic Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Chunsheng Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 11/30/2018
* USD 117,000.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Fundamental Understanding of Ionic
Insertion/Extraction Mechanism on Organic
Electrodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Huixin He (Lead)&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1438493&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Rutgers University - Newark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Chunsheng Wang&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1438198&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Maryland, College Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a strong need to develop
batteries for storage of electricity that are inexpensive and use sustainable
materials. Rechargeable batteries based on organic materials such as crystalline
salts of croconic acid are potentially inexpensive and can be fabricated from
sustainable resources, but suffer from low power and eventual failure after many
re-charging cycles. The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of ion movement during the charging cycle in these materials. This
information can then be used to rationally design organic batteries with
improved energy capacity and long cycle life. The approach will make use of
advanced techniques for synthesis and performance characterization of organic
nanowire batteries that will be complimented by powerful molecular models to
predict ion movement. An interdisciplinary team from two universities will be
involved in this research effort. The interdisciplinary nature of this research
will provide students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels with
training in the high-tech fields electrochemical energy systems, nanotechnology,
and computational modeling. To broaden participation, activities include an
outreach program to provide high school students with a summer research
experience, and a workshop for science teachers on sustainable energy topics
from school districts in low-income areas of New
Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic
materials for electrochemical energy storage are potentially inexpensive and can
be fabricated from sustainable resources, but suffer from low energy density and
cycling failure. The potential to overcome these limitations has not been
realized, due in part to an incomplete knowledge of ion insertion/extraction
processes within the organic materials. The overall goal of this project is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the ion insertion and extraction
mechanism by elucidating the relationships for the thermodynamics and kinetics
of ion insertion/extraction processes for lithium, magnesium, and sodium ions.
These relationships will be obtained through density functional theory (DFT) and
molecular modeling, in situ electrochemical characterization measurements, and
characterization of organic crystal structures. This will approach will be
complimented by synthesis and mechanical strain evolution measurements of
crystalline croconic acid disodium salt nanowires of controlled size and shape.
The fundamental understanding gained from this research can potentially enable
the rational design organic materials ordered at the nanoscale and microscale
for sustainable organic batteries with high energy density and long cycle life.
An interdisciplinary team from two universities will be involved in this
research effort. The interdisciplinary nature of this research will provide
students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels with training in
electrochemical energy systems, nanotechnology, and computational modeling. To
broaden participation, activities include an outreach program to provide high
school students with a summer research experience, and a workshop for science
teachers on sustainable energy topics from school districts in low-income areas
of New Jersey.