* 1438779
* Probing and directing colloidal migration by sculpting chemical micro-environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Todd Squires, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2018
* USD 318,784.00

CBET 1438779&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many materials of industrial and biological
importance consist of small colloidal particles suspended in a liquid. The
particles are so small that they move in response to various forces exerted on
them by their surroundings. This project will study diffusiophoresis, which is
the motion of colloidal particles in response to concentration variations of a
dissolved solute such as salt in the liquid. A microfluidic-based device will be
developed that can create and maintain solute concentration gradients in a
liquid. Then, the motion of colloidal particles in the liquid will be observed
directly and correlated with the direction and magnitude of the concentration
gradient. A variety of particles and different kinds of solute concentration
gradients will be examined. Although there have been theories developed to
explain diffusiophoresis, there are few experiments available to test those
theories. The results will help scientists and engineers formulate and process
colloidal suspensions that are used in a variety of industries. The project will
provide research training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
and will engage elementary school students in demonstrations of engineering
principles and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although colloidal
diffusiophoresis plays a central role in industrial and coating processes, and
is common around equilibrating or reacting surfaces, it is less well understood
than other migration phenomena such as electrophoresis. Direct measurements of
diffusiophoretic mobilities are confounded by the challenges of establishing
strong, stable, convection-free gradients in macroscopic systems. This project
will use a microfluidic device that has hydrogel micro-window membranes
integrated into its channel walls. The hydrogel windows are permeable to solute
and solvent diffusion. Diffusion through the windows will allow spatial and
temporal solute gradients to be established and maintained across selected
channels of the device. An interferometric technique will be used to measure
solute concentration, and colloidal diffusiophoretic mobility will be measured
by direct observation of particle motion. The device will also be equipped to
measure electrophoretic mobility of the same colloid. New phoretic phenomena
will be identified and exploited for direct assembly of structure soft
materials.