* 1438263
* SusChEM: Long chain hydrocarbons from CO2 and electricity via genetic modification of a chemolithoautotrophic bacterium
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Alan West, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2017
* USD 393,932.00

Principal Investigator: Scott Banta&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1438263&lt;br/&gt;Title:
SusChEM: Long chain hydrocarbons from CO2 and electricity via genetic
modification of a chemolithoautotrophic bacterium&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Columbia University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is a national need to develop
carbon-neutral processes for the production of liquid transportation fuels. This
project will develop a new process to turn carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, and
renewable electricity into liquid fuels and chemicals using a unique
microorganism integrated into an electrochemical device. Particular efforts will
be made to dramatically increase the production of the liquid hydrocarbon
heptadecane by genetically engineering the metabolism of the microorganism.
Genetic engineering tools will also be developed to make the genetic
modifications permanent, which will create robust cell lines capable of making
fuels and chemicals in an industrial process using electricity and atmospheric
carbon dioxide as the feedstock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop a new electrofuels platform for producing hydrocarbons from
atmospheric carbon dioxide using electricity. The unique electrofuels platform
consists of two integrated reactors. The first is a bioreactor containing
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans cells which are able to grow at low pH using
carbon dioxide as their sole carbon source and the oxidation of ferrous to
ferric iron as an energy source. The ferric iron is sent to an electrochemical
reactor which efficiently reduces the ferric iron back to ferrous iron. The
combined reactor system produces biomass from electricity, water and air. The
cells have been genetically modified with two different exogenous metabolic
pathways for chemical and/or fuel production, and preliminary results show that
cells can be transiently transformed to produce small amounts of heptadecane
from carbon dioxide. In order to advance this new technology, it will be
critical to increase the production of heptadecane and/or other long chain
hydrocarbons. This will be accomplished using co-transformations to transiently
over-express or knock-down the expression of key metabolic genes to determine
strategies to direct the flux of carbon into the production of the fuels.
Further development of this technology will require permanent transformation of
exogenous genes into the chromosome of these cells. New methods will be
developed to edit the A. ferrooxidans genome to enable the chromosomal
integration of genes and pathways into this unique host cell system. The best
new cell lines will be characterized in the integrated electrofuels platform so
that the improvements in efficiency obtained from these maneuvers can be
quantified in terms of yield of fuel per kW-hr of electricity utilized. Through
these research activities, the project will train a Columbia University graduate
student, who will also help to develop content for a distant-learning program to
build the capacity of West African experts in the field of sustainable energy
systems and solutions. Topics from this course will also be integrated into two
graduate level elective courses at Columbia University as well as other outreach
activities in the local community.