* 1438218
* SusChEM: Waste Valorization through Hydrothermal Catalytic Conversion  of Carboxylic Acids/Esters to Hydrocarbon Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Timothy Strathmann, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 10/31/2015
* USD 348,124.00

1438218&lt;br/&gt;PI: Strathmann, Timothy J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SusChEM: Waste
Valorization through Hydrothermal Catalytic Conversion of Carboxylic
Acids/Esters to Hydrocarbon Fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Population growth and
economic development are spurring increases in demand for new sources of energy
and chemical precursors while simultaneously producing growing quantities of
waste. Concurrently, there is growing agreement that waste streams should be
viewed as valuable renewable resources rather than economic burdens. Current
wastewater treatment operations are energy intensive, and ~3 % of electrical
energy in the U.S. is used for wastewater treatment despite the fact that
wastewater contains (1) organic materials possessing several times the energy
needed for treatment, and (2) nutrients that can be used as a source to
cultivate many times more organic biomass (e.g., through algae cultivation).
When viewed in a biorefinery concept where the value of individual process
streams is maximized, wastewater treatment provides an opportunity to produce
energy and valuable chemicals while meeting treatment goals. Environmental
engineers are uniquely positioned to play a central role in valorizing waste
streams, developing new technologies that meet environmental quality goals while
simultaneously recovering and producing energy, platform chemical feed stocks,
and nutrients. The overall objective of the project is to advance hydrothermal
catalytic technologies for converting waste-derived carboxylic acid/ester feed-
stocks to hydrocarbon fuels. Development of economical technologies for
valorizing waste streams has significant potential to transform waste treatment
practices. Improved technologies for conversion of biomass-derived organics in
water would also have broader impacts for the nascent lignocellulosic and algal
biorefining industries, where feedstock dewatering/drying is a major hurdle to
economic viability. This project will contribute to the training of at least two
graduate students and will be used as a vehicle for recruiting and mentoring
underrepresented minority undergraduate researchers. In addition, project
participants will contribute to an environmental engineering and sustainability
camp for high school girls that the I directs, at the
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work supports larger collaborative
efforts targeting development of integrated biological-catalytic pathways that
are potentially transformative for valorization of municipal, agricultural, and
industrial waste streams, including large quantities of organic wastes expected
from proposed cellulosic biorefineries. Conversion of feedstocks in water is
ideal because it eliminates the need for cost- and energy-prohibitive
dewatering/drying steps. This study will be one of the first to focus on
developing catalysts capable of sustained activity for both deoxygenation of
waste-derived carboxylic acids/esters and in situ production of hydrogen to meet
process needs. Proposed work will also improve understanding of the mechanisms
responsible for catalyst deactivation and identify preventative and regeneration
strategies for sustaining catalyst activity. A series of tasks were outlined to
include examine catalysts with different combinations of lower-cost primary and
secondary metals and to be compared for their dual functionality (acid/ester
deoxygenation and in situ hydrogen generation). The most promising catalyst
formulations will be extensively characterized, and their activity, longevity
and deactivation mechanisms will be studied in detail under continuous-flow
conditions in a packed bed reactor with both model compounds and waste-derived
feedstock?s. Experimental results will be used as input for techno-economic and
life cycle analyses to evaluate valorization potential and environmental
sustainability.