* 1438280
* Direct and Embodied Ecological Impacts across the Fullerene Life Cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Anna Christina Tyler, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,854.00

PI: Babbitt, Callie W. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1438280&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid pace of innovation in engineered
nanomaterials (ENM) has led to a very large growth in new applications that take
advantage of the unique properties of these materials. Fullerenes (carbonaceous
ENM, e.g. 60-carbon nanospheres) are used in diverse applications, ranging from
biomedical science (e.g., drug delivery), cosmetics (e.g., free radical
'scavenging'), to renewable energy systems (e.g., polymer photovoltaic cells).
However, the impact of fullerenes on the natural environment is poorly
understood, particularly as the fullerenes, like other ENMs, can undergo
significant changes over their life cycle, changes that can affect their manner
of transport and partitioning between environmental compartments. This proposal
will develop a life-cycle analysis of fullerene materials by considering two
diverse pathways of fullerene utilization: renewable energy (photovoltaics) and
personal health (cosmetic creams). The PI and Co-PIs will utilize an ecosystem
assessment approach and use toxicity data for a life-cycle assessment that will
compare the eco-toxicity impact from the totality ('embodied') of upstream
production of fullerene to that of the 'direct' eco-toxicity of the materials,
when they are released into the environment. A successful outcome can inform
sustainable ENM process design, material handling, disposal practices, and help
guide policy and decision-making. The proposal also has a varied and strong
outreach and educational plan, especially the incorporation of opportunities for
underrepresented K-12 students to engage in sustainable nanotechnology research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposal will address key issues about
life cycle impact of fullerene-based materials, which will be translatable to
life cycle assessments (LCAs) for other ENMs as well. They propose to create new
life cycle metrics that can account for systems-level impact of fullerenes on
select ecosystem functions by combining laboratory microcosm studies of
freshwater ecosystems under fullerene exposure with emerging life cycle
accounting techniques for ecosystem services. This data will enable the
investigators to assess the eco-toxicity impact from 'embodied' versus 'direct'
eco-toxicity of the materials. The end goal of this research is to create a
comprehensive life cycle assessment of fullerene ecological impact that reflects
realistic variability of fullerene materials, life cycle stages, and end uses.
The ability to distinguish between direct and embodied ecological eco-toxicities
will enable prioritization of life-cycle stages and intervention strategies that
have the highest opportunity for environmental improvement. Outcomes from this
effort can inform environmentally low-impact fullerene production methods,
identify risks associated with fullerene-containing products at end-of-life,
enable proactive policy-making for ENMs.