* 1438112
* Characterizing Fluid Properties for Micro/Nano Droplet Using High-Q Whispering Gallery Modes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sunny Jung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 371,634.00

CBET 1438112&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a new method to
measure the fluid properties of tiny liquid droplets by using light to deform
the shape of the drop. The method involves using a laser and an optical fiber to
inject photons into the drop. These photons form a whispering gallery mode,
which is an optical wave that is reflected by the droplet interface and
circulates near the equator of the drop. The radiation pressure from the optical
wave causes the interface to bulge, which, in turn, causes a change in the
frequency of the whispering gallery mode. By detecting the change in frequency,
extraordinarily small changes in the shape of the drop can be measured. These
shape changes can then be used to deduce the surface tension of the fluid
interface and the viscosity of the internal fluid. There are no other comparable
methods for measuring these properties in micron-size drops. Thus, the project
will provide scientists and engineers with a new tool for measuring physical
properties that can be applied to colloidal systems, emulsions, aerosols and
other suspensions that are formed in many manufacturing processes and biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of high-Q whispering gallery modes
within the liquid drops will be established through optical spectrum
measurements. The optical force that induces drop deformation will be
experimentally confirmed and characterized. Drop deformation will be determined
by measuring shifts in the whispering gallery mode resonance frequency. Results
will be verified by measuring deformation with white light interferometry that
is capable of detecting interface movement with nanometer scale resolution. The
roles of surface tension and viscosity will be investigated by comparing the
measured drop deformation and rate of deformation with boundary element
solutions of the Stokes equations for the drops. Experiments will be carried out
using simple fluids such as water and silicone oils. A system consisting of
nanoparticles suspended in liquid will be characterized to simulate whispering
gallery mode induced drop deformation in a more complex fluid.