* 1438396
* Collaborative Research: Validating an Innovative Technology Classroom Observation Protocol (IT-COP) in High School Science Classrooms
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Caroline Parker, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 529,225.00

Integration of technology aligned with authentic science applications can help
teachers address the focus on real-world science and engineering practices in
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) while also engaging students and
enhancing their learning. However, few existing science classroom observation
protocols examine the impact of this 'innovative' technology use in the
classroom, and none measure the quality of technology implementation and its
alignment with performance measures from the NGSS. Building on previous NSF-
supported research, this study will develop the Innovative Technology Classroom
Observation Protocol (IT-COP) to measure the impact of innovative technology
integration on high school science teaching.

Co-led by an experienced team at Education Development Center and University of
Maryland Center for Environmental Science, this study consists of designing and
validating the IT-COP and creating a companion mobile app for data collection
along with an online How-To Guide to support its use by other researchers and
evaluators. The framework of the IT-COP centers on technology types (STEM
workplace technologies not common in the classroom; ubiquitous technologies that
are common in the classroom and beyond, and instructional classroom
technologies); alignment with science, engineering and mathematical practices,
pedagogical practices relevant to these standards; and authentic STEM contexts.
The IT-COP will be piloted in classrooms that serve underrepresented students
with a wide range of access to technology tools. This research and resulting
tool will provide the foundation for future work on complementary measures of
student learning aligned with high-quality integration of technology and may
serve as a teacher professional development resource.