* 1438416
* Municipal Solid Waste Leachate Organic Matter Generation and Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Debra Reinhart, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 371,410.00

CBET-1438416 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the management of a
particularly challenging constituent of leachate from landfills, leachate
organic matter (LOM), with the goal of reducing the long-term risks and costs
associated with landfill operation. Through this research, for the first time,
information will be provided that may lead to the control of LOM that passes
through biological treatment systems. Further, by providing information
regarding the potential for natural systems to assimilate low level
contributions of non-biodegradable LOM from closed landfills, society may be
relieved from long-term financial burdens of landfill post-closure care (PCC). A
better understanding of LOM fate and behavior can provide regulators with the
information needed to confidently approve reducing or terminating landfill PCC.
The proposed research has clear societal benefits associated with reduced cost
and risk of landfills, a greater understanding of leachate discharges to the
environment, and more sustainable solid waste
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the chemical nature
of leachate organic matter (LOM) to better understand the humification of
landfilled waste and the fate of discharged LOM to the environment after in situ
landfill treatment, co-treatment at a Waste Water Treatment Plant, or on-site
biological treatment. The hypothesis is that recalcitrant LOM production is
associated with specific components of solid waste, therefore the avoidance of
these components in future landfills could result in enhanced leachate
treatability and reduced treatment cost. It is further hypothesized that the
consequences of discharging LOM in treated leachate from existing landfills can
be attenuated through passive sunlight-driven photolysis. Specific research
questions to be addressed include the following: (1) which waste components
contribute to recalcitrant LOM; (2) can we use advanced characterization tools
to better understand the potential for LOM biodegradation, photolysis, or
contaminant transport; and (3) what is the fate of recalcitrant LOM in aquatic
environments (e.g., wetlands and surface waters), with a focus on photolysis?
This research will be accomplished by well characterizing LOM, conducting
microcosms examining the evolution of LOM from waste components, and evaluating
LOM photolysis of leachate samples irradiated by natural sunlight and a solar
simulator. The broader impacts of this proposed research also include the
advancement of understanding of chemistry and photochemistry of organic matter.
The proposed research is a multidisciplinary project that involves a diverse
group of female researchers, bridging environmental engineering and physical
science fields and impacting multiple areas of the scientific community. The
doctoral researcher assigned to this project is a female minority student,
contributing to diversity in the science and engineering workforce. Outreach to
art and design students through UCFSTEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art,
and Mathematics) activities will also provide broader impacts. Researcher
involvement with K-16 students through school visitations provides an
opportunity to increase STEM understanding.