* 1438375
* Time-scale analysis for the synthesis of thin-film deposition reaction kinetics models
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Raymond Adomaitis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1438375&lt;br/&gt;PI: Raymond Adomaitis&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Maryland College Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some electronic materials, such as
photovoltaic materials for solar cells, are manufactured in specialized chemical
reactors in which gas-phase reactant molecules deposit on a surface to form a
thin film of the product material. The routes that molecules take from the gas
phase to the thin film involve a complex set of chemical reactions that must be
well understood in order to produce materials with the desired properties. To
describe mathematically the overall process of film growth, a system of
equations can be derived to track the various chemical species inside the
reactor and on the surface of the growing film. This project involves developing
new methods for analyzing the system of equations, and comparing the results of
the analysis with experimental data for deposition processes such as atomic
layer deposition (ALD) and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The results of the
project will provide scientists and engineers with a new tool for predicting the
performance of ALD and CVD reactors. The project will provide a training ground
for graduate students in an important area of reaction engineering and will
provide research opportunities for interested undergraduate students as well.
Software that is developed during the project will be made available to the
research and industrial communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the mathematical structure of differential-algebraic (DAE) systems
of equations describing surface reaction species during ALD and CVED thin film
deposition processes. A reaction network factorization procedure will be
developed that partitions surface reaction and deposition species dynamic
balances into sets of relatively slow (deposition), fast (equilibrium), and
instantaneous (conserved) modes. The project will determine conditions under
which the factorization works, the importance of fixed points of the equations,
and reaction fluxes of chemical species. Example deposition processes of varying
complexity will be analyzed, including some with spatially distributed
deposition. Results that correlate rates of film growth with reactor conditions
will be compared with experimental data.