* 1438925
* Bayesian Criteria for Correspondence in Within-Study Comparisons
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* David Rindskopf, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2016
* USD 402,713.00

The gold standard of research on the impact of educational interventions is a
randomized controlled experiment where students or classrooms are randomly
assigned to a treatment or control context. However, randomized experiments
cannot always be used for ethical or logistical reasons. This study will
contribute to the on-going research that identifies the conditions under which
nonrandomized experiments can yield valid answers to questions about
effectiveness of interventions. Within-study comparisons compare results from a
randomized experiment to results from a nonrandomized experiment to understand
the conditions under which results from the latter might approximate results
from the former. Typically, such studies examine whether the results from both
experiments are in the same direction, are both statistically significant (or
both not), or differ significantly from each other. These studies usually yield
only a binary conclusion that the results either do or do not correspond. The
researchers in this study will use a Bayesian approach to develop more nuanced
conclusions about the probability that the two designs match in terms of the
estimated outcome. These more nuanced conclusions will provide better standards
by which the validity of evidence from studies of effective educational
practices will be determined.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use
datasets from three major kinds of quasi-experimental designs - the regression
discontinuity design, the interrupted time series design and the nonequivalent
control group design. They will explore how Bayesian approaches should be
structured by investigating the nature of the parameters that need to be
established. The analysis for the Bayesian correspondence analyses will be
WinBUGS, a free software program for conducting Bayesian inference. However, the
researchers will also explore the development of the syntax for computing such
analyses with other statistical programs to expand the platforms within which
such studies might be performed. The researchers will publish program syntax and
findings for the major variants of within-study comparisons to make the Bayesian
correspondence criteria they identify more accessible to education researchers.