* 1438913
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Philippos Mordohai, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,050.00

This grant partially supports 20 students at institutions across the U.S. to
participate in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern 2014 Recognition (CVPR). CVPR is the premier annual conference with
about 2000 senior and student participants in computer vision, held in North
America and attended by members of the international research community. The
Doctoral Consortium is to highlight the work of senior Ph.D. students, who are
close to finishing their degrees, or recent graduates, and to give these
students the opportunity to discuss their research with senior researchers
matched with their expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables top-
quality Ph.D. students to present, discuss, and receive feedback on original
research within the broader community are all critical components of graduate
student development. The opportunity to receive advice on their research and
career plans from experts from different institutions, and with potentially
different perspectives, in many cases is not available internally within one's
own institution. This project supports the career development of some of the
brightest junior researchers in computer vision, contributes to the computer
research community and related fields in general by drawing attention to an
important aspect of graduate student development, and potentially increasing the
number of active researchers and teachers in STEM.