* 1438400
* Regional Air Quality Impact of Natural Gas Production Operations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Russell Dickerson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 305,400.00

1438400&lt;br/&gt;Ehrman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regional Air Quality Impact of
Natural Gas Production Operations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid expansion of
natural gas (NG) production operations in the United States has irreversibly
altered the energy landscape. Upsides include low cost fuel and chemical
industry feedstocks, resulting in a boost to the economy and in new and expanded
plant capacity. Downsides include concern about environmental degradation of
groundwater, and about the impact of air emissions of air toxics and ozone
forming precursors such as nitrogen oxides and reactive volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), and the resulting immediate impact on public health, as well
as air emissions of methane, a potent greenhouse gas. This project will lead to
toolsets that can be used by a variety of constituents to improve predictions of
fate and transport of air pollutants, and to identify effective regulatory
policy measures to reduce impact of NG operations. Products of this research
will include improved understanding of vertical mixing parameterization for
improved accuracy in predicting regional scale transport of area source
emissions, model-ready updated emissions estimates, and well documented
scenarios available for evaluating impacts of policy changes. Concerns regarding
transport of area source emissions extend beyond NG operations to emissions from
non-electricity generating NOx sources and vehicle emissions as well as biogenic
emissions. Model-ready emissions estimates can be used by a variety of
constituents including regulatory and community organizations and the oil and
natural gas industry. Hands on research activities for high school and
undergraduate students will support personnel development. The emphasis of this
work is the Marcellus shale play but approaches and products developed will be
useful for other regions of the US and world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will investigate the regional nature of emissions from NG production operations
including modern horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing. The primary
testable hypothesis is that ground level air emissions of even short-lived
species can be significant regional sources of pollution through vertical
transport and advection. Rigorous analysis of ground level and aloft aircraft
measurements of methane, VOCs, NOx, and PM2.5, including those made during the
NASA DISCOVER-AQ campaign will be performed. Receptor based source apportionment
will be conducted for multiple sites in the mid-Atlantic region. To improve our
ability to simulate regional transport, existing vertical transport
parameterization schemes available within the Community-scale Modeling and Air
Quality (CMAQ) platform will be evaluated for several episodes in the mid-
Atlantic region of the US for 2007 and 2011. Regional ground level monitoring
data will be aggregated from several states and combined with a short aircraft
field campaign, using upwind and downwind spirals and plume transects to
evaluate degree of agreement between our model predictions of vertical transport
and downwind dispersion and measurements. Building on a long-standing
cooperation with State (MD, CT, DE, NH) and regional (OTC/MANE-VU) Air Quality
managers the PIs will partner to develop and evaluate possible future case
scenarios.