* 1438612
* Investigating the Role of Genetically Modified Crop Transgenes in Antibiotic Resistance in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Claudia Gunsch, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 318,965.00

1438612&lt;br/&gt;Gaunsch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the Role of
Genetically Modified Crop Transgenes in Antibiotic Resistance in the
Environment&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In 2013, approximately 90 % of the US corn
crop was genetically modified. As part of the genetic modification process,
selectable marker genes including antibiotic resistance genes are inserted into
genetically modified crops. The fate of these genes is important to quantify,
especially in the context of wastewater sewage sludge (biosolids). The land
application of biosolids makes it critical that the fate of these genetically
modified crop transgenes be investigated. The data generated will be useful to
industry as well as legislators who control the future of genetically modified
crops both domestically and internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to determine if genetically modified crops are a
significant source of antibiotic resistance genes. We hypothesize that
genetically modified crop transgenes are an important contributor to bacterial
antibiotic resistance development mainly because of the smaller size of the
genetically modified crop plasmids relative to naturally occurring antibiotic
resistant plasmids. This hypothesis will be tested in three tasks; 1)
Genetically modified corn and soybean transgenes will be quantified in various
wastewater treatment facilities. 2) The persistence of antibiotic resistance
genes originating from plasmids used in genetically modified corn and soybean
crops will be compared to naturally occurring plasmids during a simulated
wastewater treatment and biosolids land application event. 3) Antibiotic
resistance genes horizontal transfer rates will be compared between small
plasmids (representative of genetically modified crop plasmids) and large
plasmids (representative of naturally occurring plasmids carrying antibiotic
resistance genes). The expected results from this research consist of
identifying whether: 1) genetically modified crops are an important contributor
of antibiotic resistance genes in the environment and; 2) biosolids land
application promotes the proliferation of genetically modified crop associated
antibiotic resistance genes. The success of the research work plan will be
measured by our ability to quantify genetically modified crop derived antibiotic
resistance genes and to determine their role in global antibiotic resistance
development. A successful outcome of this project will lead to a better
understanding of the long term implications of utilizing antibiotic resistance
genes as selectable marker genes in genetically modified crop engineering.