* 1438935
* A Security-Integrated Computer Science Curriculum for Intensive Capacity Building
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Terrance Boult, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 12/31/2015
* USD 333,347.00

A Security-Integrated Computer Science Curriculum for Intensive Capacity
Building&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, at the University of Colorado at
Colorado Springs (UCCS), will develop a security-integrated computer science
curriculum in order to increase the number of students who are exposed to
cybersecurity concepts and skills, and who understand the interplay between
cybersecurity and other areas of computer science. A total of 12 courses will
have relevant security topics integrated into them. This set includes 9 core
courses and 3 electives. Existing courses will be enhanced through the use of
course content modules, lab exercises, course projects, and guest lectures. In
addition to making project materials publicly available, the project team will
organize both a regional and a national workshop. The regional workshop will
include faculty from other schools in Colorado such as UC Boulder, Colorado
State, University of Denver, Colorado College, and Metropolitan State University
of Denver. They will also collaborate with a number of institutions with which
they have educational collaborations and institutional Memoranda of
Understanding, including Otero Junior College, Lamar Community College, and
Pikes Peak Community College. These schools do not currently have sufficient
cybersecurity education capacity, and their programs will be significantly
enhanced through the materials made available to them through this project. This
project will be funded by the Division of Graduate Education through the SFS
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course infusions involved in this project will
focus on topics related to web, cloud, system, network, and biometrics
cybersecurity research. Topics addressed will include drive-by-download attacks,
single-sign-on system security, biometrics-based user authentication methods,
cross-site scripting, security policies, malware analysis, privacy leakage
detection and prevention, and trusted platform module chips. Project evaluation
will be done using a combination of mechanisms: student and instructor surveys;
focus group studies; cybersecurity knowledge and skill measurements;
cybersecurity course and program enrollment data; cybersecurity student club and
competition team participation; cybersecurity projects, theses, dissertations,
and research papers; and student placements into cybersecurity positions or
cybersecurity graduate programs upon graduation.