* 1438871
* Cyber Defense Bootcamp for High School Technology Teachers
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Brett Tjaden, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2016
* USD 99,990.00

The need for more college graduates in cybersecurity is increasing. In order to
facilitate cybersecurity education growth at undergraduate and graduate levels,
programs and projects are needed to help attract and recruit college bound
students to this field. This project will be part of a feasibility study
investigating types of activities, pedagogy, target audience, scale, evaluation
metrics and other factors of innovative projects to achieve this goal. The
project will involve teacher professional development and promote improvement in
cybersecurity education at the high school levels with two central goals: (1)
attract and recruit college bound students to the field of cybersecurity; (2)
produce more qualified students entering college programs of study in
cybersecurity. All curricula, exercises, and activities developed, in whole or
in part, as a result of this project will be available to the community through
the NSF-sponsored RAVE Program and/or other dissemination channels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to organize a week
long Cyber Defense Bootcamp for High School Technology Teachers. It will expose
secondary school teachers to the principles of good cybersecurity practices and
the science behind those practices so that they may both teach their students
effective practices as well as motivate these students to study more
cybersecurity in more detail as they move into their chosen disciplines in
colleges and universities. The main objectives of this Bootcamp include:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Improve Cyber Security awareness of participating high school
teachers and their students; &lt;br/&gt;2. Provide participating teachers with
the opportunity to learn the fundamentals of Cyber Security; &lt;br/&gt;3.
Provide participating teachers with a complete set of course material to use at
their home institutions; &lt;br/&gt;4. Provide mentoring and help creating Cyber
Defense clubs; &lt;br/&gt;5. Introduce teachers to the Cyber Patriot and other
nationally organized high school Cyber Defense competitions and encourage them
to participate.