* 1438989
* XPS: EXPL: FP: Collaborative Research: Formal methods based algorithmic synthesis of more-than-Moore nano-crossbars for extreme-scale computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sumit Jha, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 231,035.00

The transistor density of integrated circuits has been doubling approximately
every two years for about four decades. This exponential rise in the
computational power of the integrated circuit has driven the information
technology revolution that has transformed every aspect of our society - from
personal entertainment devices to high-assurance intelligent cyber-physical
systems. However, the growth in transistor density is now slowing down, and new
technological breakthroughs are urgently needed to sustain the ongoing
information technology revolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a
new memristor-based nano-computing architecture that circumvents the fabrication
density problems associated with traditional transistor-based integrated
circuits. The project investigates the fundamental principles of memristor-based
nano-computing and designs efficient memristor-based nano-crossbar circuits that
can execute elementary bit-vector mathematical and logical computations. The
project pursues a transformative agenda for next-generation extreme-scale
computing involving two design principles: (1) the use of memristors as
distributed asynchronous digital switches and continuous-valued non-volatile
nano-stores of input data and intermediate results, and (2) the use of sneak-
paths in nano-crossbars as fundamental computational primitives that pool
together results of intermediate computations from distributed memristor nano-
stores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The memristor-based nano-computing architecture
developed in the project will enable the execution of legacy programs on low-
energy ultra-dense memristive nano-crossbar circuits and will facilitate the
design of domain-specific parallel execution engines that combine storage and
computation on the same chip - thereby nullifying the traditional barrier
between the memory and the microprocessor. &lt;br/&gt;