* 1438721
* SusChEM:  Using theory-driven design to tailor novel nanocomposite oxides for solar fuel production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Eric Weitz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

Title: SusChEM. The Design of Materials to Harvest and Store Solar Energy in
Chemical Bonds: Tailoring nanocomposite catalytic structures for artificial
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis for this proposed research is the
fact that more of the sun's energy hits the face of the earth in two hours than
is consumed globally in a year. Yet only minor amounts of sunlight are currently
harvested to meet an ever-growing energy demand. The conversion of sunlight to
chemical energy is a promising strategy to deliver greater use of solar energy
and to provide a variety of possibilities for local, off-the-grid energy
storage. The particular focus of this research is the light-driven conversion of
CO2 that opens up new strategies for developing closed loop carbon cycles, a key
aim of sustainability. To undertake this effort, an award is made to Professors
Kimberly Gray, Justin Notestein and Eric Weitz of Northwestern University in
line with the SusChEM initiative. An international and interdisciplinary team of
catalysis experts has been assembled utilizing the US-Ireland R&amp;D
Partnership program. This international R&amp;D Partnership leverages funding
from the Irish and UK governments. This team has unparalleled capabilities to
carry out theory-driven design, synthesis and testing of multifunctional
catalysts that will separate and control the distinct steps of the complex
series of reactions around sunlight-driven CO2 conversion. The goal is to
improve the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of CO2 photo-reduction
and as a result, the achievement of much higher product yields and energy
conversion efficiencies than is currently possible. Researchers on this project
will also participate in a Climate Change and Sustainability Professional
Development Series that connects middle and high school teachers to cutting-edge
academic research and provide STEM enrichment to a racially and economically
diverse student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photochemical fixation of
CO2 to energy rich products, essentially artificial photosynthesis, whether for
solar energy storage or the production of potential feedstock chemicals,
involves an exceedingly complex system of reactions requiring novel,
multifunctional nanoarchitectures that can harvest visible light, stabilize
charge separation, reduce the heterogeneity of surface sites, activate CO2, and
control the reaction pathway. The overarching hypothesis of the proposed work is
that multi-functional nanocomposite metal oxide clusters supported on a
semiconductor surface that couple photo- and thermal catalysis can be designed
from first principles, and then synthesized and engineered in order to convert
CO2 to useful two-electron reduction products selectively and with greatly
improved efficiency. The research integrates theory, synthesis,
characterization, mechanism interrogation and application and links the efforts
of three research teams in a coordinated fashion providing feedback to inform
next steps. First principles modeling will be used to design nanostructures
tailored to CO2 conversion, followed by sophisticated and controlled synthesis
techniques to execute these designs and then, the verification of their efficacy
by rigorous structural and functional characterization and scaled-up engineering
testing. This is feasible only through a team effort, which will then offer a
compelling and potentially transformative strategy to improve fundamentally the
efficiency and selectivity of CO2 reduction chemistry and process engineering.