* 1438419
* RAPID:  Establishing International Collaboration for a CubeSat-Borne Magnetometer
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Hyomin Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 04/30/2015
* USD 19,079.00

This is a short-term (one-year) effort to coordinate the testing, delivery, and
integration of a new miniature magnetic field instrument for a cubesat being
built and launched by Kyung Hee University (KHU) in S. Korea. The new science
magnetometer for cubesats is being developed at University of New Hampshire
through a separate effort, funded by NASA, and will be contributed free of
charge to this project. The cubesat named SIGMA (Scientific cubesat
with&lt;br/&gt;Instruments for Global Magnetic field and rAdiation) is currently
being developed by KHU with funding from the Korean government and is scheduled
for launch into a low-Earth orbit in 2015. The main purpose of the SIGMA mission
is cubesat technology demonstration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the addition of
a science grade magnetometer, the mission will provide interesting and important
data pertaining to waves in the magnetosphere and their role in energization and
decay of the Earth radiation belts. Furthermore, the project will provide in-
flight qualification and in-space demonstration of the new magnetometer, making
it a valuable asset for future cubesat missions both in the US and
internationally. Finally, the effort will foster and expand an ongoing
collaboration on cubesat projects between universities in the US and the KHU in
South Korea and will establish an early career scientist in a key coordinating
role.