* 1438648
* Source, Composition, and Stability of Soluble Iron Fluxing from Continental Margin Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 497,590.00

Iron is a limiting nutrient in the world's oceans and plays a key role in
regulating the growth of phytoplankton. The main sources of iron to the open
ocean are the atmosphere, through wind-blown terrestrial dust, and the seafloor,
through input from continental shelf sediments. While atmospheric inputs have
been well-studied, the oceanic input of iron from sediments has only sparsely
been measured and, as a result, the relative importance of the sediment-derived
iron to the iron pool and, ultimately, primary productivity in the oceans is
poorly understood. In this study, researchers will examine the chemical
properties of sediment-derived iron in the oceans to assess its contribution to
the iron used by phytoplankton. Results from this study will further our
understanding of iron inputs to the ocean and their importance to ocean primary
productivity. The project will contribute to the training of graduate students,
as well as provide educational opportunities such as a day at sea for
undergraduate students in engineering and physical science.

The atmosphere and continental margin sediments are the main source of the
limiting nutrient iron (Fe) to the open ocean. Yet, the chemical form of iron
from sediments has not been well examined and only quantified as reduced iron or
the dissolved iron passing through 0.45 Âµm filters. The kinetics of iron
oxygenation suggests it should precipitate rapidly in the overlying waters,
challenging the view that sediments are important sources of iron for primary
production. To establish whether the flux of iron from sediments has important
implications for primary productivity, possibly rivaling atmospheric inputs, it
is necessary to demonstrate that ferric iron originating in sediments is under
the form of stable iron species with potential for a high residence time in the
water column. The overall objective of this project is to test the hypotheses
that iron fluxing across the sediment-water interface in continental margin
sediments is dissolved under the form of organic-Fe(III) complexes and that the
magnitude of the iron flux is influenced by the redox conditions in the
overlying waters, the composition of the complexes, and the biogeochemical
processes in the underlying sediments. To test these hypotheses, the flux and
speciation of dissolved Fe(III) will be quantified in the sediments of the
Carolina depocenter and the Gulf of Mexico, and the biogeochemical processes
regulating the production and the flux of iron as a function of the redox regime
of the environment will be determined using in situ measurements and state-of-
the-art voltammetric and chromatographic techniques.