* 1438765
* GOALI: Sinter-Resistant, Self-Regenerating Platinum Group Metal Catalysts for Low Temperature Oxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Se Oh, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Project Title: GOALI: Sinter-Resistant, Self-Regenerating Platinum Group Metal
Catalysts for Automotive Exhaust Treatment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
combustion engines being developed for meeting our transportation needs achieve
improved fuel efficiency by lowering exhaust temperatures. This puts demands on
the technology for catalytic converters, since these catalysts must become
active at lower temperatures. The proposed research addresses the design of
these catalysts, leading to improvements in air quality and to societal needs
for energy. Automotive exhaust catalysts lose activity during use due to
precious metal sintering. This loss of performance requires a new exhaust
catalyst, thereby putting pressure on prices for precious metals such as Pt and
Pd. By developing ways to slow the growth of metal particle size, demand for
these precious metals is reduced, and they can be used more efficiently. This
GOALI award recognizes the strategic importance of this research to the U.S.,
and is in support of an industry-university collaboration between Abhaya Datye
of the University of New Mexico and Chang Kim and Gongshin Qi of General Motors
Global R&amp;D. The university participants will use model catalysts that allow
characterization with advanced microscopy techniques which cannot be applied to
actual commercial automotive catalysts. The results will be shared with the
scientists at GM, and the team will attempt to implement the findings in new
technologies for exhaust emissions control. An added educational feature is that
students will spend time working in the industry partner laboratories as part of
this collaborative research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research challenge
being addressed here impacts the entire class of precious metal heterogeneous
catalysts used for meeting the needs for energy, materials and fuels. Three way
catalysts in automotive exhaust (especially those in the close coupled position)
are subjected to elevated temperatures that lead to growth of nanoparticle size
and loss of activity. The research will address Ostwald ripening of
nanoparticles, investigating the key steps of atom emission and capture, by
using model catalysts. Industrial supported metal catalysts do not lend
themselves to direct measurements of processes such as atom emission or capture,
which are critical to understanding catalyst sintering. This research program
uses novel forms of model catalysts that can be heated to temperatures and gas
atmospheres encountered in automotive exhaust. The model catalysts allow
obtaining time-lapsed electron micrographic images of the same region of the
sample, so that rates of atom transport can be inferred. These rates, coupled
with a robust physics-based model, will help improve predictions of catalyst
sintering. Methods will be developed to modify the rates of emission and novel
approaches developed to capture mobile species. Concepts developed using model
catalysts will be translated to powder catalysts and tested under realistic
conditions using the facilities of the industry partner. The close participation
of industry and university researchers is critical for validating the concepts
and models. GM has committed significant resources in terms of people time and
access to facilities, to enable this research to be successful. The partnership
will help address significant unknowns in the understanding of catalyst
sintering, and will lead to advances in the synthesis of novel catalysts with
improved reactivity.