* 1438958
* XPS: EXPL: FP: Symbiotic Power Management for Integrated CPU - GPU Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sherief Reda, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 316,000.00

Power consumption is a major constraint on the operation of mobile computing
devices. By reducing power consumption, it will be possible to prolong the
operational time of battery operated devices. Modern computing devices integrate
Central Processing Units (CPUs) and Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) on the same
die to cater to the performance needs of various software applications. These
software applications are usually written to execute parallel threads that make
use of the CPUs and the GPUs. Integrated CPU-GPU devices offer many advantages
over discrete CPU-GPU systems, including higher performance, reduced power
consumption, and finer-grained interactions between the CPU and GPU.

The overarching goal of this proposal is to explore a new paradigm for symbiotic
power management that exploits the structure and semantics of parallel
programming languages for CPU-GPU devices to deliver improved power management
capabilities. To achieve this goal, the PI will first identify the operational
phases of software applications directly from their parallel programming
constructs, and then use the identified phases to devise an adaptive power
management method that determines the optimal resources (e.g., frequency-voltage
settings and number of cores) to meet performance targets while offering large
reductions in power consumption. In synergy with the overarching goal, the PI
will pursue an educational outreach program that includes: expanding on-going
projects targeted for local high-school students to increase their knowledge of
energy challenges in computing systems; developing courses on high-performance
computing systems; involving undergraduate students in research experiences; and
outreach to industry.