* 1438902
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Bowie State University Applied Biotechnology Initiatives
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2019
* David Micklos, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2019
* USD 464,565.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Bowie State University
(BSU) seeks to use the platform of the existing collaboration between Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, BSU and Godfrey Okoye University (GOU) on DNA
barcoding projects to infuse basic and advanced interdisciplinary biotechnology
concepts and laboratory skills into its biology undergraduate degree program and
to train students that are equipped to function as independent laboratory
technicians and/or pursue postgraduate degrees in biotechnology/STEM. The Bowie
State Applied Biotechnology Initiative (BSABI) builds on a previous NSF project
that supported a genomics lab and a Biotechnology Summer Institute in the
Natural Sciences Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BSABI has three key
objectives: a) Curriculum enhancement of the Molecular Biology (Biol 303)
course, by infusing it with intensive research for discovery-based learning; b)
Research infrastructure upgrade to support the curriculum redesign for hands-on
research experience for students; and c) International research experience, to
provide students opportunity to collect and categorize germplasm in their native
environments. The project augments faculty capacity to instruct students through
the provision of cutting edge equipment for research and teaching, and by
infusing hands-on laboratory activities and undergraduate research projects into
an existing molecular biology course. The DNA barcoding project enables BSU to
respond to the growing demands for understanding and categorizing biodiversity.
In perspective, besides training 160 minority students to join the STEM
workforce, the broader impact of this project is to promote global exploration,
biodiversity conservation and utilization of indigenous genetic
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration among Bowie State University
(BSU), the DNA Learning Center at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL), NY, and
(GOU), Nigeria, fosters a diversity of research experiences, both locally and
internationally, for undergraduates in the Department of Natural Sciences at
BSU. BSU uses the platform of this existing liaison on DNA barcoding projects
among the three institutions to infuse basic and advanced interdisciplinary
concepts and laboratory skills into its biology degree program. The ultimate
goal is to create student driven class projects that answer pertinent biological
questions while providing students with the opportunity to acquire basic but
vital laboratory skills for concentration in biotechnology. The hands-on
research experience built into the courses operates on an open-lab concept that
is designed to promote peer-mentoring and provide students with independence to
explore and be creative in their discovery-based learning
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of the three-year project, at
least one hundred and sixty (160) underrepresented minority undergraduates will
receive state of the art education and advanced training in molecular biology
and biotechnology. An extensive evaluation process is incorporated into the
project to monitor and measure program effectiveness. Outcomes of this project
will be widely disseminated for the benefit of the academic community.