* 1438165
* Forecasting the Environmental Fate and Ecotoxicity of Nanomaterials in Aquatic Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Stacey Harper, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 307,438.00

Proposal Number: CBET - 1438165

Nano-size particles (nanoparticles, or NPs) are increasingly prevalent in
industrial processes. Their toxic effects are usually not known before their
use. The Oregon State University research team proposes to develop small-scale
("nanocosm") assays to profile the eco-toxicities of NPs in an aquatic
environment. Students from minority and woman groups will be involved in the
proposed research. The results of the development and investigation will shed
light on the behavior of silver and zinc oxide NPs in aquatic environments.
Since the lack of a common approach to environmental investigations of NPs has
limited the advancement of knowledge in this area, the successful outcomes from
this proposal can be adopted as a standard technique by other researchers,
policy makers and regulators, and chemical producers, and the proposed research
is, therefore, potentially transformative.

The overall goal of the proposed work is to predict nanomaterial behavior in
natural environments and forecast potential to impact organisms and ecosystem
function. The objectives of the proposal plan is to first develop and validate
an assay for use in determining the ecotoxicity of nanomaterials in aquatic
systems by using small-scale studies of algae, bacteria, small invertebrates,
and developing vertebrates in order to determine the biological impacts of known
nanomaterial toxicants (Ag and ZnO nanoparticles). The validated assay will then
be employed to elucidate nanomaterial features (e,g, composition, size, and
surface chemistry) that alter bioavailability, biological impacts, community
structure and overall ecosystem health across diverse nanomaterials. Finally,
the data gathered will be used to help construct a predictive model using the
structure-activity relationships (SAR) of nanoparticle behavior and ecotoxicity.
The results will be established and embedded into existing modeling frameworks
that can translate the findings to decision making processes. This, in turn,
will help provide protocols for designing future nanocosms.