* 1438667
* SusChEM:  Algal-Based Resource Positive Sanitation (ARPS) Systems - An Integrated Modeling Framework to Advance Wastewater Infrastructure Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Timothy Strathmann, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 309,468.00

1438667&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research and associated educational activities
will advance the sustainability of municipal and agricultural wastewater
infrastructure by establishing a systems-scale modeling framework for algal-
based resource recovery technologies, and will leverage this framework to teach
Illinois farmers about sustainable wastewater management. Research will pursue
financially viable treatment processes capable of nutrient recovery and energy
positive wastewater management, and will focus on overcoming critical knowledge
gaps that limit our ability to design algal-based resource positive sanitation
(ARPS) systems integrating algae cultivation, harvesting, and downstream
processing to manage wastewater as a renewable resource. Wastewater management
is often viewed as a burden by farmers and municipalities (with good cause).
Conventional approaches to sanitation focus on pollutant mitigation, resulting
in unsustainable financial models that lead to dilapidated infrastructure and
inefficient resource management. This research seeks to re-envision wastewater
treatment by developing holistic approaches to nutrient management enabling
energy positive nutrient recovery through the design of systems that achieve
microalgae cultivation, harvesting, and processing to fuels. The research will
focus on the development of an integrated modeling framework that links design
decisions, operational decisions, and independent variables (e.g., climate,
wastewater composition) with predictions of treatment efficacy, nutrient
recovery, and energy production. Research efforts will be integrated with an
education plan designed to engage undergraduate students, Illinois farmers, and
the public at large (from pre-schoolers to adults). These goals will be achieved
by (i) mentoring undergraduate students through on-campus programs targeting
underrepresented groups in engineering, (ii) developing a course module for
environmental engineering undergraduates, and (iii) partnering with a local farm
and farmer education organization to develop a module on sustainable wastewater
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of this research are (i) to
establish an integrated modeling framework that enables dynamic modeling of ARPS
and the prediction of water quality, recovered nutrients, and the production of
energy, and (ii) to elucidate the mechanisms governing the sustainability of
ARPS systems and leverage this information to establish a path forward for ARPS
development. Existing models of sub-systems (cultivation, harvesting, downstream
processing) will be leveraged to provide a baseline modeling framework, and
targeted experimentation will enable the development of novel models for
cultivation and hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL; the greatest source of
uncertainty in preliminary calculations). This ARPS model will be integrated in
a quantitative sustainable design (QSD) framework (including life cycle
assessment, life cycle costing, sensitivity and uncertainty analyses) to
identify technology targets and enable decision-makers to navigate
sustainability trade-offs under uncertainty. The benefits and drawbacks of
increasing model complexity will also be evaluated through the development of
two new sub-models (one for cultivation, one for HTL). Ultimately, the
integration of these models in the QSD framework will enable researchers to more
accurately characterize uncertainty, quantify trade-offs in decision-making,
identify critical barriers to long-term viability of ARPS systems, and
prioritize research and investment to advance such technologies. The research
plan will be coupled with an educational plan to engage students, farmers, and
the broader public in a discussion related to waste, water, and nutrient
management. Undergraduate students will be engaged through educational module
development and through undergraduate research opportunities. In partnership
with a local farm and a farmer educational program, a module will be developed
on sustainable wastewater management and ARPS systems for an immersion school
for farmers in central Illinois.