* 1439504
* Are blue crab declines leading to a trophic cascade and massive loss of U.S. southern marshes?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2014,08/31/2014
* Brian Silliman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 8,449.00

A fundamental goal of ecology is to understand the physical and biological
processes that control plant production and distribution patterns in natural
communities. For over 6 decades, salt marsh plant assemblages have been
considered a classic example of a bottom-up regulated community dominated by
relatively unpalatable plants controlled by physical conditions and nutrient
supplies. Recent research in southeastern U.S. salt marshes, however, challenges
this paradigm and suggests that powerful trophic interactions are equally
important mechanisms. In Virginia, Louisiana, and Georgia salt marshes, the PI
found that the common marsh snail, Littoraria, is capable of exerting strong,
top-down control of marsh plants. Unless kept in check by its predators, this
snail can transform a highly productive ecosystem to barren
mudflat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, large expanses of
southeastern U.S. salt marshes (100's of km2) have experienced unprecedented
die-back. From 2002-2006, surveys of &gt;20 die-off areas revealed snail
densities exceeding 1000/m2 on die-off borders. In exclusion experiments in GA,
FL and LA, snails actively converted salt marshes to barren mudflats. These
findings and the concurrent, steep decline (20-80%) of blue crab densities over
the past decade suggest that cascading consumer effects discovered in small-
scale experiments may apply to a larger trophic cascade that contributes to die-
off in southern salt marshes. There have, however, been no studies of how
commercially important blue crabs regulate marsh die-off via suppression of
snail densities. This knowledge gap will be address with the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) What is the role of blue crabs in regulating
snail populations? This question will be evaluate with multi-site experiments of
both blue crab inclusions and exclusions.&lt;br/&gt;2) Does spatial variation in
blue crab densities across marsh landscapes determine spatial variation in
predation, subsequent grazer outbreaks, and marsh die-off in areas of low crab
density? To evaluate this question, broad-scale surveys (20 sites) will identify
relationships among blue crab and snail density, grazing intensity and plant
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;3) Have blue crab population declines indirectly contributed
to marsh die-off by releasing plant-grazing snails from top-down control in
recent history? This question will be evaluated using a correlative approach,
with long-term (~30 yrs) data (FWS, LTER) sets of blue crab harvests, snail
densities, and incidence of scarring on archived snail
shells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research would contribute
a new, top-down mechanism for control of salt marshes, and reveal if blue crabs
are keystone predators in the trophic cascade. Evidence for species-specific,
higher trophic level control of plant growth and recent community die-off would
compel ecologists to reevaluate the 60-yr-old bottom-up paradigm in salt marsh
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The consequences of marsh die-off
are far-reaching for humans, since marsh grasses provide many essential services
(e.g., shoreline protection). Results from this proposed research would allow
managers to predict effects of predator (i.e., blue crabs) depletion and to
formulate effective strategies for marsh conservation (e.g. reduced fishing). To
facilitate inter-stake-holder-communication on the role of consumers in marsh
die-off, results will be presented in a series of seminars and Q&amp;A sessions
to key stakeholders: the public, fishermen, and marsh managers (TNC, FWS). In
addition, educational, outreach activities, in collaboration with high school
teachers, will engage students that are excelling (boy scouts) and at-risk (low
grades/attendance) in hands-on field science and potential career opportunities
through: 1) field classes, 2) research and 3) a marine symposium (e.g., as
previously at UF 2008).