* 1439383
* I-Corps:  Neural microphysiological systems for neuropharmaceutical testing
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Michael Moore, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 04/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The technology described in this project represents a significant leap forward
in the development of a neural 'organ-on-a-chip'. The ability to engineer a
biomimetic 3D nerve model will allow for rapid screening of neurotoxicity,
neuroprotection, as well as the tailoring of the microenvironment to mimic
critical disease models. To this point, only 2D in vitro cell cultures and
animal models have been available as pre-clinical tools for drug discovery.
Unfortunately, neither of these options translates well to in vivo clinical
applications, which is apparent looking at the current failure rates of drugs as
well as skyrocketing R&D expenses. This advanced model will allow both academic
and industrial scientists to further study underlying mechanisms and therapies
related to neurodegenerative pathologies in a uniquely cost effective and timely
manner. This technology should increase the molecular understanding of axonal
degeneration, neurotoxic consequences and neuroprotective mechanisms.

Successful commercialization of the proposed technology will result in a
service-based product marketed towards pharmaceutical testing. The PI has
demonstrated that microengineered peripheral neural tissues conduct
electrically-evoked compound action potentials and filed a provisional patent
related to the fabrication and application of the cell culture model. With this
discovery as a foundation, the PI proposes to validate a prototype by
demonstrating pathophysiological signatures in microengineered rat tissues. By
contacting potential customers, the PI and his team will assess the readiness of
the prototype and identify further benchmarks and design criteria. Two critical
components will include refining the most effective outputs utilized for
preclinical screenings and identifying maximally exploitable experimental
paradigms.