* 1439849
* James Madison University EPIC (Expanding Pathways, Identity and Capacity) Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Eric Pyle, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,744.00

James Madison University's EPIC (Expanding Pathways, Identity and Capacity
(EPIC) for Preparing Science Teachers) project, a Capacity Building project
funded through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, addresses the
demand for highly qualified secondary science teachers by creating new, more
flexible pathways for STEM undergraduates to pursue teaching careers. The
project will (i) build institutional capacity by creating additional curricular
on-ramps for the science teacher education program leading to licensure; (ii)
offer experiences that explicitly develop pedagogical content knowledge early in
the undergraduate career; (iii) recruit, retain, and mentor a community of
preservice teachers engaged in early teaching experiences that build their
identity as secondary science teachers; and (iv) increase the number of students
participating in the preservice teaching curriculum as well as informal teaching
experiences. In the long term, the project will lead to an expanded pool of
well-trained MAT candidates who will be prepared to enter the workforce as
secondary science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of faculty members
representing the College of Education and the four science disciplines (Biology,
Chemistry, Earth science/Geology, and Physics) housed within the College of
Science and Math, with the support of the Administration, will develop two
additional credit-bearing pathways leading to science teacher licensure that
supplement the existing program at James Madison University. Instruction will
focus on science-specific pedagogical content knowledge developed through early
teaching experiences, courses targeted at science secondary education students,
and mentoring by instructional coaching teams consisting of both a science
content and pedagogy expert. Additional elements include active recruiting of
potential teacher candidates, targeted advising within the science disciplines,
establishing a freshman learning community, offering summer teaching
opportunities, and building community across the 5-year BA/BS/MAT program
through an active National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) student chapter.
Through these efforts to provide early teaching experiences, community building,
and additional curricular pathways incorporating mentoring by coaching teams,
the investigators aim to understand the role that these experiences play in the
development of science teacher identity, demonstrating pedagogical competencies,
the construction of pedagogical content knowledge of secondary science education
students, and their persistence in a rigorous program of professional
preparation. By assessing outcomes for populations following each distinct
track, the role of these varied experiences in teacher preparation both in
developing pedagogical content knowledge and producing critical incidents
leading to science teacher identity will be characterized. Data will include
qualitative and quantitative analysis based on individual case studies.