* 1439622
* I/UCRC Phase II: Center on Intelligent Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2021
* Jon Weissman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,215,182.00

The University of Minnesota is completing single university Phase I I/UCRC
Center on Intelligent Storage (CRIS) and is proposing to establish a multi-
university I/UCRC Phase II Center on intelligent storage with Texas A&amp;M
University and Temple University. The center research will focus on intelligent
storage devices that have greater semantic and structural knowledge about their
stored data as compared to standard disk technology. Additionally, center will
develop high-performance long-term data management systems that will ensure the
necessary levels of security throughout the data?s lifecycle.Currently, there is
emphasis on addressing the needs of ?big data? environment and ?cloud computing?
such as identifying and locating the right information and managing and
preserving the existing data. In order to meet these needs, new storage
architectures, different storage systems design, new data models, new
information access methods and new ways to deliver information will be
identified. The focus of the center will be on how to solve the big data problem
with new storage technologies, new designs of storage systems/architectures,
emerging management frameworks and tools in the current computing and
communication environment. Industry has recognized the importance of this new
computing and communication environment. Many new products for storage/file
systems, storage management, and ways of preserving the data have evolved.
However, most of these applications require more research and development. The
center will utilize synergies from both academia and industry, encourage
innovative and creative thinking for integrated solutions that combine
techniques from storage systems, file systems and information retrieval, enhance
the understanding of large scale data management and information retrieval, and
develop prototypes for long-term data preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
?big data? problem is currently faced by not only individuals, but also by
almost all segments of the society, including professional groups, research
communities, companies and government. The proposed center will facilitate the
process of developing and researching solutions that can efficiently manage and
preserve large volumes of data and provide needed information to an end user on-
demand from anywhere at any time. The potential outcomes includes fostering the
advancement of science and technology, making the society more efficient and
secure, providing better health-care delivery, and better ways of preserving
information and arts produced by our culture. The research results will be
disseminated to general public via journal publications and conference
presentations. The Center will enhance the education process by bringing input
from industry, developing new courses at both undergraduate and graduate levels
and emphasizing the diversity of the student population. Special effort will be
carried out to bring in more female and under-represented minority students. All
three sites plan to educate a new generation of systems oriented students to
satisfy the needs from both industry and government.