* 1439605
* Using Science to Build Tribal Capacity for Data-Intensive Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Gregory Hooks, National Congress of American Indians Fund
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 566,655.00

The federal government has a trust responsibility to tribal nations that is
implemented through federal statutes and programs intended to promote economic
self-sufficiency and the distinct sovereign status of tribal nations and their
people. Quality, tribal-level data is essential for ensuring the federal trust
and for informing the work of tribal leaders to strengthen their governments.
Within this broader context, this project will improve tribal data quality and
capacity for data-intensive research by building a data network of tribes,
social scientists and federal policymakers; assisting with ongoing tribal data
collection designed to improve the reliability, validity, and long-term
sustainability of tribal data; and by using the Census Bureau?s Research Data
Centers to provide tribes with data better aligned to tribal boundaries and
tribal needs. The broader impacts of this work are far reaching and include: 1)
Improved data collection and analyses to assist tribes to better meet the needs
of the Native populations they serve; 2) Strengthened tribal data infrastructure
so that comparative analyses can be developed and policy based on more than
individual tribal cases; 3) New insights for social science research about
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) demographic characteristics through
real-world data experiences of tribes; 4) Solutions to data security and
confidentiality issues facing tribal governments; and 5) Insights for emerging
international conversations about data linkage and Indigenous identification in
large data sets, amongst others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States boasts
unmatched scientific capacity, but it has long failed to provide even the most
basic enumeration of AI/AN people. Despite thorough documentation that this
population is at great risk of poverty and the problems that flow from poverty,
detailed information about labor force participation, social service needs,
educational attainment, and related information is sparse and unreliable.
Enumeration issues involve those related to indicator fit for tribal
populations, those related to generating appropriate geographic boundaries for
tribal data, and those related to the actual collection of tribal data for
measurement purposes. This project is designed to address enumeration issues
using a participatory approach to research. It explores the question of how to
improve the quality of tribal-level data collection, reporting, and management
to assist tribal leaders, federal policymakers, and social scientists. The
project will utilize multiple methods, including qualitative data collection and
analysis through interviews and focus groups, quantitative analysis of secondary
data collected from the Census Bureau?s Research Data Centers and from, and
survey data collection by partner tribes. The goal is to produce a range of
tools and resources to improve tribal-level data collection and use, including a
survey template that could be used by tribal nations and federal agencies like
the Census Bureau and the Department of the Interior to supplement existing
person-level data collection from American Indian and Alaska Native people.