* 1439551
* SAVI: CLOUD Virtual Institute and Chemical Physics of Atmospheric New-Particle Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Richard Flagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 889,312.00

This project addresses the Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) Program at
NSF. SAVI is an innovative concept to foster interactions among scientists and
educators around the globe based on the principle that excellence in the
disciplines of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research
and education exists in many parts of the world, and that scientific advances
can be accelerated by scientists, engineers, and educators working together
wherever they are. SAVI focuses on interactions between cohesive teams of
researchers across national borders and takes advantage of existing U.S. and
foreign investments in frontier research by leveraging complementary
intellectual strengths and sharing unique research
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 3-year Cloud Virtual Institute (CVI) has
been developed to include a team at Carnegie Mellon University, California
Institute of Technology (Caltech), and Aerodyne, Inc. working in conjunction
with the European Training Network (CLOUD-TRAIN) and the CLOUD research
consortium based at CERN in Switzerland. The CVI will enable US based
researchers to participate in CLOUD, focusing on new-particle formation in the
atmosphere. CLOUD revolves around an extremely sophisticated experimental cloud
chamber equipped with a large suite of state of the art instrumentation to
measure nanoparticle size distributions and composition. This project supports
the administrative aspects of the institute. Research funds, including support
for students and postdoc participation in the research, are being requested
through other research-specific proposals to NSF and other
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports team membership in the CLOUD
consortium, and travel by US researchers to CLOUD campaigns, project meetings,
and data analysis workshops, as well as the participation of US students in
European summer schools and the hosting of a summer school at CMU and/or at
Caltech. Network tools will enable remote collaboration during planning, daily
briefings during campaigns, data analysis, paper planning, and publication
preparation. CLOUD is a research consortium with stable funding contributed by a
dozen different national research agencies. CLOUD-TRAIN is a Marie Curie Initial
Training Network (ITN) based at the Goethe-University of Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. The CVI team includes all of the US members of CLOUD as well as several
enhanced collaborations with European CLOUD member institutions (University of
Stockholm, University of Helsinki, Paul Scherrer Institute, and the University
of Frankfurt). The CVI also will closely collaborate with the Finish Centre of
Excellence in Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Meteorology of Atmospheric
Composition and Climate Change.