* 1439393
* Science Educators for Urban Schools Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Michael Graf, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 799,980.00

Learning how to most effectively prepare the next generation of science teachers
is essential for improving science learning for all students. The Science
Educators for Urban Schools Phase 2 (SEUS 2) project at Boston College aims to
support a total of 20 Scholars who are enrolled in the Masters of Education in
Science Education program to prepare for initial licensure in secondary science
and preliminary licensure in middle school general science through the Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Phase II program. SEUS 2 is a comprehensive urban teacher
preparation program in the sciences that: i) includes effective strategies to
recruit highly qualified and diverse applicants, a rigorous STEM teacher
preparation curriculum, established support programs for pre- and in-service
teachers, and opportunities for professional development; and ii) prepares the
scholars to become and remain science teachers in urban schools. By developing
and supporting additional highly qualified and diverse STEM teachers with
Sheltered English Immersion endorsement who will teach in urban schools, the
SEUS 2 program will address the Nation's shortage of science teachers, as
described in the National Academies' report Rising Above the Gathering Storm
(2007) and the recent Teacher Shortage Area Nationwide List (2013). Moreover, an
emphasis on recruiting scholars from underrepresented minority groups to serve
as role models as teachers and the emphasis on social justice, which can be
critical in maintaining motivation working in high-need schools, provide
additional ways this project has broad significance to society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEUS 2 project will contribute to the existing body of
knowledge by implementing and studying a model for developing and supporting an
urban STEM teacher preparation program and adding to understanding about science
teacher education and retention. The project will build upon a recent successful
Noyce Scholarship Phase I award, in which all 20 scholars who were supported are
currently remain teaching science in urban schools. The project will also
leverage the existing Donovan Urban Scholars Program, high-quality support
structures for new teachers, and strong relationships with six urban school
districts including Boston Public Schools through the Boston Higher Education
Partnership and community partners through Boston Connects. SEUS 2 will feature
a rigorous teacher preparation program that adds a required Behavior Management
course into the curriculum, additional internal recruitment activities beyond
existing internal and external recruitment strategies, scholar participation in
classroom-based research to improve science achievement in an urban context, a
classroom-based performance assessment via a Master's Comprehensive Examination,
biweekly online discussions for previous and current SEUS scholars, and support
for new teachers to participate in NSTA conferences. The mixed methods
evaluation plan and research investigations that include qualitative case
studies, as well as monitoring, semi-structured interviews and year-end surveys
of all SEUS scholars will increase the likelihood that the SEUS model for
developing and supporting an urban STEM teacher education program can be adapted
at other institutions.