* 1439183
* I-Corps:  Development of Novel Technology for Nanoparticle Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,05/31/2014
* Dariusz Stramski, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2014
* USD 10,389.00

The PI and his group have developed an innovative technology named Multi-
spectral Apparatus for Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (MANTA) for accurate
characterization of nanoparticle concentrations and sizes in an unperturbed
state, which is relevant for many applications and research areas; for instance
medical, pharmaceutical, biochemical, physical and environmental. Tests with
nanoparticle standards demonstrate that MANTA outperforms existing commercial
technologies. The superior performance of MANTA is due to novel approaches
including sample illumination and video recording of nanoparticle Brownian
motion and to proprietary algorithms and software for analysis of video data.
MANTA is capable of providing information on nanoparticles meeting outstanding
needs not currently met by the existing technologies and that affects a broad
variety of industrial sectors/applications which utilize nanotechnology, such as
manufacturing diagnostics, the printing, drilling, and milling industries, and
the production of cosmetics, pigments, inks, catalysts, and textiles.

Because measurements of concentration and size distribution of nanoparticles are
essential to many applications as stated above, a range of potential customers
for MANTA technology is large and diverse with no single typical customer
profile. MANTA ensures that the concentration and size of nanoparticles are
accurately determined over a broad range of nanoparticle sizes. The innovative
solutions of MANTA thus represent a transformative advancement in the area of
nanoparticle analysis and a major competitive advantage over existing
technologies. The team expects that MANTA will have transformative effects in a
broad range of health and environmental applications, including the diagnosis of
disease and pathological conditions, development of efficient and specific
therapies, environmental risk assessment, food safety, and occupational health
and safety risk management strategies.