* 1439917
* Math for America Los Angeles:  Putting Research into Practice to Raise Teacher Quality and Retention and Student Performance
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Darryl Yong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,140,427.00

This Master Teaching Fellowship (MTF) Phase II proposal, involves adding 18
Master Teachers to an ongoing project at Math for America Los Angeles (MfA LA),
a collaborative program sponsored by the University of Southern California,
Claremont Graduate University and Harvey Mudd College. The MTFs will work with a
cohort of 12 early career teachers to create teams of teacher leaders within a
middle or high school who can foster reform efforts that raise student
achievement. MTFs will also team teach with early career teachers. This novel
strategy will accelerate the transfer of expertise from experienced teachers to
novice teachers, while allowing both groups to develop their leadership
capacity. The project will be conducted in partnership with the Los Angeles,
Claremont, Pomona, Hacienda/La Puente, Chaffey Joint, Union, Duarte, and
Glendale unified school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key idea of MfA LA's
MTF program is that there is no better way for teachers to develop their
leadership capacity than to directly engage in the work of designing and
orchestrating student-centered changes in their schools and districts.
Applicants will identify some critical need in their school and propose efforts
to bring about improvements; student learning outcomes will be a central part of
these proposed projects. Master Teachers from the same school site must apply to
the program in pairs so that they will have a greater chance of bringing about
real, sustained change. This project integrates the common features of teacher
professional development that translate to the highest levels of student
performance. These include (a) a coherent framework combining pedagogical
content and assessment knowledge, (b) alignment with the teacher's school
curriculum and learning goals for students, and state or district, and (c) the
integration of learning with coaching, mentoring and participation in
communities with colleagues among others. Data generated through assessment and
evaluation should support the rationale that this strategy will enhance the
preparation and commitment of the MTFs and their students. Formative and
summative evaluation will focus on whether or not the project objectives have
been met and the effectiveness of project activities. Assessment will include
both qualitative and quantitative data collected through student surveys (the
Minnesota Math Attitude Inventory), classroom observations, and teacher surveys.
Dissemination of the project results will provide a model for using small teams
of teachers to lead reform efforts within a school. The work will be presented
at annual regional and national meetings of the Mathematics Science Research
Institute.