* 1439663
* I/UCRC Phase II:  Center for Hybrid Multicore Productivity Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Yelena Yesha, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,579,849.00

The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), the University of
California, San Diego (UCSD) and the University of Utah (U Utah) are pursuing a
Phase II renewal of the multi-institution I/UCRC for Hybrid Multicore
Productivity Research (CHMPR). CHMPR, in Phase II, plans to focus on problems of
national priority such as Big Data Analytics for Health IT, Climate Change,
Brain and Pluripotent Cell Imaging, Material Genomics and the Human Imagination.
It will conduct research to optimize the scalability, performance and
productivity of applications to Interactive Digital Media and Data Intensive
Parallel Computing Paradigms which are all of direct relevance to industry
advisory board members on hybrid multicore clusters. CHMPR will contribute
towards development of efficient hybrid multicore computational science
applications. It will improve the understanding of constrained parallel
processing algorithms, and provide academic researchers access to large hybrid
multicore systems to address the challenges in obtaining peak performance of
applications on these architectures. CHMPR will further assist in addressing
these challenges by providing fundamental understanding of the numerical
formulation, structure of the applications and the ability to map known single
threaded algorithms from multiple processors onto the underlying hybrid
multicore architectures under limitations on local processor memory, and cache.
The combined computing facilities at UMBC, UCSD and U Utah respectively, will
offer industry advisory board members access to university testbeds consisting
of some of the most advanced and diverse computing technologies and Big Data
sets in Health and Climate. There is a large demand to explore the application
and scalability of such hybrid multicore
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHMPR will provide faculty and students the
opportunity to gain hands-on research expertise in a wide variety of hybrid
multicore applications in areas of Health, Climate Change, Biomedical
Informatics, 3-D Graphic Environments and the use of Social Media for Disaster
mitigation. By addressing the future needs of industry advisory board members as
the computer industry evolves its hybrid multicore processor technology, the
center will contribute towards US leadership in HPC. CHMPR sites will
incorporate hybrid multicore computing into their core course curricula for
students to address the industry applications. The students will also have the
opportunity for internships with industry and the center will educate students
how to take advantage of the parallelism offered by tens of thousands of
multicore processors to solve a variety of applications.