* 1439532
* Innovating Infrastructure: A new platform for studying dynamic regional economies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Nichola Lowe, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 365,327.00

This research focuses on geographically-defined economic regions in order to
understand why some regions thrive while others stagnate. The key barrier to
such research is the lack of detailed, time-series data at the individual, firm,
and institutional level. Over the past 6 years, the researchers have acquired
such data on over 4200 technology firms in the Research Triangle Park region of
North Carolina and they are now able to examine the spatial and temporal
relationships between economic entities and uncover the drivers of regional
economic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers have developed a
relational database and tool sets that enables the organization, curation, and
search of this data. They are now extending this solution with a
cyberinfrastructure that manages diverse types of economic data, aids in
integration of newer data, and powers new approaches for analysis and
visualization of geo-spatial-temporal data, while addressing privacy and
security concerns. Through this new cyberinfrastructure, a community of
interdisciplinary scholars are able to have access to the data and tools on
regional economics. Likewise, policy makers and economic practitioners could
have access to reporting tools that provide greater detail than is available
today. Going forward, the developed cyberinfrastructure provides both a
framework and needed solutions to power other regional research systems and thus
further extend our knowledge of regional economics.