* 1439762
* Designing and Implementing a STEM Teacher Preparation Program to Address the National Need for Highly Qualified High School Physics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2023
* Dennis Showers, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,198,459.00

This Robert Noyce Teaching Scholarship Phase I program for STEM teachers of
physics will develop, implement, and evaluate strategies to increase the number
of highly qualified physics teachers by extending SUNY Geneseo's commitment to
preparing physics and other STEM teachers and supporting them as they enter the
teaching profession. There is a documented national shortage of high school
physics teachers who can prepare today's students for opportunities in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics and this project will provide a model
for ways to address this national need in physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
Robert Noyce Teaching Scholarship project includes several components to support
and encourage physics and STEM majors interested in teaching physics in
underserved high schools after earning their New York State teaching
certification. These components include (1) early teaching experiences for
physics and STEM undergraduates, such as presenting physics demonstrations in
local classrooms; (2) a Physics Teacher Summer Field School and Summer
Internships at local science camps to provide first- and second-year
undergraduates with valuable teaching experience in STEM fields; (3) mentoring
by successful local physics teachers through the NYS Master Teacher Program and
Geneseo's physics Teacher-in-Residence; (4) Noyce Scholarships to support 35
upper-level undergraduates committed to teaching STEM in high-need school
districts, (5) travel to national and regional meetings of professional
societies to learn about best practices in science teaching, and (6) induction
and mentoring for teachers in the early years of their teaching careers. This
Noyce project has four specific objectives, with evaluation metrics tailored to
each: increasing the number of physics graduates certified to teach high school
physics; improving confidence and physics teaching efficacy of non-physics, STEM
majors pursuing secondary certification; increasing the diversity of certified
physics teachers drawn from under-represented groups; and providing meaningful
early teaching experiences to assist with recruitment and retention of physics
teacher candidates and pre-service STEM teachers completing at least ten "Build-
It, Teach-It, Leave-It" demonstrations.