* 1439253
* GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Shipboard determination of key trace elements
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Mariko Hatta, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2018
* USD 366,783.00

In this project, investigators participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will make shipboard measurements of dissolved aluminum, iron, and
manganese in seawater, ice, snow, and melt pond samples collected during the
cruise. In common with other national initiatives in the International GEOTRACES
Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and
quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and
isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions
to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life,
others are known biological toxins, and still others are important because they
can be used as tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological
processes in the sea. This project will be of particular importance to the
success of the overall Arctic expedition because measurements of trace metals in
seawater require highly-specialized clean sampling techniques to prevent
contamination. Accordingly, the shipboard measurements made by this scientific
team will allow for the early detection and rectification of any sample
contamination problems while still at sea. In terms of broader impacts,
education and training of the next generation of marine trace element
scientists, including undergraduate and graduate students, as well as public
outreach will be key aspects of this project.

The shipboard determinations of dissolved aluminum, iron, and manganese in this
study will provide near real-time insights into the distribution of these
parameters, which can be used to potentially modify sampling strategies and can
also be used to identify any systemic sampling contamination issues during the
GEOTRACES Arctic expedition. Definitive data for dissolved iron and manganese
will be produced by shore-based ICP MS, a type of mass spectrometry capable of
detecting metals at very low concentrations. However, since dissolved aluminum
data cannot be determined by shore-based ICP MS, the shipboard data set
collected as part of this project will provide the definitive data set for this
key GEOTRACES parameter. In addition, the researchers will undertake high
resolution water sampling in the upper 10 m of the water column to characterize
the trace metal distribution in this highly stratified region, which cannot be
sampled by a conventional rosette. This sampling will be conducted from the edge
of ice-floes or a small boat, away from the disturbing effects of the research
vessel.