* 1439656
* Building Community and Capacity for an Internet-Accessible and State-Level Microsimulation Model of Tax and Benefit Policies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Linda Giannarelli, Urban Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 319,116.00

Social and economic policy increasing involves changes in both benefit programs
and the tax systems, yet methods to assess program impacts and interactions are
limited, and the available approaches provide primarily federal-level
information. This project will develop a complete substantive and technical plan
for a new tool for assessing government policies-an Internet-accessible
microsimulation model of tax and benefit policies able to estimate the impacts
of policy changes at the state level. A microsimulation model is a complex
computer program that mimics the operations of government programs using either
actual program rules or hypothetical rules. Changes in federal tax and benefit
policies are often assessed using microsimulation models developed by or for
federal government agencies; this project will lay the groundwork for a tool
that will allow microsimulation analysis at the state level, and that will be
accessible to anyone with Internet access. With the envisioned model, state
government analysts could estimate the cost or caseload impact of a
legislatively-proposed change in a tax or benefit program, an academic
researcher could assess the impact of a package of changes on state poverty,
students could conduct analyses to better understand how programs operate, non-
profit policy organizations with competing philosophies could discuss a state
policy proposal using quantitative estimates from the same source, and an
individual could see how changing programs would affect different
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design for the new model will be based on an
existing simulation model-the TRIM3 microsimulation model, which is funded and
copyrighted by the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (HHS/ASPE) and developed and
maintained by the Urban Institute. The data source will be the American
Community Survey, conducted by the Bureau of the Census, which provides large
samples for state-level analysis. TRIM3 already includes detailed state-level
simulations, but it primarily uses a different data source, and its computer
architecture and user interface do not allow extensive public access. The
planning for the new model will include three inter-related activities. First,
the researchers will hold meetings and webinars with prospective users,
including state government staff, academics, and other individuals interested in
state-level policies. Participants will be asked what modeling capabilities are
most important, the type of user interface that is needed, and the types of
modeling results that would be most helpful. Second, the research team will
develop prototype designs for the user interface and for results in various
formats. These designs will be shared with the potential community to obtain
their reactions and suggested improvements. Finally, the research team will
determine what computer architecture will best support this type of model,
allowing multiple users to simultaneously set up and run simulations, with very
fast run speeds. The final written product will be a complete plan for the
implementation of the new model. The work will also result in the development of
a community of researchers and policymakers who have applied or who want to
apply microsimulation techniques to the analysis of policy options in their
states.