* 1439290
* Second language acquisition and long-term retention in a mini-language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Michael Ullman, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 586,933.00

Learning a second language (L2) is becoming increasingly important given the
globalization of modern life. Yet, L2 learning is notoriously difficult,
especially in adulthood, and even after high proficiency is reached, learners
face the difficult yet critical task of retaining what they have learned. We
currently know very little about the neural mechanisms underlying L2 acquisition
and retention. A major roadblock in investigating the neurocognitive trajectory
of L2 acquisition is the time it takes a learner to acquire a full language,
from initial exposure all the way to high proficiency. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Michael Ullman and colleagues will use a new
approach to reveal the neural processing involved in the entire trajectory from
initial acquisition to high proficiency and then subsequent retention. Using a
reduced version of an actual natural language, Basque, but with many fewer words
and a simplified grammar, learners can achieve high proficiency in a relatively
shorter time. Investigating L2 learning using this reduced language may offer
insights into shared neural mechanisms underlying the learning and retention of
a full language. Both behavioral and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) measures will be continuously recorded while English-speaking adults
learn reduced Basque to high proficiency, over several learning sessions spread
out over several days, as well as again one and six months later to examine
language retention. This study will provide the first fine-grained picture of
the full behavioral and neural trajectories of L2 learning from initial exposure
to high proficiency and then retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
the brain learns a second language to high proficiency, and then retains it,
will pave the way to multiple beneficial outcomes. First, it may lead to
effective evidence-based language learning and teaching approaches. For example,
different neurocognitive mechanisms could be targeted for different aspects of
language at different points in the learning trajectory. Such approaches could
have significant impacts for education, security, and the economy, where
learning an L2 is often important, and sometimes critical. Such approaches could
also lead to advances in language (re)learning therapies for individuals with
developmental or acquired disorders (e.g., Specific Language Impairment,
dyslexia, autism, acquired aphasias), with substantial clinical benefits. The
proposed research may additionally impact research methodology, since
demonstrating the utility of this paradigm would open up major new avenues of L2
research. The project should also have institutional and educational benefits.
It brings together researchers from several disciplines and institutions,
strengthening existing collaborations and forming new ones. Finally, the project
will be leveraged to train the next generation of scientists, through the
development of an undergraduate research module, and the training of high
school, graduate, and post-doctoral students, providing them with first-hand
experience in cutting edge interdisciplinary research.