* 1439561
* Meeting: Finalizing an Integrated Behavior Ontology for the Behavioral Science Community in Two Workshops-August 7-8 2014, Princeton, N.J. and February 2015, Washington, DC
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Anne Clark, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2017
* USD 17,040.00

Ontologies or controlled vocabularies are fundamental to data access and data
sharing in the sciences. This project consists of two workshops where ontology
developers would connect the Animal Behavior Ontology (ABO), an ontology of
normal behavior across a wide variety of animals, to the NeuroBehavior Ontology
(NBO), a well-developed ontology of the behavioral phenotypes of model
organisms. As behavioral studies have become increasingly inter-disciplinary and
collaborative, establishing a cohesive framework within which data can be
labeled and shared becomes increasingly important to allow full utilization of
data produced with federal support. The joined ABO and NBO will become one
ontology, the Comprehensive Behavioral Ontology.

Ontologies are controlled vocabularies that specify the classes of objects that
exist, the relationships among those classes, and the possible relationships
among instances of the classes. More than 10 years ago behaviorists began to
create the Animal Behavior Ontology (ABO), an ontology of normal behavior across
non-model taxa. As animal behavior expanded to include behavior genetics,
genomics, neurobiology and particularly the use of model organisms, specialized
ontologies are being developed. The NeuroBehavior Ontology (NBO) is a well-
developed ontology of the behavioral phenotypes of model organisms, but it lacks
a formal structural relationship to the taxonomically broad and evolution-based
ABO. To bring about the integration of these two ontologies, we propose a series
of two workshops. The first will convene animal behavior experts to identify the
categories in each ontology that need to be defined, resolved and organized in
terms of relationships. The second workshop will bring together ontology experts
with behavioral biologists to take the recommendations and materials developed
in the first workshop and make the necessary changes in the NBO that will make
full integration possible. The researchers will disseminate the ontologies
through journal article and working with publishers to include the ontology's
meta data terms in supplementary material and deposited data.