* 1439867
* NebraskaNOYCE Phase II: Investigating the Impact in High-Need Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* W. J.  'Jim' Lewis, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 349,864.00

High quality teaching matters, especially for students "at risk." Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship projects attempt to address this through recruiting and
retaining excellent mathematics and science teachers to work in high-need
settings. This Fellowship Track Phase II Monitoring and Evaluation project will
examine the longitudinal impact of the NebraskaNOYCE project at the University
of Nebraska-Lincoln on the participants and on the professional community of
Nebraska mathematics teachers. The NebraskaNOYCE program has seen much success
in its initial three and one-half years, including 100% placement and retention
of Teaching Fellows (TFs) in high-need districts and excellence in the
professional trajectory of Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs). This project will
investigate how candidate and program factors contribute or do not contribute to
TFs' and MTFs' work as professionals in high-need districts, their commitment to
the teaching profession, and their commitment to placement in high-need
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching agenda of NebraskaNOYCE Phase
II is: What is the longitudinal impact of NebraskaNOYCE on recruitment and
retention of TFs and MTFs, and the development of their professional practice?
The goals of NebraskaNOYCE Phase II are to understand the factors and resources
that shaped the TFs' capacity for and commitment to teaching in high-need
districts; the MTFs' development as master teachers and commitment to teaching
mathematics in a high-need district; and the interactions between the TFs and
MTFs that influenced these factors and resources. The project focuses on the
impact of personal, social, and knowledge resources and factors on TFs' and
MTFs' professional practice. Additionally, NebraskaNOYCE Phase II will evaluate
the program's ability to recruit and retain teachers, the impact of the program
on University of Nebraska-Lincoln Department of Mathematics and Department of
Teaching, Learning, and Teacher Education, and the impact of the program on the
school districts. The knowledge that will be generated by this project has the
potential to impact other Noyce projects' activities and research and evaluation
designs, as well as preservice teacher education and inservice teacher
professional development on a scale that extends beyond the Noyce community. A
comprehensive dissemination plan will ensure that research produced by
NebraskaNOYCE Phase II will be shared with the NSF Noyce community, the
Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities' (APLU) Mathematics Teacher
Education Partnership (MTE-Partnership) and the broader mathematics and
mathematics education communities. Nebraska's membership in the MTE-Partnership
provides the team with a dissemination platform to reach educators who are
working to improve secondary mathematics teacher preparation and their induction
into the teaching profession. NebraskaNOYCE's 43 MTFs and TFs have all remained
in their high-need schools; understanding the supports that have helped this to
happen will allow this project to make policy recommendations related to
preservice teacher preparation, novice teacher induction, teacher retention, and
qualities of effective cooperating teachers and mentors. This project also will
contribute to the sparse literature on mathematics teacher leaders related to
the development and growth trajectories of MTFs as mathematics teacher leaders
in high-need districts. Data collection will include observations of teachers
through the cycle of planning, teaching and reflecting, and interviews designed
to address research questions associated with either preservice or master
teacher participants.