* 1439955
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Monumental Architecture And Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Fred Valdez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 15,473.00

Prehistoric Mayans provide an excellent example of a culture which, with
relatively simple technology, was able to create societies which included
multiple thousands of individuals and allow them to function successfully in a
physical environment which supports lower population densities today.
Researchers wish to understand the social mechanisms - some political and others
economic - which facilitated this adaptation. This research project achieves
significance within this context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;La Milpa is one of the
largest ancient Maya sites in Belize, and was occupied from the Late Preclassic
to the Terminal Classic (approximately 250 BC to AD 850). Structure 3 is a
temple pyramid and one of the largest structures at the site, built initially
around 250 BC, and renovated multiple times over its history. Under the
supervision of Dr Fred Valdez, and guidance from Dr Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach and
Dr Paul Goldberg, Debora Trein will examine the possible functions of Structure
3 by analyzing the distribution of microscopic remains of activities in and
around this building, in conjunction with a traditional examination of artifact
assemblages and the architectural morphology of the structure. Ms. Trein will
examine the patterns of activities at Structure 3 by employing Inductively
Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS), sediment micromorphology, and AMS
radiocarbon dating in the analysis of samples gathered during the 2012 and 2013
field seasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ancient monumental architecture is a
research topic that has received sustained academic attention. Nevertheless, the
approach adopted in this project provides a new perspective on the subject,
primarily for two reasons. First, this research will analyze archaeological
evidence at the microscopic level, in the shape of chemical signatures and
micromorphological traits of sediments associated with particular activities.
These types of evidence are seldom used in a discussion of the functions of
monumental architecture in the Maya region, even though these may be just as
indicative of variability of ancient space use as the architecture itself.
Second, studies of monumental architecture in the Maya region have generally
focused on the intentions of its architects, who are assumedly of elite status.
This project aims to complement these studies by focusing also on the actual use
of Structure 3 by its community, as suggested by the remains of activities that
may include such mundane acts as cooking and tool-making. In doing so, this
research seeks to inform on how various groups of agents, possibly of diverse
social and economic backgrounds, shaped this monumental structure and its
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to have broader impacts beyond
the intellectual benefits presented. During the 2012 and 2013 field seasons,
undergraduate students from the United States and local staff received training
in geochemical and micromorphology sampling. These educational opportunities
will be expanded in the future. Ms. Trein will hold workshops on retrieval and
analysis of geochemical and micromorphology samples for undergraduate students,
local staff, and the surrounding community at Programme for Belize
Archaeological Project (PfBAP), in Belize. It is hoped that this public outreach
effort will foster community understanding and engagement in archaeology, and
provide an educational opportunity for those who may be interested in pursuing a
career in archaeology. The results from this project will be disseminated in
peer-reviewed publications and presentations at symposia in the United States
and abroad, promoting academic scholarship and collaboration. The raw data
produced by this research will be freely and widely available through the
University of Texas Digital Repository (UTDR).