* 1439391
* Conference Grant Proposal for 2014 IEEE ICOPS/Beams, May 25-29, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Scott Kovaleski, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

The 41st IEEE International Conference on Plasma Science (ICOPS) and the 20th
International Conference on High-Powered Particle Beams (Beams 2014) will be
held in Washington, DC May 25-29, 2014. The meeting is sponsored by the IEEE
Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society under the supervision of the Plasma Science
and Applications Committee and Pulsed Power Science &amp; Technology Committee
to provide a forum for the exchange of technical information in the area of
plasma science, pulsed power science, technology, systems, and applications.
Plasma technologies are expanding rapidly into new areas including bio-medical
areas, high energy density matter, materials processing, in addition to
continued growth in traditional areas such as basic physics, lighting, radiation
sources, beam physics, inertial and magnetic confinement fusion, environmental
sciences, and pulsed power. These areas depend on a strong foundation of basic
research featured in the ICOPS meeting. The ICOPS technical program continues to
reflect the dynamic evolution of pulsed power and plasma science through
plenary, invited, and oral talks, as well as interactive poster sessions in a
diverse set of sessions organized by a diverse group of researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICOPS is held annually and is joining Beams, which is
returning to the United States this year, and is held bi-annually. ICOPS has
been held annually since 1974. Recent meetings were held in San Francisco, CA
(2013, a joint meeting with Pulsed Power), Edinburgh, Scotland (2012), Chicago,
IL (2011), Norfolk VA (2010), San Diego CA (2009), Karlsruhe Germany (2008),
Albuquerque NM (2007, a joint meeting with Pulsed Power). In 2014, ICOPS/Beams
will be held in Washington, DC (http://www.ece.unm.edu/icops-
beams2014/index.html). Projected attendance is approximately 500 participants.
The conference will include plenary, oral, and poster sessions on research in
charged particle beams and plasma science and technology and a Prize Address by
the recipient of the Plasma Science and Applications Committee Award. Oral
sessions will include plenary, invited and contributed papers. In addition to
the material traditionally covered in these conferences, two mini-courses will
also be offered, on the topics of Low Temperature Atmospheric Pressure Plasmas
and Atomic and Radiation Physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for students to attend the IEEE International Conference on
Plasma Science and the International Conference on High-Powered Particle Beams.
It will support student travel grants, particularly underrepresented minorities,
promote women in engineering, and help in awards costs. The travel grant will be
awarded to those students who will be presenting papers (oral talks and posters)
as first authors. If a large number of students will be presenting their work,
then a committee consisting of three members of the local organizing committee
will choose students on the basis of merit and need.