* 1439070
* I-Corps:  Polysialic Acid Based Nanocarriers as Platforms for Targeted Drug Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Rebecca Bader, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed project is intended to educate the principal investigator and the
entrepreneurial lead on how to translate their drug delivery technology to the
marketplace so as to enhance societal benefits. The resultant improvements to
existing drug delivery will benefit those who suffer from potentially
debilitating diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, cystic fibrosis,
peripheral artery disease, and cancer. It is envisioned that the proposed drug
delivery technology will find use in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed drug delivery technology is aimed
at improving the site-specific delivery of drugs by using polysialic acid
(PSA)-based nanocarriers. Conventional and newly developed therapeutics are
often associated with severe consequences due to non-specific targeting and
induction of immunogenic responses. In recent years, paradigms have shifted
towards combining toxic drugs with molecular vehicles intended to promote
delivery exclusively to the diseased region, thereby increasing efficacy and
reducing side effects. It is envisioned that the proposed PSA-based nanocarrier
systems, in the form of nanoparticles and micelles, will find use in the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries to improve the delivery of both
conventional, small molecules therapeutics, as well as recently developed
therapeutic biologics.