* 1439123
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Pastoralist Economy And Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Steven Goldstein, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 25,087.00

The transition from hunting-and-gathering to agricultural production brought
about unprecedented transformations in human societies. In Africa, unlike most
parts of the world, people began keeping cattle before they started planting
crops. Lifestyles based on animal herding continue to be important in Africa,
however how, and why, these strategies spread so successfully remain poorly
understood. The apparent diversity among ancient pastoralists living in southern
Kenya provides a particularly good context for studying the social and economic
roles of family level exchange in this process. This project will examine the
formation of obsidian (volcanic glass) procurement networks by studying how it
was extracted and prepared for exchange at the quarry site on Mt. Eburru.
Although this research is focused on past events, the insights gained are
relevant to present day issues as pastoralist societies continue to interact
today in many parts of East Africa, often to the detriment of peace and human
wellbeing. This research will be conducted by graduate student, Steven Goldstein
under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall. The results will form the basis for
his doctoral dissertation.

Around 2,000 years ago, herders entering Kenya from the north began using a
distinct green volcanic glass from Mt. Eburru, in the Central Rift Valley, for
all of their tool production. The preference for this obsidian may have led to
the emergence of a regional exchange network, connecting pioneering herding
families as they spread across the region. Studying how people used the Eburru
quarry provides a unique opportunity to understand how such networks developed,
and will help to unravel their important role in the expansion of African food
production. Mr. Goldstein will use emerging techniques in 3D scanning to analyze
stone tool material at the quarry, reconstructing how activities at this vital
site were organized. Comparing patterns at the quarry with ancient herder
settlements across southern Kenya, will provide a comprehensive understanding of
how exchange operated, and how this influenced the spread of cattle herding.

This project will have broader impacts beyond the direct academic contributions.
The study will involve collaborations between American and Kenyan scholars, and
will include training American and Kenyan graduate students. It will also
bolster teaching collections and teaching infrastructure at Washington
University in St. Louis. The data produced will be used to train undergraduate
research assistants in analyzing 3D data, a skillset that is increasingly
important in many branches of science and engineering. Furthermore, student
participation in this research will help build skills needed for scientific
research. This research will also aid in public outreach, through public
lectures at Washington University, the Missouri History Museum, and in ongoing
programs through the St. Louis Science Center and local school districts that
expose students of all ages to various aspects of science. These efforts will
improve the dialogue between scientists and the public, particularly improving
the understanding of anthropology and archaeology.