* 1439628
* Pacific University Preparation of Culturally and Linguistically Diverse STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Catherine Kim, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2020
* USD 798,069.00

The Pacific University Preparation of Culturally and Linguistically Diverse STEM
Teachers project is a collaboration between Pacific University College of Arts
and Sciences, the College of Education, the Woodburn School District, the
TeachOregon Consortium, and the South Metro-Salem STEM Partnership, designed to
increase the number of new middle and high school STEM teachers equipped to
serve in multicultural, multilingual, high-needs communities. This project will
be a comprehensive, community-based STEM teacher recruitment, training, and
induction program, which will provide up to two years of scholarship support for
40 exemplary STEM teaching candidates. Over a five-year period, the project will
evaluate and research the transformative community-based model of STEM teacher
preparation, further broadening its impact as a regional and national leader in
understanding "what works" in preparing STEM teachers for success in 21st
century schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific University project seeks to
better understand how new STEM teachers can be best recruited, prepared, and
inducted for ambitious, literacy-rich STEM teaching. In many high-need schools
and communities, including Woodburn, student development of STEM academic
language literacy is critical to being prepared for college, careers, and
citizenship. To better understand how to prepare STEM teachers for such
communities, the project will study how proficient these Noyce Scholars are in
enacting literacy-rich teaching practices compared to similar non-Scholar
teacher candidates and what the impact on student learning will be. In addition,
the project will study the trajectories of Pacific Noyce Scholars' teaching
practices influenced by this pre-service experience. Finally, the project will
study the specialized tools and professional routines used in this community-
based clinical teacher preparation program and the development of literacy-rich
STEM teaching practices. A design action research methodology will be
implemented in which multiple data sources are collected and analyzed on an
ongoing basis to illustrate inputs, formative outputs, and summative outputs.
Data will be collected for the 40 Pacific Noyce Scholars during the teacher
preparation phase and first two years of early-career induction to the teaching
profession. This applied research work will build on prior NSF initiatives in
STEM literacy, making critical breakthroughs in understanding how STEM teachers
can be best prepared to teach literacy-rich STEM in high-needs schools.