* 1439292
* III: Travel Fellowships for Students from U.S. Universities to Attend ISWC 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

Semantic technologies are beginning to play increasingly important roles across
a broad range of applications. There is an urgent need for advanced training of
graduate students to conduct research in this area and prepare for academic or
industrial careers. Participation in premier research conferences in the area is
an essential element of such training. This project will provide funds to
subsidize the travel expenses of 10-15 students at U.S. universities to attend
the 2014 International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) which will be held October
19-23, 2014 in Riva del Garda, Italy. Broader impacts of the project include:
Enhanced opportunities for training and mentoring of US-based graduate students
in Semantic Web and related areas, broadening the particiation of students from
groups (women and minorities) that are currently under-represented in Computer
Science in general, and Semantic Web in particular.

ISWC is a premier international conference which offers a venue for the
presentation of rigorously peer-reviewed research results in Semantic Web and
related areas. The conference includes two events specially targeted to graduate
students: The ISWC doctoral consortium offers an opportunity for doctoral
students to present their work and receive feedback and mentoring. The ISWC
Career Mentoring lunch provides an informal setting for students to discuss all
issues pertaining to research careers with senior researchers in the community,
and to establish long-term mentoring ties. This project will enhance the
professional development of the participating students, by not only exposing
them to the latest research ideas, but also by establishing connections with and
receiving feedback from top international researchers.

For further information see the project webpage: http://pascal-
hitzler.de/projects/iswc2014.html