* 1439549
* Collaborative Research: BCC: Developing a Research Community and Capacity  for the Study of Cultural Heritage in Conflict
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Susan Wolfinbarger, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,897.00

Cultural heritage represents the physical manifestation of the culture and
history of a social group or region and forms a major component of a people's
sense of identity. Intentional destruction of cultural heritage during
intrastate and ethnonationalist conflict is a well-known but rarely studied
phenomenon often designed to erase the presence and history of a rival social or
ethnic group. Recent cases of such destruction include the 2001 demolition of
the Bamiyan Buddhas in Afghanistan, the 2006 bombing of the al-Askari Mosque in
Iraq, and the 2012 destruction of Sufi shrines in Timbuktu, Mali. Despite
considerable scholarship about purposeful violations of civil and political
rights during conflict, there is a general tendency to view damage to cultural
heritage as an unfortunate collateral outcome, rather than as a deliberate
tactic. Consequently, few studies have examined how damage to cultural heritage
sites is linked to ethnic or sectarian violence. Understanding how heritage
destruction is implicated in the trajectory of these conflicts will enable U.S.
policymakers and other humanitarian agencies working in conflict zones to design
more effective interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project will convene a working group consisting of subject matter experts in
archaeology, anthropology, and other allied fields; specialists in conflict
studies from political science, geography, and sociology; and methodological
experts from the data sciences. Over the course of a two-year period, this
research community will develop common definitions and coding standards that
will enable the future development of large-scale datasets documenting and
quantifying the destruction of cultural heritage. In order to facilitate such a
comparative study, there is a need to develop methods for integrating data about
events, specific localities, historical trajectories, and social conditions that
precipitate acute outbreaks of destructive violence, which includes damage to
cultural heritage. The proposed coding standards will be evaluated with a proof-
of-concept case study based upon the current conflict in Syria. The completion
of this test dataset will establish best practices in coding cultural heritage
destruction information as well as a case study on the relationship between
sectarian violence and cultural heritage destruction. Findings of the study, as
well as an assessment of the validity and reliability of the coding strategy
will be made available through a web portal.