* 1439546
* Wyoming Interns to Teacher Scholars (WITS) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Jacqueline Leonard, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,473,980.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship project at the University of Wyoming (UW)
and Central Wyoming College (CWC) seeks to increase the number of talented STEM
teachers in high-needs public, elementary schools (grades K-6) in rural Wyoming.
During the funding period, 30 students will receive scholarships in their
junior, senior, and fifth years to complete dual STEM and early
childhood/elementary education majors. The primary goal of the project is to
train a diverse group of students with strong STEM backgrounds to increase the
quality and number of math and science teachers in the region. The project
objectives are to establish (a) recruitment activities that include parents and
students at regional high schools, (b) training and summer research internships
to cultivate an interest in STEM teaching among rising sophomores, (c)
mathematics tutoring and mentoring activities that include seminars and retreats
with STEM professionals, elders, and community leaders, and (d) support
mechanisms for pre-service teachers through professional learning communities
and online focus groups. In order to broaden participation of scholars from
groups which are under-represented in STEM, recruitment efforts will target
Native American and Hispanic students and support structures will focus on
mitigating systematic disadvantages and boosting self-efficacy, particularly in
STEM education. The project will be conducted in collaboration with the Science
and Mathematics Teaching Center and Converse County, Crook County, Fremont
County, Natrona County, and Uinta County school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-efficacy is known to be a strong motivating
factor for the course of action individuals may take, the amount of effort they
will expend, how long they will persevere when challenged, how much stress they
will experience, and the level of success they will reach. The Noyce Scholars
will develop strong science and mathematics content knowledge and reinforce
their capacity to sustain STEM teaching and learning in rural schools through
place-based education and culturally relevant pedagogy, thereby laying the
foundation for their efficacy as teachers. Rising sophomores will participate in
science and math internships through K-12 summer programs sponsored by 4-H,
Wyoming Astrocamp, and the Teton Science schools among others. Students at UW
will have options to take a variety of dual STEM and education tracks in
chemistry, computer science, engineering, geology, biology, or math. At CWC,
dual majors will be created for biology and math students. Three levels of
mentorship will be offered to the participants, near-peer (graduate students and
young professionals will interact with students during internships), faculty
(professors will have one-on-one, bi-weekly meetings during the academic junior,
senior, and fifth years), and teacher (retired teachers will help students
reflect on their student teaching experiences) mentoring. Data generated through
assessment and evaluation should support the rationale that by cultivating
students' self-efficacy as STEM educators, they will persist in the course of
study and become better, more dedicated teachers. Formative and summative
evaluation will focus on whether or not the project objectives have been met and
the effectiveness of project activities. Assessment of students' progress and
performance will include both qualitative and quantitative data collected
through annual participant surveys and artifact reviews, teacher self-efficacy
surveys, social identity tests, and classroom observation. Dissemination of the
project results will provide a model for using this self-efficacy framework as a
tool for training future STEM teachers. The project team plans to present their
work through annual meetings of the American Educational Research Association,
Association of Teacher Educators, and National Association of Research in
Science Teaching and through publication of research and evaluation findings in
journals such as the Journal of Teacher Education, Action in Teacher Education,
and Journal of Cultural Diversity. Project deliverables will include results of
summative evaluation and course materials.