* 1439625
* HACU National Internship Program
* O/D,OIA
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Luis Maldonado, Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
* Continuing Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/2017
* USD 626,965.00

The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU) is the recipient of
an award for summer internship support. HACU, a national, non-profit
organization, has a long and distinguished record of providing summer internship
opportunities through the organization?s National Internship Program (NIP).
Through NIP, academically prepared students throughout the US and Puerto Rico
have received quality internship assignments through various federal government
agencies. Participants are exposed to various career options in the Federal
sector that serve as a basis in helping students make informed career choices
and solidify career objectives. By partnering with public and private sector
partners, HACU has been able to successfully place over 10,000 students in
internships since NIP commenced in 1992. In an effort to continue its
collaboration with HACU, the National Science Foundation, a participating
government agency, will offer challenging assignments that will broaden the
exposure of students pursuing careers in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM). Internships create a unique opportunity to assist in the
preparation and engagement of a future STEM workforce motivated to participate
at the frontiers of science and engineering research. By integrating research
and education, the Foundation actively participates in strengthening the human
capital infrastructure to achieve excellence in STEM education and research.