* 1439789
* Rural Enhancement of Mathematics and Science Teachers (REMAST) Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Larry Browning, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 794,577.00

South Dakota State University (SDSU) seeks to increase the number of talented
STEM teachers in high-need public, secondary schools (grades 7-12) in rural
South Dakota. Over the course of funding, 12 students will receive scholarships
during their junior and senior years to complete a biology, chemistry, math, or
physics major while pursuing secondary education certification. Several
strategies will be used to recruit and retain these students including (a)
initiation of early field experiences for those who are considering becoming
teachers, (b) establishment of a Learning Assistants program for students in
their second and third years, and (c) employment of face-to-face and virtual
platforms to create a network of recent graduates, scholars, and faculty. A
retrospective study will compare the previous cohorts (funded through a Phase I
grant) to the new students in order to determine how the project components
impact students at each stage of their professional development and which
project components are most effective in supporting teachers in rural districts.
This work will be done in collaboration with Brookings and Huron school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are based on a theory
of action which posits that research mentoring, student enrichment and support
activities, and professional affiliation should contribute to pre-service
students' success at each phase of their professional training and development.
Evaluation data from Phase I will be mined and compared to data collected
regarding the Phase II scholars. For the Phase I cohorts, research questions
will address the factors that contributed to high quality teacher preparation
and translate into the generation of high quality teachers. Assessment of the
Phase II cohorts will follow a Context, Input, Process, and Product model. All
data will be collected using interviews, on-line surveys, work samples, and
observation reports. Dissemination of the project results will provide an
example for how to use research as a motivator and tool for training future STEM
teachers. The project team plans to present its work through the annual SDSU
Faculty Excellence Celebration Day and at the Joint Annual Meetings of South
Dakota Math and Science Teachers Association, and through publication of
research and evaluation findings in peer reviewed journals that focus on rural
education. Project deliverables will include results of summative evaluation and
the student enrichment materials.