* 1439586
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Political Economy And Subsistence Linkages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Kevin Lowry, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 25,185.00

Social and historical sciences have long examined political economies,
especially those in transition. Of particular concern is how changes to
subsistence practices (food production, acquisition, and distribution) are
related to the fabrication and maintenance of new political structures. Today,
political and economic issues are inescapably global; with peoples, regions, and
countries consistently in transition (re)making and (re)stating their position
within this complex milieu. These transitional periods can cause "tensions"
which manifest on the landscape, on identities, within familial ties or larger
power structures, and upon the simple routines that are grounded in a peoples'
struggle to be heard, to be recognized, and to survive. Archaeology is well-
positioned to investigate the dynamics of shifting political economies, because
these transitions occur over long periods of time and leave imprints on the
material world. Following this line of thinking, this project will examine
social, economic, and political transformations associated with the shift to
pastoralism in Mongolia approximately 3,500 years ago. Although ancient
pastoralists cannot be equated with their modern counterparts, an archaeological
investigation of these topics will not only expand knowledge of Eurasian
history, but broaden our theoretical framework for contextualizing change in the
present where pastoralism is a central mode of subsistence. The field research
will be conducted by Mr. Kevin Lowry, a graduate student at the University of
Chicago and will provide the data for his doctoral dissertation thesis. He will
work closely with a Mongolian counterpart and will organize lectures and
tutorials for Mongolian students. This will sensitize them to the importance of
their archaeological heritage and over the long run strengthen scientific ties
with the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Late Bronze-Early Iron Age
(1500-500 BC) transition in Mongolia, mounted mobile pastoralism was adopted as
the main economic strategy, with scholars suggesting that a strong
centralization of power took place simultaneously. Although this period is a
critical prelude to some of the most (in)famous empires of East Asia, most of
what is known is derived from mortuary contexts. However, burials provide
limited information about political economic organization and change. This
prompts specific questions: How did the adoption of pastoralism alter economic
practices upon the landscape, and how did shifts in economic strategies
reinforce or transform political organization? And what social processes were
employed in the production and enforcement of authority? To address these
questions researchers will describe, link, and analyze occupational landscapes.
As a complementary perspective to previous burial studies, occupational
landscapes include a wider range of sites associated with pastoralist
settlements and activities, including: 1) sites of frequented or permanent
habitation, such as pithouses, ger (felt tent) platforms, or corrals; 2)
features associated with domestic activity such as hearths, storage pits,
caches, or middens; 3) activity areas related to the raw material procurement
and production of metals, lithics, and ceramic; and 4) places designated for the
seasonal herding or culling of fauna. Research concentrates on two sites in
Bayan-Khongor province located during preliminary survey completed in 2011 and
2012. Pastoralist activity areas will be identified through a variety of
archaeological techniques: pedestrian survey, excavation, and geophysical
prospection using electromagnetometry equipment. These techniques, in
combination with an occupational landscape perspective, encourage a simultaneous
look at household, local, and regional scales. This spatial flexibility will
offer a variety of empirical and theoretical detail about pastoralist economic
production, political processes, and social trajectories in Mongolia, with
broader applications to historical and contemporary societies elsewhere.