* 1439842
* Developing Master Teachers through the South Carolina Science and Mathematics Teacher Leaders (SC-SMTL) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2023
* Matthew Irvin, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,990,299.00

In collaboration with South Carolina's Coalition for Mathematics and Science,
the University of South Carolina-Columbia seeks to establish professional
development mechanisms for 20 Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs). Four challenges
faced by rural teachers and their school districts have been identified; (a)
relative isolation from other teachers, (b) high attrition, (c) lack of
leadership, and (d) weak opportunities for continuing teacher education. The
project will initiate strategies to address these challenges and evaluate their
implementation. The work will be carried out in partnership with Fairfield
County, Lexington County, Lexington, Orangeburg Consolidated, and Sumter school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on research that addresses
effective STEM professional development for rural teachers. The project team
will employ proven strategies to create a network of teacher-leaders with strong
content knowledge through on-site and virtual mentor/coach, content-knowledge,
and new math and science standards training. In years one through three of the
project, teachers will participate in intensive summer workshops or
Instructional Leadership Academies which they will begin to co-lead by year
four. Data generated through assessment and evaluation will underpin
investigations of how the project components enhance the preparation and
commitment of the MTFs and the circumstances governing success. Formative and
summative evaluation will focus on determining whether or not the conceptual
basis of the interventions (addressing the four challenges) is sound. Assessment
will include both qualitative and quantitative data collected through tracking
MTF participation in project activities, perceptions of all aspects of the
project (online surveys), performance in coursework, and classroom observations.
The results of this work will be presented at annual regional and national
meetings and submitted for publication in a variety of teaching journals such as
The Journal of Science Teacher Education, Journal for Mathematics Teacher
Education, and Journal for Research in Rural Education.