* 1439241
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Health Sense: Motivating Health Awareness in Children through Wearable Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Katie Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 532,708.00

The obesity epidemic among children has become a widespread problem in the
United States. This trend is disturbing because overweight children tend to
become overweight or obese adults with potentially life threatening chronic
conditions. By focusing on children?s physical activity, we can shift the
problem from treatment to prevention. There are numerous academic and commercial
applications that aim to help individuals monitor and make proactive decisions
about their physical activity; however they do not integrate well into an
individual's daily life because they may require manual activity input,
asynchronous visualization, and non-instinctive awareness of the application for
actionable feedback. Thus, while existing devices have had some success in
monitoring, inferring, and presenting activity, they do not always convey the
value of physical activity in an intuitive visual abstraction. The feedback
design is important in designing wearable technology for children because
children are less likely to connect quantifiable measurements - in this case
with their health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to these issues, we design
innovative wearable computing components that empower children to craft their
own intuitive abstractions of wellness data for physical activity promotion.
This project builds on existing socio-technical research in health informatics
by extending the nascent research subarea, wellness informatics, that studies
how technology can be utilized to empower lay populations to stay well and adopt
preventative health behaviors. The research objectives of this project are to:
(1) Design plug-and-play wellness monitoring Health Sense systems; (2) Design a
graphical programming environment to control the actions of the Health Sense
systems; and (3) Understand how children use Health Sense systems. The research
methodology is inspired by participatory design activities including participant
observations, design workshops, and iterative evaluation of prototypes. Overall,
the proposed system provides innovations in computing by creating new, wearable
computing prototypes and paradigms of interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of Health Sense include undergraduate and graduate research
assistant interdisciplinary research training. The research team is introducing
low socioeconomic status K-12 students to computing, electronics, and health
through Health Sense workshops. Research methodology and results is being
integrated into the PIs' established 1st year general engineering projects
courses. In addition, the PIs and their students are helping increase the
pipeline of future scholars by developing teaching and outreach materials that
are being distributed through the project website. The PIs and their students
are disseminating their research by publishing results in health informatics and
traditional computing venues. Finally, the system also helps fulfill Healthy
People 2020 Educational and Community-Based Programs goals.