* 1439743
* RAPID: Trace Element Cycling in Dan River Sediments following Coal Fly Ash Release
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Andrew Heyes, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2015
* USD 49,909.00

1439743&lt;br/&gt;Heyes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On February 2, 2014, the third-
largest coal ash spill in the Nation occurred at Eden, North Carolina where a
drainage pipe under a 27-acre Duke Energy Dan River Steam Plant waste pond
collapsed, discharging coal ash and millions of gallons of contaminated water
into the Dan River. The Dan River originates in Virginia and flows into North
Carolina and then flows north back into Virginia crossing the state lines eight
times. It eventually flows into the Roanoke River, and into Lake Kerr then Lake
Gaston and eventually into the Albemarle Sound, NC. The waters serve as a highly
used recreation system and as a source of drinking water for cities from
Danville, VA to as far away as Virginia Beach. The toxic constituents of coal
ash include various contaminants from metals such as arsenic (As), lead (Pb),
mercury (Hg) to selenium (Se) along with a suite of organic compounds. While the
element concentrations in impoundment water can exceed drinking water criteria
and aquatic life water quality criteria, less is known about the fate of trace
elements bound to ash in the new biogeochemical environment of the Dan River.
Dissolution and changes in speciation can increase metal toxicity thus threaten
wild life and water usability for years to come. To answer some of these
questions a multidisciplinary approach is necessary. This study will provide
information to policy makers on the extent to which coal fly ash releases
present a hazard to humans and wildlife. Specifically it will address the extent
to which trace elements continue to be released from ash enriched sediments and
if the depositional environment influences such release. This research will help
determine if sediment removal is warranted and to prioritize any removal efforts
based on the environment of deposition and proximity to targets of concern such
as drinking water intakes and sensitive areas for the rivers fishery and
recreational use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research seeks to assess
the impact of ash on sediment biogeochemistry as it pertains to the
bioavailability and toxicity of ash born trace elements. Particular emphasis is
placed on the sediment redox condition as this impacts metal speciation and
mobility in sediments. It is understood that development of anoxic conditions in
sediments promotes the release of trace elements through changes in speciation.
It is hypothesized this will occur in the case of coal fly ash. The research
will focus on the release of trace elements As, Se, Hg and MeHg to porewater as
indicators of trace element mobility, transformation and bioavailability. It has
also been proposed that trace element mobility is enhanced through a direct
interaction with sulfur or indirectly through sulfurized organic matter. The
research will investigate the degree of sulfurization of DOM in sediment
porewater to assess if this is a potential mechanism for trace element
mobilization and transport.