* 1439550
* RAPID: Do extreme climatic events and predator diversity interact to shape the biogeography of disease?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* John Orrock, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 83,645.00

This research will provide critical information on the Sin Nombre Virus (SNV)
that can help improve the safety of hundreds of thousands of National Park
visitors each year, as well as involve two graduate students and a postdoctoral
scientist. Many diseases that affect humans (e.g. Lyme disease, hantaviruses,
West Nile disease, rabies, toxoplasmosis) are zoonotic diseases, i.e. diseases
where an animal is the primary host for the disease. As a result, understanding
the ecological forces that govern the prevalence of disease in animals is very
important for understanding human disease risk. However, predicting disease
prevalence can be difficult because the size of animal populations is likely
affected by both predators and by resource availability (e.g. the amount of food
available for animals). Understanding how predators and resource availability
interact to affect host populations may be further complicated by extreme
climatic events that may become more common under future climate scenarios,
since climate (e.g. the amount of annual precipitation) often determines
resource availability. In addition, human activities are changing the worldwide
distribution of top predators, likely affecting the nature of predator effects
on animal populations. Despite the importance of understanding how predators and
climate shape disease, such research is challenging because predators are rarely
known with certainty, and because extreme climatic events may occur so rapidly
that it is difficult to study them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will use multiple island ecosystems where predator diversity is known, providing
an unprecedented opportunity to understand how extreme climatic events and
predator diversity affect the prevalence of Sin Nombre Virus (SNV), which causes
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, a severe disease in humans. Specifically, this
research entails measuring SNV prevalence in deer mice on the California Channel
Islands during and after a drought more severe than any drought in the last 500
years. These data, especially when coupled with existing pre-drought data,
provide a rare opportunity to understand the interplay between extreme climatic
events and predators in affecting large-scale prevalence of disease, and also
provides an opportunity to evaluate the novel hypothesis that predator diversity
reduces the rate at which disease prevalence rebounds in animal populations.