* 1439021
* XPS: FULL:CCA: Extracting Scalable Parallelism by Relaxing the Contracts across the System Stack
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 850,000.00

Technology scaling trends have made parallelism the de-facto standard for
enhancing performance across a spectrum of computing environments spanning from
high-end computing to embedded platforms. Yet, the software is woefully lagging
in its ability to extract usable parallelism offered by the underlying hardware
platforms primarily because of the compartmentalized contracts between the
different layers of the system stack. Rigid contracts restrict the ability to
leverage a rich design space of performance/power/correctness trade-offs within
and across layers, that could be achievable by straying slightly from the
contract. Although such a relaxed contract, referred to as approximate
computing, has received attention recently, much of the work in this area is
still compartmentalized and lacks a holistic cross-layer strategy to maximize
parallelism, while adhering to power and correctness mandates. Thus, the
motivation of this project is to explore a holistic cross-layer approach to
approximate computing spanning application, runtime system, compiler and
hardware, thereby breaking the rigidity of the contracts between the layers,
while still allowing them to cooperate for extracting the achievable parallelism
across a diverse set of applications in both the high-end and mobile computing
environments. Specifically, it involves application-level analysis of the scope
of approximation for computation, data access and synchronization, designing
efficient hardware mechanisms that could facilitate and benefit from
approximation, and developing compiler and runtime support for expressing,
exploiting and evaluating/validating the approximations in an architecture-aware
fashion. This cross-layer approach to approximate computing is expected to play
a crucial role towards achieving scalable parallelism for the next decade and
beyond, with a potentially high impact to the computing industry. In addition,
the tools and models developed from this project are disseminated in the public
domain to a broader research community, and the PIs engage in a variety of
outreach activities such as recruiting women and minority and involvement of
local high school students through Penn State Eberly College's Exploration-U
initiatives.