* 1439817
* Noyce Phase II Monitoring &amp; Evaluation at St. Edward's University
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Cynthia Naples, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 294,473.00

This Phase II Monitoring and Evaluation project from St. Edward's University
(SEU) intends to spark a systemic change in science and mathematics teacher
education in the region. By examining the objectives of an earlier Phase I
teacher scholars project at SEU and extending its findings and questions into
the future, this project will: (1) illuminate the successful components of the
recruitment strategies employed; (2) clarify results of SEU's partnership with
Austin Community College in the original Phase I work; and (3) determine the
value of the professional development summer institutes held in Phase I. The
investigation will also provide insight into building relationships with local
STEM community stakeholders to use research as a means to jump-start future
teacher leadership in the Austin region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
provides funds to extend the Phase I induction program for three additional
years. By doing this, SEU will support the final cohorts of scholars as well as
provide additional long-term research data for dissemination. During this time
the project will measure: (1) the impact of the project on SEU Phase I Noyce
scholar performance as teachers, (2) their completion of the teaching
requirement, and (3) their retention in the teaching profession. The principal
investigators will also explore the formation and strengthening of community
partnerships between the high-tech industry partners and the local STEM teacher
preparation enterprise. By examining the professional development growth of
early career science and mathematics teachers over an extended period, the
findings will uncover important factors related to teacher retention and growth.
Ultimately, this study will help fill crucial gaps in the current knowledge base
of factors related to the continuum of science and mathematics teacher
development from recruitment through the critical induction years.