* 1439862
* Supporting Science Teaching: The San Diego State University Noyce Scholars and Interns Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Kathy Williams, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,199,524.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, this San Diego State University (SDSU) Noyce Scholarship
Track I project will address the national need to produce a high quality
teaching workforce in science. The project will recruit a select group of high-
achieving and diverse science majors into teaching and will provide support
through a variety of hands-on, research-based learning experiences to develop
the recipients' teaching practices and science content knowledge, while
nurturing their enthusiasm for teaching. The project will provide financial
support for seventy-four (74) internships and scholarships, and work with SDSU's
existing Center for the Advancement of Students in Academia (CASA) to give
particular attention to recruiting participants from diverse backgrounds,
including students from underrepresented minorities. Results from the project
not only will enhance science workforce diversity, but will also contribute to a
broader understanding of how teacher preparation programs can be tailored to
reach and prepare underrepresented students for successful science teaching
careers. The program will offer forty (40) Noyce Internships to first and second
year biology, chemistry, geology, and physics majors, who will explore teaching
through participating in SDSU's summer camp for students from grades 2-8. The
camp will be set in place through this grant, and will be sustained by SDSU once
the grant is completed. Select interns and other science majors will receive
scholarships to become Noyce Scholars during their teaching credential year and
as new teachers placed in high needs schools. The program will produce at least
thirty-four (34) new high quality science teachers through these scholarships,
and the investigators will help place graduates from the program in high needs
schools and then provide them with important and timely support when they enter
the STEM teaching profession. The project will build on SDSU's Noyce Master
Teacher Fellows project (NSF #1240127) by placing the Noyce Scholars from this
project in classrooms of master teachers from the Teacher Fellows program. These
experienced Teacher Fellows will serve as guides and mentors for the new
Teaching Scholars. The overall project will be housed in SDSU's Center for
Research in Mathematics and Science Education, and the research and evaluation
plans include methodologies for measuring the role of the Noyce Internships in
providing early opportunities to promote teaching as a career and for measuring
the effectiveness of the Noyce scholarship recipients as teachers.