* 1439465
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: New Approaches to the Design of Joint Source-Channel Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Joerg Kliewer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 132,885.00

Joint source-channel coding and decoding techniques are rapidly emerging as
important design tools for the complexity- and latency-constrained transmission
systems that underlie the multimedia revolution. In such scenarios these
techniques have the potential to offer the same performance with less complexity
or delay compared with systems which completely separate the source and channel
coding functions. The investigators develop theoretical insights and practical
approaches into the construction of joint source-channel codes by addressing
certain classes of optimal variable-length error correcting codes and their
application to networks. The insights gained by these studies facilitates new
advanced coding strategies as well as a fundamental theory that guides the
design of future wireless and multimedia systems.

One approach to joint source-channel coding is to consider prefix condition
codes which have an inherent source compression property and are in addition
able to detect or correct errors resulting from noise on the communication
channel. Thus, these codes typically require a smaller amount of redundancy than
classical channel codes to achieve the same amount of error resilience. However,
the current understanding of these codes remains rather limited which has led
researchers to focus on heuristics. The investigators address these issues by
tackling research problems in three interrelated directions. In particular, we
(1) develop new minimum-redundancy variable-length codes with inherent error
resilience properties and investigate issues related to their design and
compression performance; (2) study the application of this family of codes to
sensor and ad hoc networks and gain insight into their repercussions for higher
communication layers; (3) investigate the construction of reversible variable-
length codes including those with special error-correcting properties.