* 1439188
* Mechanisms of Anticipatory Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mingzhou Ding, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 426,748.00

Attention is about enhancing what is important to us and suppressing what is
not. Nearly everything we do, ranging from reading a book to looking for a
friend in the mall, requires attention. One of the fundamental questions in
cognitive neuroscience is how networks of neurons in the brain flexibly control
the allocation of attentional resources to the task at hand. Dr. Mingzhou Ding
of University of Florida will investigate this question using innovative
computational tools. The novel set of theoretical constructs and effective
physiological measures proposed in this project will help to better understand
attention as well as its impairment. As such, the results can inform
dysfunctions of attention control that are characteristic of many devastating
neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's disease and ADHD by
providing objective and quantitative markers for the affected individuals. In
addition, the planned free distribution of the software codes implementing the
novel methods used in the project and the large amount of well-characterized
human and monkey electrophysiological data that will be made available will
benefit a much broader community of researchers in science and engineering, many
of whom have no access to such data and methodology. The project will also
enhance the educational mission of the NSF by providing materials for course
development and resources for mentoring the next generation of interdisciplinary
cognitive neuroscience researchers at both graduate and undergraduate levels.
Combining theoretical/computational approaches with experimental approaches, Dr.
Ding will test a novel computational model that links ongoing neural activity
prior to the appearance of a sensory stimulus with selective enhancement and
suppression of stimulus processing by analyzing brain electrical signals
(electroencephalography, EEG) in both humans and monkeys. Furthermore, Dr. Ding
will apply novel measures to multiple types of neural data to go beyond the
conventional EEG measures observed from outside of the human brain. This project
aims to provide not only new insight into our current understanding of attention
processes, but more importantly, new tools and approaches that will enable
neuroscientists to characterize the interaction between neural signals from
different regions inside of the brain (source analysis), particularly how
electrical activity in one brain region influences the other (Granger
causality). These new tools and approaches are expected to be applicable to the
investigation of a wide range of cognitive functions, and is thus potentially
transformative in making EEG, a relatively inexpensive and widely available
brain imaging tool, useful for understanding cognitive functions in natural
context.