* 1439926
* The California State University, Northridge Noyce Scholarship Phase II Program
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Virginia Oberholzer-Vandergon, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2020
* USD 797,355.00

The California State University, Northridge (CSUN) Noyce Scholarship Phase II
project will build on lessons learned from its Phase I project. CSUN will work
closely with Local Districts of the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD)
and other area Districts (Glendale, Pasadena, and Antelope Valley), to place
program graduates into middle and secondary school mathematics and science
classrooms. The overall goal is to increase the quality and quantity of
mathematics and science majors entering and remaining in teaching careers, and
to track graduates of the CSUN Phase I project. By increasing the number of
highly qualified middle and high school math and science teachers (27 new
teachers are targeted), the program will help ease acute teacher shortages in
these disciplines in the greater Los Angeles area, and increase the diversity of
the teacher workforce by especially encouraging the participation of students
from underrepresented minority groups in seeking scholarship support. The Phase
II Noyce scholars will also benefit from relationships established by working
with underprivileged secondary students in Upward Bound and Project GRAD Los
Angeles (PGLA) in summer enrichment programs. The program will have a multiplier
effect, as those teachers will influence future generations of students in their
classrooms.

New to the program will be support offered to freshmen and sophomore math and
science majors to participate in summer field experiences, with a goal of
interesting these STEM majors in teaching careers through early clinical/field
experiences. Also new is support for teachers during their initial teaching
years. The project aims to provide professional development opportunities and
professional learning communities that keep new teachers connected to one
another and to experienced group of teacher leaders. By expanding the conduit
for new teachers through Noyce-supported pre-service and in-service activities,
new math and science teachers will help to build a robust community of
teacher/learners. Specific components of the program include: (1) academic
coursework for the California single subject credential in math or science; (2)
summer and academic year practicum/clinical (or field) experiences for freshmen,
sophomores and participating scholars; (3) monthly meetings and
regional/national meetings; and (4) mentoring during the first year of teaching.
All aspects of the Phase I project will be enhanced, including outreach,
recruitment, research, and evaluation efforts. Specific research questions the
PIs intend to tackle include: 1) How does student teaching (clinical) experience
(including school and master teacher placement) impact a preservice teacher
during the initial teaching years?; 2) Are there requirements for pre-service
math majors (in CSUN's Freshman Year/Junior Year/Secondary Teaching Options)
that can be modified to better serve the needs of these students over the long-
term and why? (e.g., Would additional field experiences benefit them? How? Which
aspects are most useful? Why?); 3) How can CCSSM and NGSS be integrated into
pre-service mathematics and science content courses?; and 4) Which professional
development activities best train pre- and in-service teachers to teach the new
standards of mathematical and science practice? Finally, long-term tracking of
graduates will be an important component of the program with respect to
formative and summative evaluation, determining if teaching commitments are
being fulfilled, and assessing the achievement of project objectives.