* 1439246
* RAPID: Using the historic Californian drought to gain a predictive understanding of the effects of severe climatic events on plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Susan Harrison, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2016
* USD 170,574.00

Drought in the California Floristic Province has recently reached record-setting
severity, with 2013 having the lowest precipitation ever recorded in a calendar
year. The proposed study will test predictions about which plant species and
plant communities are most vulnerable to severe droughts and which ones are more
resistant to drought. This will be done by gathering new data from the sites of
five previous studies across California. Each of these previous studies examined
how water availability affected plant communities, using either experimental
water additions, comparisons of wetter and drier years, or comparisons of
geographic locations with differing amounts of rainfall. Each of these studies
provided evidence about which characteristics of plant species and communities
make them more or less sensitive to water availability. Using the data collected
in 2014, the same plant communities previously studied will be compared after
versus before the drought, allowing this study to document which species and
communities have changed the most in response to the drought. Next, this study
will test whether the changes seen after versus before the drought are
consistent with predictions based on the five earlier studies. As one example of
the expected results, it is predicted that species with small, thick leaves will
decline less in abundance than species with broader and thinner leaves, because
these characteristics were previously found to predict the sensitivity of plant
species to water availability. This research is urgent because effects of the
drought can only be quantified by intensive resampling of the five datasets in
spring-summer 2014.

This study will confirm or reject generalizable predictions about the attributes
of terrestrial plant species and communities that render them more or less
vulnerable to drought. Severe droughts are expected to worsen with climate
change, and so this research may have great potential applications to prediction
of plant community composition with climate change. Additionally, the research
will involve a female postdoctoral researcher. At the principal study location,
the researchers will continue contributing to an outreach program that provides
field science learning opportunities to >500 K-12 students per year in an under-
served area.