* 1439320
* I-Corps:  Point of care biosensor for quantification of biomarkers in bodily fluids
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Venkat Bhethanabotla, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Biofouling is a significant problem which occurs when a biosensor is exposed to
a complex medium (i.e. blood, plasma, or urine) that contains moieties other
than the analyte of interest. Effects of biofouling can include false positives
and decreased limits of detection. This project focuses on the continued
development of an inexpensive, portable, and easy to use biosensor. The sensor
is customizable and enables sensing of a variety of antigens in a physician's
office, at a patient's bedside, or in a patient's home. The current design
includes a single surface acoustic wave (SAW chip) that simultaneously senses an
antigen and removes biofouling for the detection of cancer markers. Through this
project, the team will optimize the sensor design, develop a commercially
feasible product, identify a customer base, and validate business hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this technology is its ability to
impact the health of large populations of people who do not have access to
quality screening/tests for various life-threatening diseases. This is more
evident in developing countries, where a need for tests and test devices for
infectious diseases is vital. The market for biosensors is growing because of
the push to move diagnostic testing out of large clinical laboratories into
decentralized settings such as physicians' offices and walk-in clinics.
Implementation of effective point-of-care (POC) tests will not only impact the
lives of individuals, but can reduce time in and costs to hospitals, which will
result in a more efficient healthcare system.