* 1439865
* Collaborative Research: Building Capacity for Middle School Master Science Teacher Development
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Christopher White, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2016
* USD 105,298.00

This Capacity Building project supported by the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program will develop and pilot a working definition of what practices,
approaches and knowledge base constitute Master Level teaching in cross- cutting
concepts of science. These cross cutting concepts are integral to current
attempts to bring increased coherency to the teaching of K-12 science in the
United States. National Louis University (NLU) and the Illinois Institute of
Technology (IIT) will collaboratively build a joint Master Teacher Fellowship
Program that will develop a cadre of middle school science teachers in Chicago
Public Schools with deep pedagogical content knowledge and leadership capacity
in implementing the cross-cutting concepts of the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS) of particular relevance as states adopt and begin to implement
NGSS.

To reach this goal, the key activities of this project will be the establishment
of a University-Museum partnership involving Adler Planetarium and the Museum of
Science and Industry that will integrate expert science content knowledge, deep
pedagogical knowledge, and sites of ongoing science practice and the development
of a learning pathway that substantially increases teachers' science content
knowledge, connects them to ongoing sites of science practice, and supports them
in translating that knowledge and connection into the design and assessment of
learning experiences for their students. Two key components of that pathway will
be a summer institute held at museum sites and IIT that is designed to deepen
teachers' knowledge of cross-cutting concepts of science and current science,
and the use of a web-based platform for collaborative improvement of teacher
practice that incorporates teachers' consistent examination of formative student
assessment data. A pilot group of teachers will take part in a project-designed
summer institute and professional development activities throughout the school
year. Results from a needs assessment will inform the design of the summer
institute and professional development. Teachers' progress in implementing
content-specific, high leverage teaching strategies will be measured using the
Adaptive Cycles of Teaching (ACT), a cloud-based technology system that enables
teachers to improve specific teaching strategies through formative assessments
of student learning, teacher portfolio analysis and feedback from
coaches/mentors. The ACT tool will be customized to support the implementation
of NGSS science teaching.

The definition and development of mastery teaching in science will inform
science educators in the field and in teacher preparation. As part of this
capacity building project, they will be supported in reporting to their school
sites and in taking leadership roles in the implementation of stronger science
teaching in their schools and districts. Each partner institution will deepen
its knowledge base and capacity for teacher education by developing and testing
models of the science knowledge and skills teachers need to advance student
learning in central concepts of science. These models will inform STEM teacher
preparation and professional development throughout each institution. By the
close of the pilot phase, these teachers will have significantly developed their
capacity to inform NGSS implementation at their school sites.