* 1439059
* 2014 TERMIS-AM Conference in Washington, DC on December 13-16, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* John Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 33,500.00

PI: Fisher, John P. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1439059 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Maryland College Park&lt;br/&gt;TERMIS-AM Conference, Washington
DC, December 13-16, 2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
support for Travel Awards to Young Investigators, Graduate Students and
Undergraduate Students to attend the Tissue Engineering and Regenerative
Medicine International Society - Americas Chapter (TERMIS-AM) Annual Meeting to
be held in Washington, DC on December 13-16, 2014; support is also requested for
special sessions within this meeting. The 2014 TERMIS-AM Meeting is organized by
Dr. John P. Fisher (Conference Chair) at the University of Maryland and Dr.
Jennifer Elisseeff (Program Chair) at The Johns Hopkins University. The theme
for the 2014 TERMIS-AM Meeting is "Restoring Lives through Regenerative
Medicine," which reflects the societal impact of tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine. Besides the scientific sessions, which include
presentations by leaders in the field, the meeting includes several special
sessions and aims to integrate federal agencies, including the NSF, NIH, FDA,
and NIST, in the planning of and participating in the meeting as presenters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine is an
emerging interdisciplinary field with the potential to revolutionize clinical
treatments and therapies for a variety of diseases. The TERMIS-AM Meeting is the
key annual meeting of the Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine
International Society held in the Americas each year, and brings together over
800 researchers, scientists, trainees, and students from both academia and
industry to present and discuss key developments in the field. The meeting
therefore integrates and disseminates cutting edge research in tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine. Keynote speakers are leaders in the field
and technical and poster sessions include presentations on the latest advances.
A strong role in the meeting planning and execution will be played by the
TERMIS-AM Student and Young Investigator Section (SYIS). Additionally, there
will be an emphasis on promoting the involvement of women and underrepresented
groups in the tissue engineering and regenerative medicine fields. Participants
from NSF, NIH, FDA, and NIST will provide presentations and will discuss the
efforts of the respective federal agencies in advancing fundamental science,
technology, and translation in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. The
conference is planned to allow ample opportunities for interactions among
investigators and for networking.