* 1439933
* Workshop -- Support to Students to Attend IEEE Photonics Society Summer Topical Conferences, Montreal, July 14-16, 2014
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Juejun Hu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,500.00

The program will provide financial support for student participants to attend
the IEEE Photonics Society Summer Topical Meetings to be held in Montreal on
July 14-16, 2014. The Topical Meetings provide a unique forum where members from
academia, national labs, industry, and government labs working in the same field
will convene in a highly interactive environment to foster active cross-
disciplinary discussions. In addition, the workshop will define key strategic
directions for future research in the topical areas by creating synergies
between academia, industry and national laboratories, and is expected to broadly
impact interdisciplinary scientific efforts. The program will also sponsor a
student poster session and poster presentation awards at the conference. The
Summer Topical Meetings are the premier conference series hosted by IEEE for
exciting, new areas in photonic science, technology, and applications. The
Meetings will also set broad directions for future research and will impact
interdisciplinary scientific efforts in the five topical areas covered by the
meetings. The research fields covered by the topical meetings are of
considerable interest to many current programs of the ECCS division. The NSF
support is expected to significantly promote student participation in the
conference, and provide a unique opportunity for the students to learn about
emerging fields in photonics research and to interact with leaders from both
academia and industry in an intimate environment. Participation of
graduate/undergraduate students, in particular those from underrepresented
groups, will be fostered leveraging NSF funds to partially cover registration
and travel expenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics to be discussed in this
year's Summer Topical Meetings span a broad range in related emerging areas of
research, from materials to devices, integrated photonics, and systems. The
conferences will cover five topical areas: Midwave Infrared Integrated Photonics
(MWIP), Functional Meta- and Two-dimensional Materials (FMTM), Nanowire
Materials and Integrated Photonics (NWIP), Nonlinear-Optical Signal Processing
(NOSP), and Space-division Multiplexing technologies for high capacity
transmission (SDMT). The FMTM topic will cover advances both in metamaterials,
with focus on functional structures and device configurations, and in two-
dimensional materials including graphene and other 2D materials, and their
exciting potentials in photonics. The NWIP topic will cover nanowire related
materials and devices, as well as heterogeneous integration. The MWIP topic will
focus on integrated photonic technologies, optical physics, and emerging
application trends of mid-IR photonics. The NOSP topic will span both
traditional and emerging materials, as well as various nanophotonic platforms
and advanced format and algorithms used for NOSP. The SDMT community will share
the exciting advances in all areas related to SDM, from devices to system
integration. These topics, proposed by experts in the respective areas and
selected by the IEEE Photonics Society, represent some of the most important and
intensively investigated fields as deemed by the photonics community.