* 1439257
* Assessing the neural dynamics of reading in deaf adults
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Karen Emmorey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 580,702.00

Reading presents a significant challenge for individuals who are born severely-
to-profoundly deaf because they cannot hear the language that is encoded by
print. The factors that lead to skilled reading for deaf individuals are
currently under debate and not well understood. For hearing individuals,
phonological coding and awareness skills appear to be critical for reading
success, but these skills are not good predictors of reading proficiency for
deaf people. Furthermore, almost nothing is known about the underlying neural
processes involved in the transition from identifying visual letter features to
accessing word meaning for deaf readers. This project is designed to investigate
the brain response to reading in deaf adults and the factors that predict
variation in those responses. By identifying factors that do (and do not) affect
reading processes, this project will inform educational models of literacy
instruction and reading remediation for deaf people. In addition, deafness has a
substantial impact on the ability of students to gain access to research careers
because of communication roadblocks that hamper interaction with hearing
scientists. The principal investigators have deaf-friendly labs (e.g., project
staff are fluent in ASL) and provide training that facilitates the entrance of
deaf students into scientific and academic fields. Thus, a parallel aim of the
project is to increase the representation of deaf people in science by including
deaf researchers on the project and by providing an accessible environment for
deaf students to gain training and research experience.

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Karen Emmorey, Dr. Philip
Holcomb, and their colleagues will use behavioral and neurophysiological
measures to identify what factors predict variations in the brain's response
when deaf adults read and recognize written words (e.g., spelling ability,
phonological awareness, signing ability, reading speed). Cutting edge source
localization techniques will be used to constrain and identify the neural
location of the brain's response as measured by electroencephalography (EEG).
The project is designed to illuminate the neural dynamics of reading for deaf
people who are bilingual in English and American Sign Language and to understand
how the neural components of reading are shaped by deafness, i.e., by the
changes in visual attention and phonological abilities that result from
congenital hearing loss. These discoveries will have theoretical import for
understanding the neural plasticity (and invariance) of the reading system, as
well as practical implications for developing reading interventions for deaf
individuals.