* 1439091
* XPS: FULL: CCA: Production-Run Failure Recovery Based Approach to Reliable Parallel Software
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

Title: XPS: FULL: CCA: Production-Run Failure Recovery Based Approach to
Reliable Parallel Software&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrency bugs are a severe
threat to system reliability in the multi-core era. Approaches to handling
concurrency bugs and improving the reliability of production-run parallel
software are sorely needed. This project aims to create a new parallel computing
paradigm. The intellectual merits are that the project will pioneer treating
run-time failure recovery as default for parallel programs, and reshaping every
aspect of parallel-program development and maintenance. The project's broader
significance and importance are that it will help lower the costs of software
development, in-house testing, failure diagnosis, and bug repair, broadly
benefiting society through better-performing parallel
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed framework will include
five components: (1) a feather-weight run-time recovery framework that utilize
natural program idempotence to obtain natural concurrency-bug failure recovery;
(2) a new code-development system that guide developers to write software with
improved recoverability; (3) a new in-house testing system, where the testing
focus is shifted towards hard-to-recover code; (4) a new on-demand run-time
monitoring system that leverages on-demand run-time monitoring for run-time
recovery; (5) a new off-line failure diagnosis system that leverages the
feedback from recovery for failure diagnosis and fixing. These five components
will work together to significantly improve the reliability and lower the
development cost of parallel software.