* 1439786
* Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Hoffstein, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2021
* USD 17,600,000.00

The Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics (ICERM)
is a national institute whose mission is to support and catalyze fundamental
research in the mathematical sciences with a thematic focus on the fruitful
interplay between mathematics and computers, explored and developed through
computation and experimentation. ICERM convenes leading scientists from academia
and industry, together with students and early-career researchers, in programs
that generate new mathematics and that accelerate the development of tools and
technology arising from new mathematics. The institute has a special focus on
training the next generation of computationally skilled mathematicians and
preparing them to enter a variety of scientific careers. ICERM places a priority
on increasing the participation of members of groups under-represented in
mathematics. To support these goals, ICERM provides a sophisticated research
infrastructure as well as access to high performance computing and current
software resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICERM programs support and broaden the
relationship between mathematics and computation by expanding the use of
computational and experimental methods in mathematics, by supporting theoretical
advances related to computation, and by addressing, through mathematical tools,
research, and innovation, problems posed by the use of the computer.
Experimentation has historically been a driver of advances in fundamental
research in mathematics. New technology opens up new opportunities for research
and discovery through experimentation; ICERM programs aim to identify and
develop such opportunities. Mathematics interacts with an ever widening range of
scientific and industrial enterprises, and computation is at the heart of this
interaction. ICERM programs aim to develop resources for data-driven
explorations in both pure and applied areas of mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICERM serves as a national resource for mathematical
activities, events, and programs that have strong computational/experimental
components and that aim to catalyze development of new mathematics as well as
new ways of doing mathematics. The institute runs thematic research programs
together with associated international conferences, provides support for
postdoctoral fellows and graduate students in residence during semester-long
programs, hosts team-based research programs to train graduate and undergraduate
students of mathematics in the use of experimental methodologies and computer-
aided tools, and conducts a variety of independent workshops, outreach
activities, and special events.