* 1439940
* South Asian Summer Monsoon Rainfall:   Origin of Multidecadal Variability/Trends and Investigation of Seasonal Predictability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 02/28/2019
* USD 844,427.00

The Indo-Gangetic Plain is home to a billion people and is the agricultural
heartland of South Asia. Rapid population and economic growth have led to
significant land-use land-cover change, aerosol loadings, and greenhouse gas
emissions. Regional hydroclimate exhibits substantial - at times, precarious -
multidecadal trends: For example, summer rainfall over the Gangetic Plain has
declined by 10-15% since the 1950s. The seasonal rainfall is moreover seldom
predicted accurately; prediction skill has remained modest and stagnant despite
advances in the representation of physical processes, numerical model
resolution, and data assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the
following goals:(A) To investigate if the steep decline in post-1950s rainfall
is from anthropogenic effects, multidecadal natural variability, or both. By
revealing the nature of interference between secular change and natural
variability, this attribution analysis will help estimate the likelihood of even
steeper rainfall decline or some reprieve from drying in future decades. The
modeling analysis will uncover the mechanisms through which multidecadal ocean
variability influences the South Asian monsoon rainfall. (B) To determine the
potential predictability of seasonal summer rainfall over South Asia from a
discerning spatiotemporal analysis of 20th-21st century SST and rainfall
observations, and rainfall reconstruction from contemporaneous and SST-leading
rainfall regressions in an independent period - yielding a quantitative
assessment of the SST-based predictability of monsoon rainfall at various
seasonal leads. Intercomparison of the key SST-monsoon rainfall links in nature
and historical simulations will advance the modeling of monsoon hydroclimate
variability in two coupled climate models, viz. the Community Earth System
Model(CESM) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Lab (NOAA GFDL) model.