* 1439097
* XPS: FULL: CCA:  Collaborative Research: SPARTA: a Stream-based Processor And Run-Time Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Guang Gao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 313,371.00

Computer systems have undergone a fundamental transformation recently, from
single&amp;#8208;core processors to devices with increasingly higher core counts
within a single chip. The semi&amp;#8208;conductor industry now faces the
infamous power and utilization walls, that is, physical constraints such as
levels of power and energy consumption, but also reliability of the various
components, must be taken into account not only during the chip fabrication
process, but also when generating machine code and during program execution. To
meet these challenges, heterogeneity in design, both at the architecture and
technology levels, will be the prevailing approach for energy efficient
computing as specialized cores, accelerators, and graphical processing units
(GPUs) can eliminate the energy overheads of general&amp;#8208;purpose
homogeneous cores. However, with future technological challenges pointing in the
direction of on&amp;#8208;chip heterogeneity, and because of the traditional
difficulty of parallel programming, it becomes imperative to produce new system
software stacks that can take advantage of the heterogeneous hardware.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to rethink the whole
hardware&amp;#8208;software interface, by researching novel ways to design
many&amp;#8208;core chip architectures and weaving heterogeneous components
together and binding them by a fast and energy efficient on&amp;#8208;chip
interconnection network. On top of it will lay a system software layer to
efficiently drive applications and map them onto the best suited components of
the chip. Both the hardware and software layer are encompassed by a novel
execution model, which describes how to orchestrate the various parts of a
program in the most efficient way (be it with respect to power and energy,
performance, or reliability). To achieve these goals, the development of a new
model of computation called SPARTA (Stream-based Processor And RunTime
Architecture) is proposed. The proposed model combines a new runtime and
compiler technology with a hierarchical heterogeneous many&amp;#8208;core chip
and features hardware mechanisms for stream&amp;#8208;based fine&amp;#8208;grain
program execution models to be reflected in different new software/hardware
systems. Many issues are be envisioned, including programmability, scalability,
performance evaluation, and power efficiency. Specifically, the goal is to
identify the major challenges and obstacles toward an efficient exploitation of
parallelism and scalability. To do so, traditional approaches will be re-
evaluated by studying a collection of representative programs. A vertical design
methodology is then proposed to effectively address the above challenges through
the SPARTA approach and its implementation. In particular, the proposed cross-
layer methodology consists of (a) a programming/execution model that will
combine the Codelet model (leveraging our past research in dataflow models and
extensions) with generalized streams: the Streaming Codelets, (b) an
architecture model that will efficiently support the Streaming Codelets in
heterogeneous hardware, and (c) a system software Stack that will be capable of
effectively mapping Streaming Codelets to the proposed architecture. Finally, a
qualitative and quantitative study of SPARTA will be performed via selected
benchmarks and a consolidated methodology based on experimentation and analysis.
The holistic cross-layer design methodology spanning the hardware/software stack
and the reliability techniques developed from this research will significantly
impact next generation multi&amp;#8208;core and
System&amp;#8208;on&amp;#8208;Chip (SoC) architectures with improvements in
energy efficiency, programmability, performance and robustness.