* 1439757
* Capacity Building: Spelman's STEM Teacher Education Pipeline (SSTEP)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Viveka Borum, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, this project will address the Nation's growing need to
recruit and prepare secondary STEM teachers, but also to provide new teachers
with the support that they need to ensure that they remain in the teaching
profession. This capacity building project from Spelman College will address the
challenges involved in recruiting STEM students into teacher preparation
programs. Spelman College has an excellent Secondary STEM Teacher Preparation
program; however, no Spelman students, only students from other institutions,
have enrolled in that program. In response to the need for effective recruiting,
this project will create an avenue for incoming freshman and rising sophomores
at Spelman College to follow a recruitment pathway that exposes interested
students to STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project PI team will create
an "Exposure, Exploration, Engagement, and Educator-preparation" pathway for
recruiting STEM majors into careers in secondary STEM teaching. Each step of the
capacity building pathway reinforces students' understanding of the intricacies
involved in becoming a STEM educator. The elements of the program have all been
demonstrated to be effective mechanisms for the recruitment of students into
teaching. The first element is exposure to STEM teaching through informational
sessions and workshops describing STEM education and research in STEM education.
Students then explore STEM teaching through positions as undergraduate teaching
assistants (UTAs). Finally they are engaged in STEM education and research
through a STEM Undergraduate Research Educator (SURE) summer program. This
recruitment pathway leads the students into the culmination of the process,
formal educator-preparation through the Spelman secondary education program. The
formal evaluation plan of the project is providing knowledge that will inform
successful recruitment of STEM students into STEM teaching, particularly the
recruitment of women and minority students, into programs across the nation. One
indicator regarding the success of this pipeline will be viewed through the
number of students enrolling in Spelman's Orientation to Education course, a
mandatory class needed before a student can apply to the teacher certification
program.