* 1439704
* Understanding Change Management for Engineering Education Innovation - The IRE Case
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Jennifer Karlin, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 32,409.00

While many efforts have been made to instill technical and professional skills
in engineering graduates,there has been little change in the pedagogy of most
engineering education institutions in the U.S.In order to see real, sustainable
improvement in engineering education practice, we must have positive change in
both the behaviors of the participants and the systems within which these
participants act. This work will gather case data and apply organizational
theory models to better understand the change management activities and
opportunities in one successful model program, Iron Range Engineering, a 100
percent problem-based learning program that grew out of a collaboration between
a two-year and a four-year institution. This exploratory study will also lay the
groundwork for a larger study to create a guiding model for others trying to
build and implement sustainable change in engineering education.

By completing a case study of a successful change effort in engineering
education and applying organizational management models to analyze this effort,
this project will increase the ability for others in engineering education to
create and sustain change both within a single course/classroom and across
curricula. This will create better infrastructure for engineering education to
meet the challenges set out by society, industry, government, and the profession
in national reports on engineering education.