* 1439979
* Conference on mathematical and computational challenges of wave propagation and inverse problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Fadil Santosa, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 40,000.00

This project provides participant support for the ``Conference on mathematical
and computational challenges of wave propagation and inverse problems'' that
will be held in April 9-11, 2015 on the campus of Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI. The theme of the conference is "wave propagation in inverse
problems". Wave propogation and inverse problems have tremendous applications in
medical imaging and exploration of Earth natural resources. This conference
brings together leading researchers in the world to discuss recent advances on
such applications. The conference also provides ample opportunity for graduate
students, post-docs, junior faculty, especially women, under-represented
minorities and people with disabilities to present their work. By locating the
conference central to the Michigan State University campus, participation of
local, non-mathematical students and scientists will be
maximized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference contributes significantly to the
advancement of research and education in applied and computational mathematics.
The conference focuses on three related topics. The first is the development of
wave-related multi-scale, multi-physics modeling, analysis, and computation
techniques. The second is the integration of inverse problem techniques with
imaging analysis methods for important physical processes that arise in radar
and sonar, geophysical exploration, non-destructive testing, and medical
imaging. The third is the stochastic modeling and uncertainty quantification of
the large scale wave propagation focusing on imaging and inversion in random
media. The conference provides a forum to update recent progress on these
research areas. By interspersing theoretical, applied, and computational talks
in the conference program, this focused conference will encourage collaboration
between scientists with various disciplinary backgrounds. By outlining the
potential impact that theoretical tools can have on the most salient issues of
our day, the conference will influence and invigorate the educational efforts at
the institutions of the conference speakers.