* 1439881
* HuskyTeach: Next Generation STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* George McManus, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,199,568.00

Husky Teach is a Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Phase I project that will
recruit, prepare, and support a diverse and talented group of professionals to
become science and math teachers in high-needs settings. This Phase 1 project
combines research activity by marine scientists with best teacher preparation
practices. The project leverages local expertise to prepare post-graduates and
career changers so they excel during their initial years in teaching positions
in high-need schools. The project will advance understandings about integrating
STEM subject matter mentoring into the goal of preparing teachers for high-need
schools. Combining expertise from marine scientists with coursework emphasizing
access and equity to STEM careers is unique to this project, the outcomes of
which would inform similar practices in at other science teacher preparation
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Best teacher preparation practices combined with
the marine research programs at the Avery Point campus provide a seedbed of
science learning opportunities for future science teachers. The HuskyTeach
project aligns with other strategic investments by the University of Connecticut
and the State. Noyce recipients will progress through the established program
with the addition of iteratively working with STEM Mentors. The goals of the
HuskyTeach project include: 1) recruiting 24 high-quality STEM professionals for
science teaching careers, 2) integrating STEM content with education training to
prepare future science teachers, 3) providing experiences and resources to
prepare science teachers to work in high-needs schools, 4) increasing the
diversity of the science teaching workforce, and 5) using multiple data sources
to inform the improvements to STEM teacher preparation. Participants will
integrate content acquired from marine science research into curriculum modules
developed in association with education coursework. Key evaluation and
assessment measurements of this project will chart attitudinal shifts and
dispositions over time, with particular focus on data-informed decisions with
respect to teaching science in high-needs schools.