* 1439372
* How Does Brain Time Lead to Mind Time in Perception and Action?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shinsuke Shimojo, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

The ability to perceive time is innate to humans, but very little is known on
the underlying psychological and neural mechanisms. Some peculiar daily life and
laboratory phenomena where time appears to be frozen for a brief moment, termed
"chronostasis," especially poses a challenge to cognitive neuroscientists. It
may also be related to pathological experiences of time lapse in cases such as
schizophrenia and drug-addicts. Chronostasis, which usually happens around the
hundreds of millisecond range, could occur with or without action, given
different perceptual contexts. This particular phenomenon could be a valuable
window into how the brain constructs duration perception. With the support from
National Science Foundation, Dr. Shinsuke Shimojo and colleagues will use
electroencephalogram (EEG) along with a novel method to measure neural activity
and its dynamics corresponding to this phenomenon. First, this project will
provide further insights into why people perform a challenging task (for
example, in sports or games) with concentrated attention sometimes experience "a
flow of time." Second, the novel method could lead to a new neural activity
index for clinical screening to understanding of mental disorders, because it is
known that various types of patients, such as schizophrenics, autistic, and ADHD
patients, have problems in time perception. The new knowledge of neural areas
and dynamics may also inspire new programs and devices for training or
rehabilitation. Third, the conclusions may potentially impact occupations whose
performance relies on precise temporal judgments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our
scientific hypothesis is that duration perception at the hundreds of
milliseconds range is mediated by "hierarchical predictive coding," where both
familiarity and novelty play a role in modulating perceived duration. The
mechanism governing familiarity is likely "repetition suppression," i.e. a
relatively automatic decay of neural responses by repetition; the mechanisms
subserving novelty detection could be attention orienting. The researchers will
isolate these factors with behavioral experiments, and then find corresponding
neural correlates with EEG. Specifically, they will use a steady state visual
evoked potential (SSVEP) approach to mark the short duration visual stimuli with
a tagging temporal frequency. This will give them advantage in subsequent source
localization and network connectivity analysis. They expect to discover
interactions between low-level and high-level brain areas that co-decide
duration perception, which will provide some clues to the ultimate mystery in
behavioral neuroscience, that is, how we could experience time lapse, without
having peripheral and specific sensory receptors.