* 1439907
* Texas A&amp;M University Noyce Monitoring and Evaluation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Timothy Scott, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,987.00

It is widely known that for K-12 students to obtain a high quality education in
the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) disciplines, they
must have access to highly effective and highly qualified teachers. It is less
known how to recruit and retain highly qualified and highly effective STEM
teachers into the teaching profession, especially those individuals with strong
STEM. The Robert Noyce Scholarship Program at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU),
funded by the National Science Foundation, has addressed this issue by offering
attractive scholarships, professional development, and other induction support
to high achieving undergraduate students majoring in STEM fields who agree to
teach in K-12 high-need schools after graduation. Since 2002, the Robert Noyce
Program at TAMU has added over 60 STEM teachers to the teaching profession. Most
of these Scholars are now teaching in high-need secondary schools and some are
experienced teachers with five to ten years of teaching experience. These Noyce
Scholars have valuable insight on many aspects of the teaching profession that
may help uncover key components to recruiting, preparing, and retaining STEM
teachers in the teaching profession. This study will follow 30 TAMU Noyce
Scholars and 30 TAMU prepared teachers that did not receive Noyce Scholarships,
all of whom completed the same teacher preparation program and are currently
teaching in Texas high schools. The institutions involved in this Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Track I Phase II Monitoring and Evaluation study are TAMU
and school districts located in four regions of Texas where Noyce Scholars and
TAMU prepared STEM teachers are employed: Houston, San Antonio, Dallas, and
Bryan/College Station. By comparing characteristics among and within these two
groups, this project will focus on advancing the knowledge and understanding of
best practices in STEM teacher recruitment, preparation, and retention.
Researchers will investigate how participants' perceptions regarding teaching in
general and teaching in high-need schools evolve over time and how these
perceptions differ within and between groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This three-
year research study will use a quasi-experimental, matched time series design
that emphasizes both quantitative and qualitative results. Sixty participants
will be recruited to form two groups, an experimental group consisting of 30
Noyce Scholars and a control group of similarly prepared teachers who did not
receiving Noyce Scholarships. Quantitative data will be collected through
classroom observations (two per year for three years), three annual surveys, and
students? standardized test scores (assuming tests are mandated for the subject
and grade level being taught). Qualitative data will be collected through annual
semi-structured interviews and optional open-ended responses to the annual
surveys. This data will be analyzed for similarities within groups, as well as
differences among groups. Repeated measures, analysis of variance (ANOVA),
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) and other inferential statistics will
be used to analyze the quantitative data. Qualitative data from the semi-
structured interviews will be transcribed, coded, and triangulated in the
analysis process. These multiple forms of data collection will allow for a more
complete and thorough understanding of the differences, if any, between groups.
The purpose of the project is to capture over time the characteristics of TAMU
Noyce Scholars as they relate to persistence as a teacher, evolving perceptions
of the profession and the performance of their K-12 students. This study will be
guided by the following research questions: &lt;br/&gt;(1) How do the TAMU Noyce
Scholars' perceptions about teaching and teaching in high-need schools evolve
over time and how do these perceptions differ from the control group?
&lt;br/&gt;(2) What factors are involved in retaining TAMU Noyce Scholars in
high-need schools and how do these factors differ from the control group?
&lt;br/&gt;(3) What are the common characteristics in teaching behaviors,
student outcomes, and overall classroom environments of the TAMU Noyce Scholars
and how do these characteristics compare to the control group?