* 1439946
* III: Student Travel Fellowships: 2014 Web Reasoning and Rule Systems Conference and Reasoning Web Summer School
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Semantic technologies, Linked Open Data, and knowledge representation formalisms
such as the Web Ontology Language OWL are beginning to play increasingly
important roles across a broad range of applications. There is an urgent need
for the advanced training of graduate students to conduct research in this area
and to prepare them for academic or industrial careers. Participation in premier
research conferences in the area is an essential element of such training. This
project will provide funds to subsidize the travel expenses of 6 students at
U.S. universities to attend the 2014 Web Reasoning and Rules Systems conference,
RR2014, and the 2014 Reasoning Web Summer School, which will be held September
8-17 in Athens, Greece. Broader impacts of the project include: Enhanced
opportunities for training and mentoring of US-based graduate students in
Semantic Web and related areas, broadening the participation of students from
groups (women and minorities) that are currently under-represented in Computer
Science in general, and Semantic Web in particular.

The Web Reasoning and Rule Systems conference series, established in 2007, and
the annual Reasoning Web Summer School series, attract the leading researchers
in the field of Web Reasoning, and offer a venue for presentation of the latest
advances in the field. Covered topics include ontology modeling languages, e.g.,
RDF, OWL, and RIF, which enable the inference of implicit knowledge from
knowledge that is explicitly encoded in the knowledge base. Web Reasoning and
related fields focus on the design, analysis, and development of ontology
languages, study of their theoretical properties, and the design and
implementation of effective inference algorithms. The co-location of the
conference and summer school provides for an excellent venue for the training of
graduate students. In addition to attending the invited and contributed talks at
the conference, and the summer school, the students will benefit from
individualized mentoring by established researchers.

For further information see the project webpage: http://pascal-
hitzler.de/projects/rr2014.html