* 1439796
* NebraskaMATH Omaha Noyce Partnership
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2020
* Neal Grandgenett, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,199,059.00

In a partnership between the Omaha Public Schools (OPS) and the University of
Nebraska at Omaha (UNO), this Noyce Scholarship Track Phase I program will
address the national need for more underrepresented STEM talent who pursue
careers in teaching. The initiative is building upon momentum from ongoing STEM
Education initiatives at both institutions. The Omaha Noyce Partnership
represents a new UNO initiative that aligns with NebraskaMATH, a statewide
partnership that works to improve achievement in mathematics for all students
and to narrow the STEM achievement gaps of at-risk populations. The Omaha Noyce
Partnership will recruit a diverse pool of new teachers and provide much needed
funding to support economically disadvantaged students. The partnership will
strengthen and expand the pipeline for preparing mathematics teachers at UNO to
better meet the high demand for teachers in local school districts, particularly
in districts with high-need schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Omaha Noyce
Partnership scholarship program is designed to develop highly skilled secondary
mathematics teachers who are committed to teaching in high-need schools by
providing targeted support for students enrolled in and graduating from UNO's
Bachelor of Science in Mathematics/Teacher Preparation program. The program
includes new coursework and complements existing pathways that were developed by
the UNO mathematics and education faculty in collaboration with school district
partners. The project's evaluation activities will inform and advance ongoing
collaborative research initiatives related to the effectiveness of inquiry-based
learning in teaching mathematical concepts and in preparing students to be
effective secondary mathematics teachers. All of the students supported by the
Omaha Noyce Partnership will be enrolled in this new program and will receive
focused training and extensive fieldwork in the Omaha Public Schools to prepare
them for teaching careers in high need schools, including instruction in
inquiry-based learning and other culturally responsive pedagogies.