* 1439751
* Preparing Future Mathematics and Science Teachers through the Noyce Scholarship Program at Savannah State University and Savannah Technical College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2023
* Mulatu Lemma, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,421,715.00

For this Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Phase I project, investigators from
Savannah State University (SSU) will work closely with partner institutions to
recruit, mentor, educate, and certify students to become highly qualified STEM
middle school and high school teachers to help alleviate workforce shortages in
this area of national need. The project team will help place graduates from the
program in high-need schools and then provide them with important and timely
support when they enter the STEM teaching profession. Responding to the high
demand for STEM teachers in the Savannah Chatham County Public School System
(SCCPSS), SSU will partner with SCCPSS and two-year school Savannah Technical
College (STC) to increase the number of high quality, technology education-
certified STEM teachers prepared to teach in high-need schools. In particular,
this Noyce project will prepare at least twenty-eight (28) undergraduate
mathematics and engineering majors and eight (8) STEM professionals to become
certified middle school or high school teachers of mathematics and/or science
grades 6 - 12. SSU's activities as a Historically Black University with a
student body of 94% African-American not only will enhance STEM workforce
diversity, but will also contribute to a broader understanding of how teacher
preparation programs can be tailored to reach and prepare African-American and
other underrepresented minority students for successful STEM teaching
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall program will employ several
interconnected components to recruit, train, mentor, and retain new highly
qualified STEM teachers. These strategical components will include: (i)
promoting extensive outreach and targeted recruitment activities; (ii) providing
internships and summer programs (workshops, observation, and hands-on teaching
experiences) for first and second year undergraduates as part of the recruitment
process to generate interest in teaching; (iii) funding scholarships for
selected junior and senior STEM majors who wish to become teachers; (iv)
offering a challenging, problem solving, inquiry based, collaborating learning
environment to address real-world applications through SSU's established teacher
education program; (v) implementing field experience activities to aid the
training and retaining process; (vi) orchestrating professional development,
mentoring opportunities, and other induction support to ensure a successful
transition to teaching and improved retention for the early career teacher
graduates; and (vii) researching and assessing the effects of these initiatives.
The assessment tools are designed to provide both quantitative and qualitative
information as a basis for research and continuous improvement of the program.