* 1439079
* XPS:FULL:DSD: A novel framework for developing highly scalable and energy efficient guaranteed quality mesh generation for 3D and 4D finite element analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Nikos Chrisochoides, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 850,000.00

Computational science is one of the "three pillars," complementing traditional
theoretical and physical experimental studies in science and engineering.
Parallel finite element mesh generation is a critical building block for this
pillar and is becoming even more relevant for a growing number of engineering
and life science applications. This project will set up a trajectory to deliver
the &amp;#64257;rst exascale-era unstructured finite element (FE) guaranteed
quality Delaunay mesh generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why is FE mesh generation
an important computational science tool? Many partial differential equations
(PDEs) that are used to model complex multi-scale phenomena such as blood flow
in the human body can only be solved by numerical approximation techniques.
These techniques require the approximation of the domain by tessellating it into
simpler geometric shapes such as triangles and tetrahedra in two and three
dimensions, respectively. This project's focus is in 3D and 4D tessellation
methods for life science applications such as blood flow simulations for
Cerebro-Vascular Disease (CVD, or stroke), one of the leading natural causes of
death in the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to deliver exascale-era mesh
generation, this project is set to achieve billion-way concurrency using
substantially less electric power than today's state-of-the-art methods. This
goal will be achieved by focusing on the following three objectives: (1)
Integration of multiple parallel Delaunay mesh generation methods into a
telescopic framework. (2) Development of application-speci&amp;#64257;c models
that describe the inherent concurrency and data access patterns of this
framework. (3) Development of domain-speci&amp;#64257;c energy-efficient and
component-level (core and memory) power scaling for massively parallel mesh
generation methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broader impact
in many other life science applications such as those related to the President's
BRAIN Initiative. For example, the mesh generation techniques from this project
can be customized to perform (by 2020) computer simulations to understand the
circuitry of the human brain - an important milestone to help understand
diseases like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, which are expected to increase with
the aging of the U.S. population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project
will contribute via the PI's MERIT outreach program for STEM education in K-12
and college students. The PI's goal is to "mentor, excite, and retain" students
and help them to identify STEM areas of study that will transform them into
responsible college graduates. The PI's MERIT Freshman Seminars (as opposed to
traditional Freshman Seminars) re-connect students in the context of Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) activities (based on students interests)
with highly visible national priorities such as the President's BRAIN
Initiative. The MERIT program covers a variety of topics to reach as many
students as possible with diverse interests and background. The goal is to
prepare computational scientists to be entrepreneurs capable of understanding
the ethical, economic, and research challenges in health care we face today.