* 1439389
* BCC Building Cyberinfrastructure for Transdisciplinary Research and Visualization of the Long-Term Human Ecodynamics of the North Atlantic
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Philip Buckland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 398,801.00

In order to understand large-scale and long-term ecological and social change,
such as vulnerability and adaptation to ongoing climate change, access to
diverse and interdisciplinary datasets is needed to understand both the
environmental and cultural drivers of these complex processes. For example,
research on the long-term sustainability of Arctic environments and communities
requires compiling data from over thousands of square miles, hundreds of years,
and multiple disciplines, from climatology to archaeology to folklore. In most
cases, datasets exist to be able to address these questions, but it remains
difficult to find these data, make them interoperable, and analyze and visualize
them in new and meaningful ways without extensive planning, thus restricting the
ability to address these questions. The complexity of datasets of this scale
presents a unique challenge to create a data management system that results in
the interoperability and accessibility of data. Investing in a comprehensive
data management system provides the opportunity to integrate collaborators and
data from the natural sciences, social sciences, and the humanities, thus
providing the opportunity for a holistic approach to long-term human ecodynamics
in the context of rapid social and environmental change and for the creation of
digital tools for expanded capacity to do global change research and engage
other users, such as the general public, students, and indigenous populations.

This project will solidify a developing multidisciplinary community of
archaeologists, climate scientists, humanists, and local communities through a
series of planning workshops with a focus on the development of
cyberinfrastructure to study the long-term human ecodynamics of North Atlantic,
a region that is especially vulnerable to ongoing climate and environmental
change. Ongoing activities of this project will benefit sustainability science,
integration of archaeology, local and traditional knowledge, cross-disciplinary
research, and the education of K-12, college, and graduate students. The
ultimate goal of this project is to transform the accessibility and utility of
data collected over multiple decades by multiple disciplines, and across
hundreds of thousands of square miles. These data will be widely available and
shared with researchers and other users both in the North Atlantic and beyond.
The lessons learned in this regionally focused collaboration in the North
Atlantic will be applied widely to other regions of the world through the
established research networks named in the proposal, as well as data management
networks, including the Research Data Alliance and the NSF Arctic-Antarctic Data
Coordination Network, through ongoing reports and social networks. The
networking of these the research team offers a unique opportunity to conduct
genuinely transformative, collaborative work to connect natural science, social
science, environmental humanities, local and traditional knowledge, innovative
data management, visualization, and direct involvement of northern communities
in order to address the cultural and environmental drivers of the long-term
human ecodynamics of the North Atlantic.