* 1439002
* XPS: EXPL: CCA: Collaborative Research: Nixing Scale Bugs in HPC Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 166,000.00

Large-scale simulation is a fundamental component of modern science and
engineering. Unfortunately, programs written to perform simulations on large-
scale parallel computers frequently suffer from software defects that result
from the sheer scale and the variety of parallelization approaches employed.
Especially egregious are software bugs that occur when large resource
allocations (e.g., memory requests) are made. Formally based active-testing
techniques are essential to locate such defects. However, these testing tools
are themselves seldom run on parallel machines, let alone at large scale, making
it difficult and very time consuming to find scale bugs with high assurance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to parallelize verification tools should reuse
existing technology for easy parallelization, result collection, and fault
handling. Key innovations of this project include the insight that large-scale
verification runs can be described through work-flows, which makes it possible
to take advantage of already available distributed computing platforms, in
particular Swift/T from Argonne. The complementary backgrounds of the PIs are
well matched with the need to push both formal aspects and distributed
verification in the context of three widely-used concurrency models, namely MPI,
OpenMP, and CUDA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will help create a public
distributed formal active testing framework. The tools and case-study software
driving this research will be maintained by the PIs and released freely under
open-source licenses through websites and repositories. They will facilitate
large-scale debugging of scientific simulation codes by researchers and software
developers in academia, government labs, and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will also generate pedagogical material and best practices, helping
educate students in the use of existing work-flow based problem solving
approaches. It will help train present and future scientists, engineers, and
programmers, thus assisting in maintaining our nation's leadership in computing,
homeland and energy security, and STEM education.