* 1439737
* The Claremont Colleges' STEM Initiative (CCSI) to Improve STEM Pedagogy Through Transferable STEM Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* DeLacy Ganley, Claremont Graduate University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,000,000.00

While there is widespread agreement regarding the importance of having Master
STEM Educators, there is limited "know-how" regarding how to cultivate them.
With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, the Claremont
Colleges' STEM Initiative (CCSI) to Improve STEM Pedagogy Through Transferable
STEM Skills will research this issue while preparing 24 Master STEM Educators to
address the nation's need for effective STEM teachers. In partnership with 6
local school districts, STEM industry professionals, and the Woodrow Wilson
National Foundation, Education faculty from Claremont Graduate University and
STEM faculty from the Claremont Colleges will recruit 9 exemplary math and
science teachers (Master Teacher Fellows or MTFs) and provide them with
professional development specific to STEM Education. Additionally, the project
will recruit 15 high-performing college graduates with an undergraduate degree
in a STEM discipline (Teaching Fellows or TFs) to first obtain the skillsets of
a math or science teacher and then to receive added support and professional
development to become a Master STEM Educator. The outcome will be teachers who
have a solid foundation in their discipline and who enable students to develop
transferable skills that cut across the STEM disciplines. With a focus on
transferable skills, the proposal would offer a professional development program
consisting of a series of courses that teach transferrable STEM skills in four
STEM areas: Applied Mathematics, Life Sciences, Computer Science and
Engineering. In addition, the Fellows will participate in Professional Learning
Communities and receive support for attaining National Board Certification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCSI project will implement, refine and evaluate its
research-based Professional Development program that draws on the knowledge-base
of effective STEM teacher preparation and effective STEM pedagogical practices.
In doing so, the project will yield insights regarding how to best prepare and
develop Master STEM educators. The CCSI will refine an observational protocol
used to measure a teacher's STEM pedagogical practices and transferable STEM
skills. The CCSI Observation Tool will build upon the Reform Teaching
Observation Protocol (Sawada et al, 2002) and reflect state adopted standards
for science education (Next Generation Science Standards) and math education
(Common Core State Standards). Along with other data collected through
interviews, portfolio analysis, and Teacher Performance Assessment, this
protocol will be used to evaluate whether CCSI's STEM PD Program had a value-
added impact on the funded MTFs and TFs and their K-12 students. CCSI Fellows
will be mentored in how to make contributions to the field which will include
leading professional development in their districts for other math/science
teachers interested in how they too can bring STEM concepts into their
classrooms. The CCSI Project thus will help to create teacher leaders,
instructional change agents who can have a profoundly positive impact on
students and schools. The CCSI Master Teacher Fellows (MTFs) will also receive
mentorship training and it is expected that the CCSI MTFs will continue to serve
as mentors to emerging STEM educators. Furthermore, the four-course STEM series
that is at the heart of CCSI's STEM PD Program will be evaluated as a
cornerstone of STEM Induction Programs for math and science teachers wanting to
develop as STEM Educators thereby serving as a model for a STEM Induction
program in California. Collectively, the 24 CCSI Fellows will impact
approximately 3,120 K-12 students annually. While the number of students who
will be taught by the CCSI Fellows is notable, even more significant is the
impact the project will have on their instruction in the classroom. The CCSI
Fellows will compel their students to think of math and science in terms of
applied situations and the transferable STEM skills needed to meet the demands
of 21st Century colleges and careers.