* 1439507
* Appalachian Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Clinton Conley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 45,000.00

This grant will support six meetings of Appalachian Set Theory (AST) workshop
series, with the first one planned for December 2014. These are two-day
conferences focuses primarily at graduate students and aiming at presenting
cutting edge developments in the discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Appalachian Set Theory (AST) workshop series ran initially for the period
2006-2012, supported by NSF grants DMS-0631446 and DMS-0903845. We propose to
continue this innovative workshop series. We will hold two workshops per year,
each devoted to a single topic such as a broadly applicable method, a complex
seminal paper or a significant unpublished theorem. Faculty and students who are
not experts will be immersed in the subject for one or two intensive days and
get the tools they need to continue on their own. Each workshop will be led by
one or two experts. NSF funds will be used to cover the workshop leaders'
expenses, and to provide support for those wishing to attend who do not have
other sources of funding. After each workshop graduate student assistants will
be paid to prepare typed notes, with help from the workshop leader or leaders:
these notes will be promptly disseminated online. Most of the workshop notes for
the period 2006-2012 are collected in the volume "Appalachian Set Theory
2006-2012" (Cambridge University Press). In planning these workshops, special
emphasis will be given to encouraging participation by young mathematicians and
mathematicians from underrepresented groups.