* 1439773
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigation of the Effects of Rockfall Impacts on Structures During the Christchurch Earthquake Series
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Joseph Wartman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2017
* USD 94,665.00

This award funds collaborative U.S. - New Zealand research that will investigate
the effects of earthquake-induced rockfalls on residential and small commercial
structures. The 2010-2011 Canterbury, New Zealand Earthquake Sequence included
four major earthquakes that produced high levels of ground shaking in the
Christchurch metropolitan region. These earthquakes triggered thousands of
rockfalls, which impacted several hundred buildings and resulted in both human
and capital losses. However, the impact of these rockfalls on structures varied
widely. In some instances boulders became enmeshed within a building's
structural system, causing damage but preserving life-safety. In other
situations boulders fully penetrated building systems and caused structural
collapse. While a rockfall's interaction with a building system may be
conceptually understood to be a function of both impact energy and structural
capacity, it still remains unclear exactly how these factors govern a building's
resistance to these impacts. There is virtually no information on this in the
engineering literature. This work will be the first extensive, well-documented
study of the subject and will be of immediate use to engineers in all parts of
the world where rockfalls are a potential threat.

To this end, this research seeks to acquire, process, and archive data
pertaining to the impact of rockfalls on a series of common residential and
commercial structures. This study will be accomplished through geo-referenced,
3D, ground-based LIDAR scans and Structure from Motion (SfM) photographic
acquisition at approximately 30 damaged buildings. In addition to documentation
at high detail, the resulting database will provide a substantial increase in
the number of high-quality case histories of rockfall-structure interaction.
This work additionally aims to identify the factors that govern the resilience
of a wide range of common structures through a preliminary series of coupled
runout/structural impact model simulations of the rockfall process. The project
includes a range of broader impacts including most notably development of
preliminary guidelines on building system resilience to rockfalls. These
guidelines will have important implications for building codes worldwide and
more immediately will serve to inform local rebuilding and recovery efforts in
Christchurch. The work will be done in close cooperation with researchers from
GNS Science, New Zealand.