* 1439738
* Manhattan College Center for Preparing and Retaining STEM Scholars Teaching Engineering Principles
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Zahra Shahbazi, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2018
* USD 297,516.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship capacity building project will investigate
ways to promote and support engineering education for three groups of learners:
i) engineers and engineering students, ii) students in middle and high schools -
especially from underrepresented groups, and iii) current math and science
majors pursuing teacher certification, who desire to be prepared to teach
engineering principles to students in grades 6-12. Currently, there is little
engineering in many teacher certification programs for individuals interested in
becoming a STEM teacher; but the need has changed with the roll-out of the Next
Generation Science Standards. Teachers are most often certified to teach math,
science, or technology, but rarely have sufficient background to adequately
teach engineering principles. Engineers, on the other hand, have expertise in
engineering principles, but lack the knowledge and skills to effectively teach
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the increasing demand for teachers
qualified to teach the engineering concepts included in the Next Generation
Science Standards, this project will produce skilled STEM educators through
three newly developed programs; first a minor in education for students studying
engineering. Second, a certificate in engineering education for STEM majors who
are pursuing teacher certification, and third, a post-baccalaureate certificate
in engineering education for engineering graduate students. The project will
also provide professional development opportunities for current STEM educators.
Finally, the project will select groups of university students to be trained to
present hands-on workshops in local schools serving underrepresented groups with
the intent of enticing these students to consider future studies in STEM related
fields. The project will contribute to a transformative change in STEM educator
preparation, while providing outreach services to high need schools and
attracting these students to STEM fields.