* 1439515
* Collaborative Research:  Lidar and Modeling Applications from the Precision Atmospheric Marine Boundary Layer Experiment (PreAMBLE) Dataset
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* David Rahn, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2019
* USD 145,728.00

The Precision Atmospheric Marine Boundary Layer Experiment (PreAMBLE) was a
field study conducted from 17 May to 17 June 2012 based out of Point Mugu, CA.
The central focus was to evaluate atmospheric dynamics associated with the
atmospheric marine boundary layer near Point Conception and the California
Bight. Airborne measurements were used to evaluate three major topics of
research: the coastal jet near Point Conception, the Catalina eddy, and the
initiation of coastally trapped wind reversals. PreAMBLE was highly successful
and all major goals specified in the original proposal have been completed and
published. Three unanticipated outcomes from PreAMBLE have prompted additional
research. These include the sheer volume of unique and high quality data
obtained, the unanticipated utility of the data collected by the cloud lidar,
and the disappointing performance of operational and case-specific numerical
simulations. Of the 15 research flights, only five have been required to address
key issues from the original proposal. The current project for the remaining ten
cases combined with the previous analyses will enable 1) a more comprehensive
evaluation of the marine boundary layer characteristics within the Santa Barbara
Channel such as height, temperature, and the horizontal pressure field, 2)
examine the role of topography in forcing changes in marine boundary layer
structure and cloud characteristics near Point Buchon, 3) analysis of marine
layer structure, aerosol origin, and fine-scale structure based on the upward-
and downward-pointing cloud lidars, and 4) critically evaluate the performance
and capability of the Weather Research and Forecasting model in simulating the
dynamics, thermodynamics, and cloud cover within the Santa Barbara Channel and
near-coastal Pacific Ocean just west of Point Arguello.

Intellectual Merit: Airborne measurements of the lower atmosphere offshore of
southern California are rare since they are difficult to obtain, which makes the
PreAMBLE dataset extremely valuable. Important characteristics of the
complicated system near Point Conception and the Santa Barbara Channel have been
revealed through case studies. Current conceptual models of the dynamics must
make assumptions and neglect more complicated issues. These observations allow a
critical examination of many of the assumptions. A synthesis of all of the
flights during PreAMBLE will provide the community with information on the
variability of the fine-scale features and quantify deviations between all
cases. Contributions will be made in identifying the relative roles of forcing
such as offshore flow and interaction with a complex boundary layer under
different conditions. Not only will conceptual models of the dynamics be
refined, but a critical examination of the numerical models will be conducted.

Broader Impacts: The near-coastal environment near Point Conception and the
Santa Barbara Channel continue to be of strategic importance. Meteorological
phenomena in the marine boundary layer have prompted several major research
efforts during the past two decades. Data collected as part of the PreAMBLE
field study are among the few airborne measurements taken within this region and
are essential for validation of previous conceptual models and provide a hard
test for numerical simulations. This project will offer an opportunity for
graduate student training in the observational aspects of atmospheric science, a
focus that was identified as a key element for the June 2009 Advanced Study
Program Colloquium. As with previous field experiments, graduate students from
the University of Kansas and the University of Wyoming will become exposed to
aircraft datasets and novel applications. The University of Wyoming King Air is
a national facility that is available to the entire meteorological community.
Advances in aircraft observation techniques including applications of lidar will
promote further use by other scientists.