* 1439417
* Investigating the Relationship between Social Interaction, Teacher Identity, and Commitment to Teaching in High-Need Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sandra Fillebrown, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,552.00

Teacher retention is one of the biggest challenges facing the improvement of
STEM education. Across all grade levels and disciplines, studies show that
almost 50% of new teachers leave the profession in the first five years and
secondary STEM teachers are not an exception. The Phase II Noyce Scholarship
Monitoring and Evaluation project at Saint Joseph's University (SJU) will
explore the factors that influence secondary STEM teacher retention. High
teacher turnover is a fact in many high-need schools and understanding how
teachers make the decision to stay or leave may help develop solutions to this
problem. This research will provide a better understanding of the process of
identity development and its relationship to the decision to stay or leave a
high-need STEM classroom. This in turn can be used to inform undergraduate
teacher preparation programs and companion efforts to support teachers in their
early years of teaching, thus ultimately having a positive impact on teacher
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research suggests that a strong identity as a
STEM teacher in a high-need school will be correlated with a decision to
continue and this grant would support a rigorous investigation of the process by
which the Noyce Scholars construct, or fail to construct, these identities. This
project will begin with eight SJU Noyce Scholars already employed in public,
charter and private schools in the city of Philadelphia. More scholars will
start teaching at the beginning of this project and several more are still in
their pre-service (undergraduate) program. The teaching commitments mandated by
their Noyce Scholarships will begin to be satisfied during the next three years
and SJU seeks a better understanding of the motivation of why they choose to
continue or not to continue in their positions beyond this commitment. Research
activities will include regular classroom visits and extensive one-on-one
interviews with the SJU Noyce Scholars. The Noyce Scholars will also keep
journals, and common themes will be identified that are associated with whether
teachers remain or leave. These findings will in turn inform SJU teacher
preparation programs and early career professional support efforts.