* 1439880
* The Urban Mathematics and Science Teacher Collaborative
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,799,094.00

The growing population of English Language Learners (ELLs) in US schools calls
for greater attention to preparing mathematics and science teachers to teach
students from linguistically diverse backgrounds. The Tufts Urban Mathematics
and Science Teacher Collaborative, a Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Teaching
Fellow/Master Teaching Fellow Phase II project, is a collaboration among three
Arts &amp; Sciences departments at Tufts University (Education, Mathematics, and
Physics &amp; Astronomy), two public schools in the local Malden Public Schools
District (Linden STEAM Academy, focusing on grades 1-8, and Malden High School,
focusing on grades 9-12), and a local non-profit organization, the Cheche Konnen
Center at TERC, which will provide professional development around learning and
teaching Mathematics and Science with students from linguistically diverse
backgrounds. The proposal builds on successes and lessons learned during a Phase
I project at Tufts. The focus on language diversity is especially relevant given
that 65 different language groups are represented in the Malden Schools student
body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tufts University Urban Mathematics and Science
Teacher Collaborative will prepare 8 new Mathematics and Science Teaching
Fellows (TFs), and contribute to the development of 4 Master Teaching Fellows
(MTFs) over 5 years. It builds on more than 15 years of experience in the
preparation of teachers for work in urban schools through the Urban Teacher
Training Collaborative (UTTC) in which pre-service teachers work in their
assigned schools full-time for a full academic year under the guidance of mentor
teachers and university professors. The Collaborative will include grades 1-12
in district-wide conversations about STEM teaching; incorporate more explicit
use of video case studies of teaching and learning as tools to reflect on
student thinking; tightly integrate Virtual Learning Communities where Phase I
and II TFs/MTFs can collaborate; and focus on language practices and equity as
ways of understanding students' sense-making in STEM. The Collaborative will
bring together the expertise of faculty in the Mathematics, Physics &amp;
Astronomy, and Education departments in Arts &amp; Sciences, to provide an
enriching and nurturing context in which teachers can deepen and broaden their
understanding of Mathematics and Science content, as well as how to teach
Mathematics and Science. Concurrently, the investigators will seek to identify
and better characterize the conditions under which the teaching fellows and
master teaching fellows are able to deepen their own understanding of science
and mathematics and to translate that deeper understanding into effective
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tufts University Urban Mathematics and
Science Teacher Collaborative model offers a research-based model for
introducing a deeper approach to Mathematics and Science education in a school
district that serves a student population from a wide range of language groups.
The courses, course materials, examples of effective teaching, and teacher
discussion forums will be built as free, open-source, cross-platform modules
that universities and schools can use and modify. The project will disseminate
the video case studies of student thinking in Science and Mathematics and of
reflective practice that the TFs and MTFs develop to form a collection of
exemplars shared through a project-designed secure website that can be used by
teachers, teacher educators, and researchers for professional development
purposes. The research team will use online surveys, classroom observations, and
analysis of Common Core State Standards Initiative assessments to follow the
Phase I and Phase II Teaching Fellows and Master Teaching Fellows so as to
document the impact of project participation on their teaching and on student
learning.