* 1439697
* CAREER:  An Integrated Geologic, Geodetic, and Paleoseismic Study of Plate Boundary Stress Evolution and Geoscience Education Utilizing the EarthScope Database
* GEO,EAR
* 01/06/2014,09/30/2015
* Bridget Smith-Konter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 196,795.00

The project is focused on studying the relationship between stress evolution of
the Pacific-North American plate boundary and the occurrence of major
earthquakes in this region using time-dependent fault deformation models
constrained by geologic, geodetic, and paleoseismic data. EarthScope is leading
a large-scale community effort to understand the nature of earthquake hazards
along the Pacific-North American plate boundary through a growing archive
seismic and geodetic instruments. These instruments are now prepared to capture
critical details of pending major seismic events, however a 3D synoptic picture
of stress evolution spanning the full earthquake cycle requires sophisticated
computer models, combined with improved paleoseismic chronologies. To
investigate earthquake cycle stress evolution of the plate boundary, this
project synthesizes several EarthScope data products with semi-analytic crustal
deformation modeling techniques. These efforts include: (1) inclusion of
community-defined fault locations and geometries, (2) integration of EarthScope
InSAR and Plate Boundary Observatory GPS data, (3) analysis of new paleoseismic
faulting histories, and (4) exploration of new fault model capabilities. A
significant component of this proposed work also aims to develop K-16
educational tools and opportunities for both students and teachers, and to
provide pertinent and accessible earthquake information to the general public.
This portion of the project emphasizes (1) integration of visualization
technologies, EarthScope Internet resources, and Earth science teaching modules
for a masters-level Computers in Earth Science course for pre- and in-service
K-12 teachers, (2) development of an EarthScope Active Earth kiosk display,
highlighting this project's research results, local and regional EarthScope
science, and Earth science career stories, and (3) participation of local high
school students in the Pathways to the Geosciences summer camp, an ongoing
educational program hosted by the University of Texas at El Paso. The
fundamental earthquake science and outreach initiatives being explored by this
project have substantial societal relevance, as time-dependent earthquake stress
simulations will soon be poised to help mitigate seismic hazards and to
transform the public's conception and appreciation of large-scale, temporally
evolving Earth processes.