* 1439632
* INCISE (Integrated Certificate in STEM Education)
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Mahnaz Moallem, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2017
* USD 299,974.00

National calls for improved education in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) point to the challenges of an ever-changing, increasingly
global society. In line with this, there is an identified need for integration
of multiple STEM concepts across disciplines to solve complex, global problems.
Based on this situation and with funding from the National Science Foundation's
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Noyce Capacity Building project
will address the national shortage of high quality STEM teachers, and especially
teachers who can teach across disciplines. Investigators at the University of
North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) will build capacity to contribute to STEM
teacher workforce development by creating and implementing two teacher
preparation programs at UNCW that will provide participants with an ability to
teach integration of important concepts across STEM disciplines. The overall
programs will integrate engineering and technology, interdisciplinary STEM
material, critical thinking, problem solving, and inquiry in science to enhance
teacher training, which, in turn, will help future teachers prepare students to
enter the workforce as problem solvers, innovators, inventors, and logical
thinkers, who will be self-reliant and technologically literate.

These discipline integrated programs to be developed will consist of: (a) an
undergraduate STEM teaching certification program for students majoring in a
STEM discipline and (b) a graduate STEM teaching certification program for
individuals who already hold a STEM degree. The intentional integration of the
STEM disciplines in the curriculum, new teacher preparation practices, and other
components of the UNCW certificate programs will be designed to serve as a
catalyst to: (i) increase the number of STEM majors; (ii) encourage and train
STEM majors to become effective K-12 STEM teachers; (iii) provide opportunities
for current K-12 educators to improve overall teaching practices; (iv) provide a
pathway for mid-career STEM professionals to become effective K-12 teachers, and
(v) provide the participant preservice teachers, current teachers, and mid-
Career professionals with the background and ability to teach K-12 students the
integration of important concepts across STEM disciplines. Evaluation and
collaborative research will be conducted to address the effectiveness of the
curriculum and the overall design, implementation, and results of the INCISE
program.