* 1439145
* XPS: FULL: DSD: Asynchronous PDE Algorithms for Turbulent Flows at Exascale
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 07/31/2019
* USD 850,000.00

Future exascale computing systems will be available to study
important,&lt;br/&gt;compute-intensive applications such as multi-physics multi-
scale natural&lt;br/&gt;phenomena and engineering systems typically modeled
accurately by partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations (PDEs).Â  A prime example
is turbulence at high Reynolds&lt;br/&gt;numbers, typically found in natural and
engineering systems, which comprise an&lt;br/&gt;extremely wide range of spatial
and temporal scales and has thus became a Grand&lt;br/&gt;Challenge in
scientific computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many challenges exists that must be
overcome before exascale systems&lt;br/&gt;can be utilized effectively. These
include communication between&lt;br/&gt;processing elements as well as global
synchronizations both of which will&lt;br/&gt;likely be a main bottleneck when
millions of billions of processing elements&lt;br/&gt;are utilized in a
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs develop novel exascale
numerical schemes for PDEs,&lt;br/&gt;especially those describing turbulent
flows, that exploit asynchrony from the mathematical to&lt;br/&gt;the software
level. These are based on widely used finite differences, compact
differentiation and spectral schemes.&lt;br/&gt;Asynchrony offers better
performance but also introduces errors in the solution. The new schemes
will&lt;br/&gt;be able to trade-off accuracy and performance in a quantitative
and predictable manner.&lt;br/&gt;The approach includes (i) rigorous
mathematical studies of stability and&lt;br/&gt;accuracy based on numerical
analysis and dynamical systems, which will also&lt;br/&gt;provide a framework
for the development of new schemes and quantify its&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty, (ii)
development of specific elements in a scalable library for
parallel&lt;br/&gt;computing to enable portable implementations on current and
future machines,&lt;br/&gt;and (iii) physics based modeling of numerical
perturbations in&lt;br/&gt;realistic flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools,
techniques and simulation data in this project&lt;br/&gt;will be integrated in
the PIs' educational efforts through graduate mentoring,
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;research and as material for courses in high-performance
computing, fluid dynamics and dynamical systems&lt;br/&gt;taught by the PIs.