* 1439660
* Collaborative Research: An Engineering University Partnering with a Teacher Preparation University to Produce Highly Qualified Secondary STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Robert Reinsvold, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2017
* USD 207,557.00

With funding from the Capacity Building track of the National Science
Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this project will build
the framework for a new STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
teacher preparation partnership program between the Colorado School of Mines
(CSM) (a strong engineering school) and the University of Northern Colorado
(UNCO) (a strong teacher education school). The new teacher preparation program
will produce more highly qualified STEM teachers in Colorado, with special
emphasis on middle and high school teachers. This program will provide an
alternative path for CSM students who may wish to become a science or
mathematics teacher. The project will provide insight in how to increase
recruitment and retention of STEM majors while also addressing the shortage of
STEM teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborating institutions will develop
new and revised courses that will best address the integrative nature of STEM
learning that is emerging in K-12 education by preparing secondary science and
mathematics teachers with the skills to integrate scientific inquiry,
technological design, engineering problem solving and mathematical analysis into
cohesive and meaningful learning experiences for their students. The program
design will focus on recruitment and effective preparation of future teachers by
providing the teacher candidates with strong content knowledge, early field
experiences, and supervision of their student teaching by content faculty. This
ultimately will have a positive impact on the students of these future teachers
and an increase in science literacy within the greater community. The innovative
model for collaboration between these two universities will be transportable to
other similar situations where engineering schools are looking for ways to
enable their students interested in teaching as a career to complete their
training and certification. Project evaluation will be conducted primarily
through tracking forms developed for each project goal and its corresponding
objectives.