* 1439923
* Preparing STEM Teachers for English Language Learners: the STELLER Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Kathleen Foltz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 796,872.00

This project will implement a Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Phase II project,
STEM Teachers for English Language Learners: Excellence and Retention (STELLER),
at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). STELLER addresses the
growing national need to recruit, prepare, and provide effective induction
support for new STEM middle and high school teachers with degrees in STEM fields
and strong content-specific pedagogical preparation. A unique aspect of this
project is the intent to focus on preparing new teachers who can meet the needs
of English Language Learners (ELLs), students whose difficulties in speaking,
reading, writing, or understanding English may hinder their learning. This
program seeks to recruit undergraduate STEM students across all disciplines for
entry into a 13-month post baccalaureate program leading to certification and a
career teaching in high needs secondary schools. A total of 40 scholars will be
supported over the five years of the project. The new teacher scholars will
obtain teaching positions in high-need secondary schools with a particular
emphasis on placement in the Santa Barbara Unified School district but also
elsewhere on the California Central Coast in Santa Barbara, Ventura, San Luis
Obispo, and Kern counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STELLER's team will consist of
UCSB faculty from science, mathematics, engineering, computer science, and
education; teachers and administrators from the high-need Santa Barbara Unified
School District (SBUSD); directors from UCSB's Office of Education Partnerships;
and community leaders from the Santa Barbara County K-20 STEM Council. The
program will continue efforts begun under the Noyce Phase I CalTeach at Santa
Barbara (CTSB) to increase the quality, number, and diversity of secondary
science and mathematics teachers who graduate from UCSB's post-baccalaureate
Teacher Education Program (TEP). Starting at the undergraduate level, a focus on
English Language Learners (ELLs) will be added so as to thoroughly prepare
secondary science and mathematics teacher candidates to teach the disciplinary-
specific language, core ideas, and practices outlined in the Next Generation
Science Standards and the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics. The
trajectories of CTSB and STELLER Teacher Scholars will be tracked to generate
new insights into effective teacher education. This project will produce a 24%
increase in UCSB's production of science and mathematics teachers. Evaluation
efforts will include an assessment of activities specific to this project as
well as continued assessment of the success of beginning teachers from the
initial Phase I Noyce Program at UCSB. A mixed methods approach will be used in
project evaluation. Data regarding the program operation will be collected
through surveys and interviews with all participants. Data regarding teacher
effectiveness and training will be collected in classroom observations, tracking
of average state standardized test scores of students, and performance on the
state-mandated teaching performance assessment.