* 1439824
* A Systematic and Integrated Approach to Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining Highly Qualified Secondary Teachers of Mathematics and Science in Arkansas
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Carl Frederickson, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,198,506.00

Developing more, highly qualified science and mathematics teachers is a national
priority. Through funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program, this grant will respond to the increased need for
outstandingly prepared teachers of mathematics and science at a time when the
State of Arkansas is increasing expectations for teaching and learning in STEM
disciplines at the secondary level. Forty rising sophomores and juniors will
participate in an internship program designed to provide participants with the
opportunity to experience teaching in tutoring and mentoring situations. These
students will serve as the primary pool of juniors and seniors who will be
selected to receive the thirty Noyce Scholarships available through this
project. The University of Central Arkansas (UCA) Noyce Scholars will graduate
with Bachelor of Science degrees in their respective STEM disciplines and will
have experiences working in a laboratory and developing the critical inquiry
skills necessary to effectively teach today's STEM content. This project seeks
to tap into the passions and inquisitiveness that are innate in STEM majors and
support them in translating this into powerful teaching pedagogies which capture
and motivate middle and high school students in excelling in science and
mathematics. Partner school districts, from the urban North Little Rock School
District to the suburban Conway School District to the rural Vilonia and
Mayflower School Districts, will benefit from the UCA Noyce Scholars, while
providing these nascent teachers diverse experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noyce Interns will have the opportunity to participate in
summer research projects with Master Teachers so they can enjoy the rewards of
teaching while strengthening teaching skills in the context of extracurricular
presentations to the Boys and Girls Club and Upward Bound Program. The
recipients will also work with more than 1,000 students in STEM university
classes through learning assistants and tutoring programs. The internship
program will serve as a primary recruitment vehicle for Noyce Scholars. The
Noyce Scholars will complete the UCA STEMteach preparation program which is a
replication of the UTeach program from the University of Texas-Austin. This
program provides mathematics and science majors the opportunity to earn an
Arkansas teaching license by completing a 26 credit-hour minor that focuses on
developing pedagogical skills within the context of the student's major program
of academic study in mathematics, chemistry, physics, or biology. One of the
hallmarks of the program is the strong collaboration between the College of
Education, the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, and partner school
districts. The program centers on the belief that the preparation of teachers
excels when students have both a contextual and a theoretical understanding
interacting in accord. For this reason, the UCA STEMteach program begins with
field experience, an approach that differs from most other teacher education
programs. The UCA Noyce program will provide robust support for Scholars after
graduation during the earliest years of their teaching careers through classroom
visits, collaboration with other UCA Noyce Scholars Program alumni, and strong
connections with the UCA Institute for STEM Professional Development and
Education Research (UCA STEM Institute) that will continue past the initial two
years of teaching. Ultimately, this UCA Noyce project intends to triple the
current output of secondary STEM teachers to approximately thirty annually,
while at the same time recruiting, preparing, and retaining an increasingly
diverse set of outstanding secondary STEM teachers armed with deep content,
research experience, and pedagogical content skills. While the fundamental
indicator of success of the UCA Noyce program will be the production of thirty
outstanding STEM majors with teacher certification, the project will use the
UTeach Progress Evaluation and Reporting System data collection system for
storing data and will also assess the extent to which the project has been
successful in recruiting teacher candidates who are traditionally
underrepresented in STEM disciplines, has provided students with a content rich
introduction to research based pedagogy to promote teaching as a career choice,
and has improved sustained connections with Noyce Scholars during the first two
years in the classroom.