* 1439967
* Wireless Spectrum Research and Development (WSRD) Workshop. "UNDERSTANDING THE SPECTRUM ENVIRONMENT". To be held March 31, 2014, National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Dennis Roberson, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2015
* USD 48,000.00

ECCS-1439967 PI: Dennis Roberson Institution: Illinois Institute of Technology
Title: Wireless Spectrum Research and Development (WSRD) Workshop

UNDERSTANDING THE SPECTRUM ENVIRONMENT

This award provides travel support for attendees to a fifth Workshop organized
under auspices of the interagency Wireless Spectrum Research and Development
Senior Steering Group (WSRD SSG). The Workshop will focus on understanding the
frequency spectrum environment using data and spectrum monitoring to improve
spectrum utilization. It will develop research themes and proposals for R&D
projects that would address the challenges identified by Congress, the FCC, the
NTIA, and the WSRD SSG to make spectrum monitoring and big data oriented
spectrum management technologies more available to all sectors of the wireless
community. The Workshop will consist of a one full day meeting on March 31, 2014
at the NSF headquarters in Arlington, VA offering a venue for over 100
participants. The Workshop seeks to bring together top industry, academic and
government policy makers with expertise in the areas of spectrum monitoring,
spectrum management, enforcement and related technology research and development
to help inform the recommendations of the WSRD SSG.

The Workshop will address the technical and policy research challenges for
making significantly more spectrum available and manageable as set out in the
two recent Presidential Memoranda on Spectrum. It will develop a research plan
that will become a roadmap to develop research into future spectrum management
and spectrum-sharing technologies that enables greater and more efficient access
to spectrum. Workshop participants will start the day by hearing from key
leaders about interesting projects in this area. The principle goals of the
Workshop are to: (i) examine spectrum monitoring as a way to improve spectrum
utilization, (ii) establish meaningful and achievable goals, and (iii) identify
topics for research and standards that align with those goals. Information
gathered from the Workshop will be instrumental in helping the WSRD SSG develop
recommendations that will be released in a Workshop report prepared for the
Office of Science and Technology Policy and made available on the NITRD website.