* 1439790
* Philadelphia Regional Noyce Partnership New Teacher Support Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Victor Donnay, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Teaching in a high-need school is challenging work and, without appropriate
supports, new teachers are at risk of low job satisfaction, burn out and leaving
teaching altogether. To address these needs, the Philadelphia Regional Noyce
Partnership (PRNP) consisting of Bryn Mawr and Haverford Colleges, Drexel
University, La Salle University, the University of Pennsylvania, Saint Joseph's
University and Temple University, together with the Philadelphia Education Fund
and its Philadelphia Teacher Residency Program will develop a new teacher
support program that will provide flexible, individualized supportive services
to new first and second year Noyce teachers so as to increase their persistence
and professional growth as STEM professionals in the Philadelphia region. The
Philadelphia Regional Noyce Partnership will develop a model of early career
teacher support using regional resources that will retain and sustain new STEM
teachers. These new Noyce teachers will have increased opportunities to
participate in mentoring, professional development, communities of practice and
social networks with regional STEM professionals in real and virtual
environments. The new teacher support model will include the following
components: (1) Individualized Support Plan (ISP); (2) Mentoring (Mentor
Training Model Development, Mentor Training and Mentoring Support); (3)
Professional Development; (4) Outreach and Networking; and (5) Website Based
Resources and Communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will
contribute to the subfield within STEM education focused on preparing,retaining,
and supporting the development of high quality teachers in high needs settings.
Specifically, through developing and testing an approach that supports both new
teachers' emotional well-being and their instructional outlook and skills, the
project will increase understanding of the challenges confronted by novice
teachers in a large urban school district and ways that those challenges can be
managed and met. By the end of the two-year project, there will be a refined
regional model of new STEM teacher support that can be scaled to provide support
for large numbers of new teachers. In addition to providing support for new STEM
teachers working in high-needs schools in Philadelphia, to increase their
capacities as teachers and the likelihood that they will stay in teaching, the
project will prepare experienced STEM teachers to serve as mentors of new
teachers, enhancing the self-sustaining capacity of the network of teachers in
Philadelphia. The project will strengthen a growing partnership across seven
teacher education institutions in Philadelphia, facilitating regional
cooperation efforts devoted to teacher development and support. Finally, through
collaborative efforts, the partnership will offer a rich menu of supports for
all new STEM teachers in the region, exceeding the capacity of any single
institution to support its graduates.