* 1439761
* Science Education for Excellence and Equity in Chicago (SEEEC)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2014,09/30/2023
* Chandra James, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,999,778.00

In collaboration with a wide variety of non-profit organizations (Project
SYNCERE, Little Village Environmental Justice Organization, Chicago Freedom
School, Chicago Botanic Garden, Friends of the Chicago River, Institute for
Latino Progress), the University of Chicago-Illinois seeks to prepare 30 new
science teaching fellows (TFs) while building the capacity of 10 master teaching
fellows (MTFs) to be leaders in urban science education. The project will
address the professional development of all participants through a three-pronged
mechanism which emphasizes (a) content-specific information that focuses on Next
Generation Science Standards, (b) culturally relevant practices, and (c) teacher
inquiry/research. The work will be performed in partnership with the Chicago
Public Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent graduates, career changers, and in-
service Master Teachers will be provided with (a) a broad range of science
concentrations including biology, chemistry, earth and space science,
environmental science, and physics, (b) a unique urban perspective on science
education that emphasizes diverse learning assets and equity, and (c)
professional development opportunities within a community of faculty, teacher-
leaders, and non-profit organizations. TFs will be prepared for licensure while
earning a Master's in Instructional Leadership: Science Education, learning to
teach and examine their practice as it relates to teaching, and learning within
specific communities. MTFs will learn to conduct practitioner research and lead
teacher inquiry groups examining essential and enduring challenges in STEM
teacher practice and student learning. Formative and summative evaluation will
focus on analysis of both qualitative and quantitative data related to degree
and licensure attainment, the various teaching practice activities (lesson
plans, participant surveys, etc.), and progress in meeting the overarching
project goals. In doing so, the project will advance knowledge and understanding
of the role played by community-based partnerships of university faculty, school
teacher-leaders, and local non-profit entities in enhancing teacher education
and development, and the circumstances that promote their success. The results
of this work will be presented at national meetings of the American Educational
Research Association and the American Association of Colleges of Teacher
Education.