* 1439054
* Workshop on Combinatorial Approaches to Functional Materials, May 5-6, 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Jason Hattrick-Simpers, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Technical Abstract This award supports the organization of the workshop entitled
"Workshop on Combinatorial Approaches to Functional Materials", which will focus
on identifying key challenges in the Materials Genome Initiative that would
benefit from the application of theoretical and experimental combinatorial
techniques. The meeting will be targeted towards senior and junior scientist
from academia, government, and industry across a wide range of materials
specific applications: including materials for energy, electronics, and
catalysis. A series of lectures will be given on the first day by topical
experts emphasizing both current state-of-the-art and future directions in
combinatorial materials synthesis and metrology, electronic materials, energy-
related materials, catalytic materials and the integration of experimentation
with theory. A series of targeted breakout sessions, led by senior and junior
scientists, will follow the lectures and provide a discussion of current
challenges, visions and strategies for moving the field forward. The discussions
will culminate in the creation of a Roadmap entitled "Strategies for Maximizing
the Impact of Combinatorial Strategies on M.G.I. in Fields of National Need."
The roadmap will be shared with industry, academia, government agencies, and
Congress with an aim towards increasing support and utilization of combinatorial
methods for increased materials commercialization and deployment. The organizers
will make a concerted effort to include underrepresented minorities in the
workshop by actively identifying leading underrepresented scientists in the
field and inviting them as lecturers or to participate as breakout session
leaders. An additional perspectives article will be generated to be disseminated
to the scientific community highlighting current challenges and future
directions.

Nontechnical Abstract This award supports the organization of the workshop
entitled "Workshop on Combinatorial Approaches to Functional Materials", which
will focus on identifying key challenges in the Materials Genome Initiative that
would benefit from the application of theoretical and experimental combinatorial
techniques. The meeting will be targeted to senior and junior scientist from
academia, government, and industry across a wide range of materials specific
applications: including materials for energy, electronics, and catalysis. A
series of lectures will be given on the first day by experts in the field of
combinatorial science and will emphasize its current and future use in the
fields of electronic materials, energy-related materials, and catalytic
materials. Targeted breakout sessions, led by scientists within the field, will
center on delineating current challenges, visions, and strategies for moving the
field forward. The discussions will culminate in the creation of a Roadmap
entitled "Strategies for Maximizing the Impact of Combinatorial Strategies on
M.G.I. in Fields of National Need." The roadmap will be shared with industry,
academia, government agencies, and Congress with an aim towards increasing
support and utilization of combinatorial methods for increased materials
commercialization and deployment. The organizers will make a concerted effort to
include underrepresented minorities in the workshop by actively identifying
leading underrepresented scientists in the field and inviting them as lecturers
or to participate as breakout session leaders. An additional perspectives
article will be generated to be disseminated to the scientific and general
communities highlighting current challenges and future directions.