* 1439244
* Metabolic Engineering X Conference (ME-X)at the Westin Bayshore, Vancouver, British Columbia on June 15-19, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Ryan Gill, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

1439244 &lt;br/&gt;Gill, Ryan T. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
support for the Xth International Conference on Metabolic Engineering (ME-X) to
be held in Vancouver, British Columbia. The Metabolic Engineering Conference is
a leading conference for sharing the state-of-the-art developments and
achievements made in the field of metabolic engineering over the last two years.
The theme of this year's conference is biological design and synthesis. The
Conference is one of the first among several conference series related to
biotechnology that started 20 years ago as an Engineering Foundation conference
with focus on recombinant DNA technology. It has been the first conference with
explicit focus on the application of recombinant DNA technology to the
engineering of microorganisms for industrial processes. This metabolic
engineering relies now on the tools commonly referred to as synthetic biology
and systems biology. This conference has been instrumental in addressing issues
contemporary to technological advancements, engineering research and to
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this international conference is to
bring together influential established researchers, young investigators,
industrial researchers and practitioners, and graduate students to assess the
contributions and future opportunities of metabolic engineering with focus on
biological design and synthesis. The support will enable attendance by graduate
students, postdocs, academic scientists and engineers and industrial researchers
that will benefit from interactions with the international community of
biotechnology researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary
nature of the Conference, the award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.