* 1439683
* I/UCRC Phase III: e-Design: IT-Enabled Design and Realization of Engineered Products and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Sundar Krishnamurty, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2020
* USD 147,160.00

This is a Phase III renewal for the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass
Amherst) site to continue as a partner institution of I/UCRC for e-Design. UMass
Amherst is one of the two founding institutions of the Center for e-Design. The
mission and vision of the existing NSF Center for e-Design is to research and
develop methods and tools that support the realization of a new design paradigm
that can be used to design, develop, and manufacture new engineered products and
systems. Research at the Center for e-Design is oriented to application areas
where large scale, complex projects are being developed, often involving
multiple collaborators at various locations. Application areas include
transportation, manufacturing, information technology, and health and safety.
Research is categorized into five thrust areas - New Design Paradigms and
Processes, Visualization and Virtual Prototyping, Enabling Information
Infrastructure, Design Optimization, and Design Education. Research projects
address a diverse range of engineering challenges faced by high-tech companies
and agencies competing in a global economy. UMass Amherst has a number of
faculty and student researchers working in areas that directly support the
research thrust areas of the center. The renewal will enable UMass Amherst to
continue its research in the advancement of new methods and tools in conceptual
design and product innovation, advanced engineering modeling and simulation,
digital manufacturing, and medical devices design. UMass ongoing research
projects involve projects dealing with integration and application of e-Design
methods and tools into commercial design processes, as well as fundamental
research projects on sustainability product design and engineering design
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center renewal will enable UMass Amherst to
contribute significantly to the successful development and preparation of
graduate and undergraduate students. Results from research effort will continue
to be integrated into the educational curriculum to enrich the student learning
experiences in conceptual design and product innovation, advanced engineering
modeling and simulation, and digital manufacturing. Students associated with the
Center will receive exceptional career development opportunities that include
laboratory and field studies, participation at conferences and workshops, design
colloquium series, and journal publications, as well as training in the ethical
conduct of research. The PI and other UMass Amherst faculty will continue
recruiting underrepresented students, including partnering with a number of
university programs aimed at providing research opportunities for these
students. Research and educational findings will be disseminated nationally and
have significant broader impact through industrial collaboration and technology
transfer. The industry partners will continue to benefit from first access to
research, royalty-free use of the tools, and the opportunity to license and
commercialize technologies. Research and educational findings will continue to
be disseminated nationally and have a significant impact on U.S. industry as a
whole.