* 1439898
* Oklahoma State University Mathematics and Science Robert Noyce Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Juliana Utley, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,193,095.00

The number of STEM jobs in the US has continued to grow over the past several
decades, but the availability of qualified STEM workers in the US has failed to
meet this growing demand. Therefore, increasing the number, quality, and
diversity of mathematics and science secondary teachers has been identified as
critical to future US economic growth and success. In response to this call for
action, the Oklahoma State University (OSU) Mathematics and Science Robert Noyce
Scholarship program in collaboration with Stillwater Public Schools will produce
sixty highly qualified mathematics and science secondary teachers by encouraging
students to earn teacher certification with their 4-year B.S. degree in
mathematics or science. This goal will be accomplished by 1) encouraging
undergraduates majoring in mathematics or science to become teachers through
summer recruitment internships and recruitment scholarships, 2) providing need-
based scholarships aimed at retention and persistence during the semester of
student teaching, and 3) supporting students as they progress through their
first several years of teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future mathematics and
science secondary teachers will be recruited from mathematics and science majors
at OSU, including biological science, chemistry, geology (earth/space science or
physical science), mathematics, and physics. Recruitment will focus on providing
summer internships for freshmen and sophomores who are interested in potentially
pursuing a career in secondary education, and providing recruitment scholarships
for juniors and seniors who have decided to declare one of these majors with a
secondary teacher certification option. The internship program is designed to
provide a flexible framework for both students and internship partners
(including faculty whose research activities include a K-12 outreach component),
with an emphasis on providing diverse experiences to students and supporting
students interested in the physical sciences. The summer internship experience
will culminate in an Internship Showcase near the beginning of the following
academic semester to highlight student experiences and accomplishments,
encourage student confidence and interest in a teaching career, and to recruit
additional students to the program. Need-based retention scholarships will be
provided to students during their last semester in the program when they are
student teaching. Induction year support focuses on a hybrid (online and face-
to-face) Professional Learning Community (PLC) to provide peer and professional
development support for teachers during their first several years in the
classroom, including a stipend for participation. Collectively these program
components complement and enhance ongoing teacher preparation activities at OSU,
and will lead to an increase in the number of highly qualified mathematics and
science secondary teachers produced by the OSU program, as well as early career
teacher retention. The results from program assessment will contribute to
knowledge about factors that positively and negatively affect early career
teachers from the demographic groups represented at OSU, which include a high
percentage of Native Americans, students from rural school districts, and
students with high financial need.