* 1439494
* Scalable Fabrication of Fractal Nanoparticles for Electrochemical Energy Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Desheng Meng, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 116,036.00

Scalable Fabrication of Fractal Nanoparticles for Electrochemical Energy Storage
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to establish the
scientific and engineering foundation for scalable fabrication of fractal
nanoparticles, which can potentially be employed in energy storage devices to
rival their highly-efficient living counterparts in nature. Fractal morphology
in biological systems accounts for allometric scaling of metabolism by
maximizing the internal reaction area while suppressing the increase in mass
transportation path. Such an elegant balance is an important lesson we can learn
from in order to improve our energy storage devices that are currently striving
to simultaneously enhance energy and power densities. Currently the applications
of fractal morphology in man-made energy storage devices are seriously limited
by fabrication capability and high cost. In this project, a comprehensive
multiscale approach is proposed to fabricate and assemble fractal energy storage
devices. Specifically, high-voltage electrophoretic deposition (hvEPD) is
proposed to assemble 1D nanoparticles into vertically-aligned nanoforests. The
thin-film substrate of such nanoforests will then be rolled up to obtain
branching nanorolls that can again be aligned into nanoforests by hvEPD. By
repeated rolling and hvEPD, fractal particles with programmable heterogeneous
nanocomponents can be obtained. 3D nanobatteries will be fabricated and
characterized as exemplary energy storage devices in this project. Fundamental
physics of the fabrication process and its scale-up will also be investigated to
establish the scientific foundation for future research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will
enable integrated design, fabrication and application of engineered fractal
systems for energy storage and conversion, such as batteries, supercapacitors,
thermoelectric devices, fuel cells and solar cells. With our nation?s reliance
on battery-powered devices, improvements in electrochemical energy storage
devices could have a significant impact on society. The research effort will
stimulate further interdisciplinary collaborative efforts to address the grand
challenges raised by the current energy crisis. Education and community
advancement are some of the most important outcomes of this project. Students
from diverse backgrounds, especially those underrepresented in STEM, will be
directly involved and trained. Research results will be widely disseminated
through publications to stimulate further investigations and interdisciplinary
collaborations on energy and nanotechnology.