* 1439420
* III: Student Travel Fellowships for KDD 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Tanya Berger-Wolf, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This grant provides international and domestic travel support for U.S. based
graduate student participants to attend the 20th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2014), which will be held in New York
NY, from August 24-27, 2014. KDD is the world's premier research conference in
data mining. It is an interdisciplinary conference that brings together
researchers and practitioners from all aspects of data mining, knowledge
discovery, and large-scale data analytics. This year, the conference has a
special theme, Data Mining for Social Good, which will highlight how the work of
data analytics researchers and practitioners in contributing towards social good
as well as how these high impact, social problems provide a rich set of
challenges for KDD researchers. Conference proceedings are published by ACM.
Besides the technical program, the conference features workshops, tutorials,
panels, demonstrations, exhibits, and a data mining contest (KDD Cup). In 2013
the conference also included a Broadening Participation in Data Mining workshop.
A strong representation of U.S. researchers, particularly students, at the
conference is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important area
and also contributes to the career development of the students. This grant will
partially support the travel costs for up to 20 U.S. based graduate student
participants to attend the KDD conference. The award will be advertised and the
results will be announced at the KDD 2014 conference website.