* 1439555
* WORKSHOP: ThinkTank (Doctoral Consortium) at ICAD 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Stephen Ruthmann, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2015
* USD 22,403.00

This is funding to support a "ThinkTank" (workshop) of approximately 16
promising scholars from the United States plus up to 4 from abroad, for a total
of 20, along with distinguished research faculty, in conjunction with the 2014
International Conference on Auditory Display (ICAD 2014), which will be held
June 22-25 at the PI's institution in New York City. ICAD is the premier
international forum for presenting research on the use of sound to display data,
monitor systems, and provide enhanced user interfaces for computers and virtual
reality systems. It is unique in its singular focus on auditory displays and the
array of perception, technology, and application areas that this encompasses;
this includes, for example, data sonification, auditory wayfinding, auditory
graphs, speech interfaces, virtual environments, and associated perceptual,
cognitive, technical, and technological research and development. Many of the
interdisciplinary research and development efforts are of direct relevance to
persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual impairments; for
example, developing wayfinding systems for the blind requires research into
effective distance cues and object identifiers used in auditory displays.
Research into the efficacy of auditory graphs may be used to help visually
impaired students and scientists participate more fully in science. Even
household devices can have more effective auditory displays that provide richer
information than the basic "beeps" they presently tend to have. A common
approach in this field is universal design, wherein a display strategy is
developed once, to be used by all kinds of users, including those with and
without specific access issues. This year's conference theme is Big Data; more
details about the conference are available online at
http://steinhardt.nyu.edu/icad2014/.

The ICAD ThinkTank, a full-day event which will take place on Saturday, June 21
immediately preceding the conference, is open to graduate students at all stages
of their educational program, including both Masters and PhD students.
Exceptional undergraduates who have demonstrated interest in pursuing this field
in their graduate careers may also be considered. Ten U.S.-based scholars will
have their attendance fully supported by this award, while 6 more scholars local
to the greater New York City area will be partially supported. The ThinkTank
will bring together students from diverse backgrounds (e.g., engineering,
computing, music, and psychology), so that they can experience the broad
spectrum of approaches to auditory displays, assistive technologies and
universal design. The ThinkTank will develop a supportive community of scholars
and a spirit of collaborative research, by providing participants with a
friendly and open, yet rigorous, scientific forum in which to present their
research ideas, to listen to ongoing work from peer students, and to receive
constructive feedback from a panel of distinguished experts. Panel feedback is
designed to help students understand and articulate how their work is positioned
relative to related research, whether their topics are adequately focused for
thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The
ThinkTank will also offer invited speakers and discussion groups (e.g., to
provide students with relevant information about important issues for doctoral
candidates, whether they are considering academic or industrial career paths).
Each student participant will furthermore present his/her work in a special
poster session during the conference proper. An evaluation of the ThinkTank will
be conducted, and the findings made available to the organizers of future
conferences and consortia.

Broader Impacts: The ICAD ThinkTank will promote scholarship and networking
among new researchers in an important emerging interdisciplinary area, and will
help shape ongoing and future research projects that have clear and important
implications for development of assistive technologies and universal access. The
doctoral consortium will afford participants exposure to a larger community,
allowing them to bond among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical
stage in their professional development. Because the students and faculty
constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including nationality
and culture, scientific discipline, and institution (no more than two per
university, and usually just one), the students' horizons are broadened to the
future benefit of the field.