* 1439902
* Cultivating a Community of Next Generation Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2023
* Lisa Montplaisir, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, this project addresses the Nation's growing need to recruit
and prepare secondary STEM teachers, but also to provide new teachers with the
support that they need to ensure that they remain in the teaching profession.
The data show compelling needs in the State of North Dakota. Both urban centers
and rural areas of the state are increasing their populations at rates resulting
in increased demands on the supply of qualified STEM teachers that are needed
for the schools. In addition, 59% of North Dakota Schools are classified as
Title I, requiring special resources to meet the needs of low-income and at-risk
children. Finally, the state Educational Standards and Practices Board has
declared all content areas except elementary and physical education as critical
shortage areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a partnership among North
Dakota State University (NDSU) and over 40 school districts of the South East
Educational Cooperative. As a Phase II Scholarship and Stipend project, it will
apply what was learned during the Phase I Noyce project to continue the
recruitment plus mentored retention of talented STEM students into high needs
secondary schools within North Dakota and adjacent regions of Minnesota and
South Dakota, especially rural and tribal settings. The successful Phase I
project supported 27 students. This Phase II project will prepare 36 new
teachers. The evaluation of the Phase I project provided knowledge that informed
the design and development of the current project. Based on what was learned,
the project PI team will recruit students earlier in their academic careers,
supporting new inservice teachers by providing funds to purchase classroom
supplies, and implementing on-line mentoring for new teachers separated by great
distances. Recruitment efforts will include paid, full-time summer and part-time
academic year internships to allow freshmen and sophomores opportunities to
explore and to encourage them to opt for secondary STEM teaching as a career.
Project evaluation will use surveys, interviews, document analysis, and
observation to assess teacher candidates and to evaluate the success of the
project. The knowledge learned will inform the recruitment and support in
preservice and inservice teachers in programs across the country.