* 1439606
* I-Corps:  System for Predicting Energy Demands and Energy Usage of Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Jorge Gonzalez, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps team has developed tools to forecast energy demands for buildings
in cities and for cities as a whole. The application of forecasting energy
demands has high commercial value for a range of users including building
operators, utility companies, data center managers, and many others to prepare
their facilities and/or take advantage of energy savings. The proposed
technology can have a large impact on industries and government entities that
provide information, management controls, equipment, and energy resources for
the built environment by accurate forecasting of their energy demands. Heavily
urbanized regions offer some of the greatest opportunities for this technology
to have a significant impact across this broad range of applications areas. New
control and HVAC technologies may be envisioned that make use of forecasted
energy information to optimize their operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed concept is based on the existing Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
mesoscale model that considers real time temporal fluctuations of local weather
and specific characteristics of buildings, neighborhoods, and cities, including
building heights, materials, optical properties,HVAC and energy generation
systems used, and usage by occupants. Significant energy savings could be
possible due to a range of possible scenarios including but not limited to
safety in the grid, anticipated preparation of large HVAC equipment based on
refine forecasted weather and/or demand, better planning of production stocks,
or long-term energy efficiency planning based on improved understanding of the
energy activity of facilities.