* 1439827
* Preparing Mathematics Teachers for Southwestern Illinois
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2024
* Sharon Locke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,043,729.00

Given the need for this nation to maintain its leadership in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and the growing diversity and
needs of our school population, it is important to increase our production of
STEM teachers who are well prepared to teach in high needs schools. This project
is designed to meet that challenge. It is a Track I Phase I Robert Noyce
Scholarship project designed to graduate and certify 24 secondary mathematics
teachers to serve in high-needs rural and urban communities, targeting the
southwestern Illinois region. It is a partnership of the Southern Illinois
University Edwardsville (SIUE) College of Arts and Sciences and School of
Education, the SIUE STEM Center, Lewis and Clark Community College (LCCC),
master teachers, community-based organizations, and Belleville, Cahokia, and
Highland Community School Districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: 1)
recruit highly qualified STEM students that demonstrate an aptitude for teaching
mathematics, 2) provide these students with an enhanced experience in
mathematics education and research, 3) supply high-needs middle and high schools
with exemplary mathematics educators, 4) increase outreach in the communities of
southwestern Illinois, and 5) disseminate project findings for use in other
mathematics education settings. As a means of interesting STEM majors in a
teaching career, four summer internships will be awarded each year to SIUE and
to Lewis and Clark freshman and sophomores with an interest in STEM and aptitude
for mathematics who also show promise to be strong teachers and an additional
eight tutoring internships will be awarded annually at Lewis and Clark Community
College. Eight competitive Noyce Math Scholarships will be awarded yearly to
junior and senior mathematics majors who are committed to pursuing a mathematics
teaching career. After graduation, new teacher support will include a summer
face-to-face workshop, online mentoring and support, and professional
development events to maintain a collaborative network of peers and supportive
master teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project complements the science
oriented Robert Noyce Scholarship project currently in progress on the
Edwardville campus, allowing for synergistic use of commonly needed resources.
Both projects are designed to build scholars' self-efficacy (a belief in one's
ability to do a challenging job well) for teaching mathematics in a high-needs
school, and the findings from both Noyce projects will be examined together to
assess the impact of the self-efficacy approach.