* 1439758
* Morgan State University Noyce Capacity Building Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Najat Ziyadi, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,983.00

This Noyce Capacity Building project at Morgan State University (MSU) is
establishing a university-community network and redesigning its five-year
teacher education programs in biology and mathematics leading to secondary
teacher certification. The STEM Teaching and Learning Community (STEM TLC)
leverages MSU's Morgan Mile Initiative, which aims to build partnerships with
local non-profits, schools, and corporations, to develop a supportive
infrastructure for a successful STEM teacher preparation program. The STEM TLC
provides future STEM teacher education students with emotional and academic
support as they develop into successful STEM learners, effective urban teachers,
and community builders. This support is needed to address the three main
challenges in producing highly qualified secondary teachers in high-need schools
(recruitment, persistence, and retention), which are addressed through the
project's activities. The project is partnering with Baltimore City Public
Schools to identify talented high school students interested in studying
mathematics or biology. Long-term, this project will impact the diversity of the
STEM teacher workforce by increasing the number of underrepresented minority
STEM teachers in Maryland, including in urban areas, who also can serve as role
models to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained from executing
this project can help university-based programs reflect on what works,
particularly to meet the challenges facing both teachers and students in urban
environments. Research-based theories support the efficacy of purposively
creating active learning environments, a community of practice, and culturally
relevant pedagogy. A community-centered approach to recruitment will lead to
teacher candidate persistence, in turn leading to improved retention of teacher
graduates. To support the development and implementation of its STEM secondary
teacher education programs, project activities include professional development
for faculty and mentor teachers, tutors to prepare students for the Praxis
exams, the infusion of urban teaching theory and strategies into the curriculum,
and helping students secure internships and scholarships. Biology majors also
have the opportunity to obtain a concentration in environmental science and to
use the Patuxent Environmental and Aquatic Research Laboratory for authentic
research experiences. The environmental science concentration developed through
this project addresses the demand for teachers in this area as Maryland was the
first state in the country to require that high school students graduate with an
environmental science course. Moreover, a detailed mixed methods evaluation plan
that includes tracking specific metrics and indicators and formative evaluation
through focus groups and surveys will help guide the project.