* 1439985
* Meeting: New frontiers for the integrative study of animal behavior, New York Genome Center, New York, NY, August 6-9, 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Johann 'Hans' Hofmann, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2016
* USD 73,558.00

Scientists who study animal behavior ask questions about why and how individuals
and groups of animals behave as they do. Studies of animal behavior are
important for understanding the role of the brain, the nervous system, genes and
hormones in influencing actions of individuals and the groups that they are in.
An understanding of animal behavior is also important for conservation and
understanding how animals respond to our changing world. This meeting will bring
together a wide variety of scientists who study animal behavior using a wide
range of approaches to discuss the future of integrative studies in the field of
animal behavior. Ideas developed at this meeting are likely to have far reaching
societal benefits to address complex problems. Blog posts and a Twitter feed of
the meeting will be presented in real time and also available to the public as
well as publications in open access journals.

At the 50th anniversary of Tinbergen's seminal publication on levels of analysis
in studies of animal behavior, efforts to integrate neural, genetic,
physiological, ecological, and evolutionary studies of behavior at the
organismal level are gaining new prominence. These integrative studies of animal
behavior are being facilitated by multiple factors, including new technologies
and analytical procedures, as well as the increasing ease of application of
these advances to field studies. The primary goal of the workshop will be to
define what "integrative" means for animal behavior today. There are three
primary areas of focus for this meeting: genes, brains, and physiology. It will
include participants who broadly study animal behavior using genetic, genomic,
epigenetic, neurobiological, neuroendocrine, immune-ecological, nutritional, and
other physiological approaches. It will also include researchers developing
emerging technologies and statistical advances that will allow for the next
generation of integrative behavior studies thus bringing together groups of
scientists that don't typically interact. As the 2014 ABS meeting immediately
follows this workshop, a summary of the discussion will be presented there. The
white paper will be freely available to anyone and we publish the paper from
this meeting in open access format. Time at the meeting will also be devoted to
discuss underrepresented minority recruitment to these disciplines.