* 1439378
* EAGER: Pervious Concrete as a Low Cost Permeable Reactive Barrier for Heavy Metals Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Megan Hart, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 44,945.00

1439378&lt;br/&gt;Hart&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Pervious Concrete as a Low
Cost Permeable Reactive Barrier for Heavy Metals
Removal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low impact development is an active area of
research and, in particular, in the area of potentially transformative solutions
for rainwater and stormwater capture and treatment for groundwater augmentation.
This project is to explore innovative solutions of pervious concrete functioning
as an effective reactive permeable barrier for stormwater treatment.
Additionally, it is believed that incorporating waste fly ash containing high
levels of carbon and sulfate into the pervious concrete will enhance the
pollutant removal capabilities while providing a new application for these
currently landfilled materials. These applications have not been previously
investigated, even though the material properties and chemistry suggest a high
potential for success. The EPA lists Missouri as the leading superfund site on
the National Priority List because of the need for heavy metal treatment
resulting from numerous operating and abandoned metal mines and refining
operations. As an EPSCoR state, this research has the potential to expand the
research activities of the University of Missouri-Kansas City, while benefitting
the region. Heavy metal contamination adversely affects both human and
environmental health due to their mobility and solubility within groundwater.
This research could result in a fundamentally new methodology for treating
stormwater while beneficially utilizing a near endless supply of low-cost, waste
materials, fly ash. Cost estimates suggest that pervious concrete could be 4.5
to over 40 times cheaper than the current strategies. As an added benefit to
treatment of the contaminated groundwater is the valorization and diversion of
these waste materials from landfills. This project will provide research
experiences for undergraduate students interested in pursuing graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate two novel
concepts which have not yet been investigated and reported in the literature.
First, pervious concrete has never been utilized as a reactive permeable
barrier. Second, waste fly ash has not been used to enhance pollutant removal in
conventional or pervious concrete, while the aqueous chemistry suggests a high
degree of success for pervious concrete to remove dissolved heavy metals from
stormwater. Jar tests will provide the initial removal ability to refine the
mixture proportions for the development of breakthrough curves for determination
of removal rates. Both scanning electron microscopy and X-ray florescence will
be used to corroborate removal rates and identify where the pollutants are
stored in the concrete matrix.