* 1439461
* Meeting: June 1-2, 2015, Milton Keynes, UK: Supporting American Graduate Students &amp; Postdocs to participate in the Royal Society Scientific Meeting: Elements, Genomes, &amp; Ec
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Punidan Jeyasingh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal requests funding to facilitate the participation of American
graduate students and postdocs in a unique two-day cross-disciplinary Theo
Murphy meeting organized by the Royal Society in Milton Keynes, United Kingdom.
The meeting will explore how environmental nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P)
impacts the evolution of nucleic acids and how these evolutionary links between
nutrients and nucleic acids cascade through natural and agricultural ecosystems.
The proceedings of this meeting will be captured in a series of manuscripts.
Participation of junior American scientists (i.e. graduate students and post-
docs) in such a diverse, discussion-based conference will bring fresh new
perspectives to this important question and will provide the junior scientists
with the connections and context that they need to start a research program
aimed at integrating processes that operate at multiple levels of biological
organization. Such information will be vital for a clear understanding of how
biological systems respond to environmental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support the travel of American
graduate students and postdocs to a unique two-day cross-disciplinary Theo
Murphy meeting organized by the Royal Society (June 1-2, 2015, Chicheley Hall,
Milton Keynes, UK). Bringing together scientists from around the world to
present and discuss new research is the spirit of the Royal Society's Theo
Murphy meetings. The PIs will host a meeting entitled "Elements, genomes and
ecosystems: cascading nitrogen and phosphorus impacts across levels of
biological organization" to unite senior and early-career scientists from seven
countries (4 continents) working on issues ranging from genome size evolution to
global environmental change. Specifically, the meeting will explore how
environmental nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) impacts the evolution of nucleic
acids and how these evolutionary links between nutrients and nucleic acids
cascade through natural and agricultural ecosystems. The meeting will bring
together expertise in N and P metabolism, plant and animal genome evolution,
ecology, and agriculture. The meeting's goals integrate well with the National
Science Foundation's central mission to train the next generation of scientists.
Graduate students and postdocs will be actively recruited, with a particular
emphasis on groups underrepresented in STEM fields, to apply for travel support
requested in this proposal. NSF travel support will enable these students and
postdocs to contribute to and benefit from the discussions at this unique
meeting.