* 1439585
* I/UCRC Planning Grant:  Evolution, Ecology, and Management of Pesticide Resistance
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Blair Siegfried, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,865.00

Pesticide resistance is a global issue that limits our ability to maintain
increased agricultural production, and poses a threat to global food security.
The proposed industry-university partnership plans to build on the extensive and
complementary expertise in dealing with resistance across organisms and
pesticide products of the assembled interdisciplinary team from University of
Nebraska-Lincoln and Colorado State University to isolate the factors
contributing to resistance evolution, to develop long-term sustainable pest
management approaches, and to provide training and education to facilitate the
adoption of sound resistance management practices. The research of the planned
I/UCRC for Ecology, Evolution and Management of Pesticide Resistance (CEEMPR)
will focus on pesticide resistance management across insecticides, herbicides,
fungicides and transgenic traits. The planned research activities of the center
are complemented by educational efforts specifically designed to provide
knowledge of pesticide resistance management at all level of the agricultural
production system.

The planned I/UCRC will enable the fostering of interactions among industry,
commodity groups, governmental agencies, academic researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students. The center activities are strongly targeted towards
providing training and education to students, postdoctoral fellows, as well as
agricultural professionals and North American growers with the goal of meeting
sustainable and wise stewardship of modern agricultural technologies, and to
prepare a highly skilled workforce. Students will have the opportunities to
participate in mentoring and professional development activities, and will be
encouraged to seek opportunities for internships with industry partners. The
planned I/UCRC will coordinate joint activities to involve students and
postdoctoral fellows from underrepresented groups with the help of the Office of
Equity, Access and Diversity at UNL, and from the Vice President for Diversity
from CSU. The center aims to make substantial contributions to the field of
pesticide resistance resulting in improved crop yield and quality for growers
that promote global food security, and reduce agricultural losses.