* 1439861
* Phase I Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program: Future STEM Teachers in South Texas (F(ST)2)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2022
* Sung-won Park, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,199,731.00

High school mathematics and science are the teaching areas that have persisted
among the most critical shortage areas in Texas, consistent with the national
challenge of recruiting and retaining qualified mathematics and science
teachers. Future STEM Teachers in South Texas (F(ST)2), a Phase I project funded
by the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, is focused on encouraging
talented undergraduate students at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville (TAMUK),
Del Mar College, South Texas College, and Texas State Technical College majoring
in Computer Science, Mathematics, Chemistry, Biology, Geoscience, and Physics to
become certified secondary STEM teachers at high-need schools in Kingsville
Independent School District (ISD), Corpus Christi ISD, and Pharr-San Juan-Alamo
ISD in South Texas. The project will recruit individuals with strong STEM
backgrounds into teaching and build the infrastructure for supporting new STEM
teachers in high-need secondary schools. The project will provide students from
underrepresented groups with rigorous STEM experiences and strengthen
partnerships with community colleges for STEM education. Therefore, a direct
benefit to society will be to bridge the gap that persists within communities
that serve students underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Hispanic high school
students in South Texas ultimately will be the beneficiaries.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Phase I Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship project will provide
scholarships for 24 talented STEM major students to recruit and prepare them to
be effective STEM teachers in high-need schools. This includes transfer students
from community colleges as well as students who are native to TAMUK. Internships
will draw talented TAMUK and partner community college students into stimulating
STEM activities at a STEM-focused summer camp. Activities will include tutoring,
peer instruction, and research in STEM disciplines and education. Noyce Scholars
will attend seminars given by the education and STEM faculty who are members of
the project team, participate in pre-professional activities with intensive
teaching field experiences in high-need school districts and be mentored by STEM
faculty and veteran high school teachers. A supportive infrastructure for new
STEM teachers will support and retain Noyce Scholars in their first two years of
teaching in high-need schools. The TAMUK Phase I Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program will enhance the university's existing Educator Preparation Program that
prepares certified teachers in Mathematics, Science, and Technology
Applications. Using aggressive marketing, scholarships, and summer internships
the program will attract talented students to major in STEM areas and pursue
careers in teaching STEM courses at high-need secondary schools. The program
will focus on modeling best practices in program development through
authentically collaborative relationships among the high-need secondary schools,
the partner community colleges, the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of
Education and Human Performance, and the College of Engineering at TAMUK.
Findings and best practices of this project will be disseminated through
research and scholarly publications and presentations at professional
conferences. The program will serve as a model for many other four-year
universities and community colleges collaborations for STEM teacher education.
Outcome measures will include teacher recruitment and retention rates. Teacher
effectiveness will be measured by impact on student achievement, using
comparison studies and a time series analysis.