* 1439763
* Preparing and Supporting Equitable Teaching in Mathematics and Science Classrooms: The FSU-Teach Noyce Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 796,734.00

Through funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Program,
this Noyce Scholarship Track Phase II project will address the established and
growing national need to improve quantity and increase quality of the teaching
workforce in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). With the
understanding that there is a significant opportunity gap for students from high
needs schools compared to students from more affluent schools, Florida State
University (FSU) will work closely with partner insitutions, (which include five
high needs school districts, Tallahassee Community College, and the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory), to address and help close this gap. In
particular, the Project Team from FSU will build on lessons learned from its
Phase I project and collaborate with its internal partners and partner
institutions to support new teachers and attract, prepare, and support future
teachers to have the background and resources to teach well, specifically with a
focus on effective and reformed science and mathematics teaching in high needs
middle and high school settings. The project will support a total of one hundred
ten (110) potential new teachers through internships or scholarships. To foster
networking and deeper understanding of needs, the multidisciplinary community
associated with this project (including STEM and education faculty, interns,
graduates, mentors, and teachers) will meet annually in a STEM Equity
Conference. A focus of this conference will be on the various issues related to
STEM instruction in high needs settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For recruitment,
the program will offer seventy-five (75)internships through which STEM majors
will explore teaching through participating in outreach that, under the guidance
of a STEM faculty, will engage K-12 students from high needs settings. A
comprehensive teacher preparation program will be provided for the thirty-five
(35) undergraduate Noyce scholars pursuing STEM teaching. These scholars will be
involved in an ongoing series of activities under the guidance of partner
mentors; they will learn to navigate the difficulties associated with engaging
high needs students in ambitious instruction that will be rich in STEM practices
and guided by research. For support after these students graduate and receive a
teaching position in a high needs school, face-to-face and virtual activities
will be provided to assist them in understanding their school sites, accessing
necessary resources, and honing their instruction to be both challenging and
effective for their students. In addition to providing opportunities, content
and pedagogical education, and support for Noyce interns and scholars, this
Phase II project will feature research designed to identify and explore: (i) the
dispositions and beliefs that position pre-service and novice teachers for
success in delivering ambitious STEM instruction; (ii) the program supports
needed to assist those novice teachers; and (iii) the school contexts that best
support novices in their first years of work. Using qualitative comparative
analysis (QCA) as the analytical approach, investigators will analyze data from
surveys, interviews, and classroom observations to move toward quantification of
possible relationships between effect, belief, and practice. In turn, this
research will allow results from the project to inform the efforts of others
involved in the recruitment, preparation, and support of novice STEM teachers.