* 1439351
* Collaborative Research:  Fundamental Study and Pragmatic Enhancement of Rock Cutting/Drilling for Oil Exploration through Embedded Thin Film Sensor Arrays in PCD Inserts
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Xiaochun Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 03/31/2016
* USD 74,878.00

This grant provides funding for establishing the scientific and technological
foundation for the measurement of temperatures and forces in the immediate
vicinity of the contact zone between the polycrystalline diamond rock cutting
insert and the rock and for the formulation of models for their prediction.
Sensing will be realized by embedding micro-scale thin film thermo-mechanical
sensors into the inserts only a few hundred micrometers away from the contact
zone through diffusion bonding two polycrystalline diamond plates, namely, the
base plate with the sensors deposited through micro-fabrication techniques and
the cover that is in contact with the rock. The realization of this task will
necessitate the study of the mechanics of the bonding process and the inter
diffusion between the polycrystalline diamond and sensors. Static and dynamic
sensor calibration methods will also be developed. The analytical model
development, departing from the classical shear plane assumption, will be based
on curved macroscopic crack propagation paths and statistical methods to
describe the properties of the rock. The numerical Finite Element model will
utilize a microcrack-based continuum damage model. Comprehensive experimental
verification of the performance of the embedded sensors and of the developed
models is also planned. If successful, the results of this research will lead to
new tools for more efficient oil- and gas-exploration and extraction
capabilities. The availability of the unique embedded sensing technology will
potentially result in a quantum leap in the fundamental understanding of rock
cutting mechanics and in innovative monitoring/control technologies. The ability
of the sensors to provide real-time measurements of process variables from the
vicinity of the insert-rock interface will allow the control of optimal
penetration rates in rock drilling/cutting operations. The developed methodology
will also serve as a platform for the further migration/spillover of embedded
micro-sensor technologies into various areas of advanced manufacturing.