* 1439914
* Preparing Science and Mathematics Teachers at the University of Texas at Arlington
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Gregory Hale, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 959,955.00

The national education community is acutely aware of the critical need for
science and mathematics teachers, especially in low income, low-performing
schools. This Phase II Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship project at the
University of Texas at Arlington (UT Arlington) will lead to an increased number
of new, highly skilled science and mathematics teachers who will be prepared to
meet their students' educational needs and fill the numerous vacancies urban
districts currently endure. UT Arlington, a Hispanic-serving institution, is
well positioned to recruit and retain candidates from populations historically
underrepresented in science and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will certify 30 new teachers who are highly qualified to teach in the Dallas,
Arlington, and Fort Worth (DFW) Independent School Districts. This collaborative
effort among the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) College of Education and
Health Professions, the College of Science, and three surrounding urban school
districts will provide a program of campus courses, online mentoring, and
classroom teaching experiences to certify 30 new science and mathematics
teachers for the three school districts. The program objectives are to: 1)
recruit mathematics and science teacher candidates from baccalaureate programs,
community colleges, and career changers from local industry, 2) provide a
quality two-track teacher certification program for the teacher candidates, and
3) induct, monitor, and mentor the teacher candidates through the program and
their early years of teaching. The project will specifically recruit teacher
candidates in the secondary school physical sciences and mathematics.
Recruitment efforts for Noyce Scholars are enhanced by a comprehensive STEM
teacher candidate recruiting program established under the previous Noyce
project and the UTeach replication program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTeach
Arlington program together with the Noyce Scholarship program has markedly
increased candidate recruitment with 60 new science and math teachers completing
certification in 2014, which is a significant increase from (on average) 5 math
and science candidates certified annually through the teacher preparation
program that existed before the previous Noyce project and UTeach
implementation. All Noyce scholars will be supported through their teacher
preparation program and teacher induction by Mentor Teachers, a Noyce Scholar
Leader, the principal investigator team, Content and Pedagogy Mentors and other
support personnel. Research and evaluation data on program impacts, outcomes and
best practices, along with new curricula developed through the program will
continue through long-term longitudinal study of Phase I and Phase II Noyce
Scholars to determine retention in teaching and teaching effectiveness with
results to be shared with the science and math education communities through
scholarly publications and presentations at professional conferences. Project
outcomes will be measured by conducting classroom observations using the UTeach
Observation Protocol instrument, review of teaching materials, interviews, and
analysis of student achievement data.