* 1439342
* Student Travel Support for the North American Membrane Society 2014 Annual Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Shankar Chellam, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

1439342&lt;br/&gt;University of Houston&lt;br/&gt;Chellam,
Sankar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel funds are requested to partially support
approximately 25 graduate students to attend the 2014 Annual Meeting of the
North American Membrane Society (NAMS 2014) Conference in Sugar Land, Texas from
May 31 - June 4, 2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAMS annual meeting is one of
the preeminent global membrane meetings. The latest developments in the membrane
field from leading academic, governmental, and industrial research labs are
presented for the first time for evaluation by the membrane community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will have 19 separate technical sessions (some
extending to two time slots depending on the number of abstracts selected for
presentation) covering all aspects of membrane science and technology. An
extensive student program has been developed for the meeting, including the
Young Membrane Scientist Forum, Lunch with the Legends, student workshop on
career planning, and a student poster competition. The meeting will feature two
plenary speakers, one from academia (Prof. Andrew Zydney) and another from
industry (Dr. Larry Costa). Additionally, Prof. Georges Belfort will deliver the
Alan S. Michaels lecture. Five technical workshops will also be offered. These
workshops are excellent venues for students to learn about fundamentals and
advanced research topics in key areas such as Membranes for Gas Separations,
Emerging Membrane Materials and Manufacturing Methods, Membranes for Water
Treatment, Membranes for Fracking Applications, and Polymeric and Inorganic
Membrane Materials and Membrane Formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers
anticipate a total of approximately 400 membrane researchers from all over the
world representing industry, government, and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the development of human resources, the support provided by this
proposal will allow presentation of the latest research results from the most
innovative academic laboratories around the country. This showcase of new
materials and technologies attracts significant industrial participation as it
provides a unique environment to evaluate the commercialization potential of the
research. The economic growth associated with such commercialization benefits
the entire country.