* 1439045
* Spectral Analysis of Brown Carbon Secondary Organic Aerosol from the IR to the UV
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Kleiber, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 410,999.00

Carbonaceous atmospheric aerosols, including black and brown carbon, impact
climate through altering the optical properties of the atmosphere, and also by
themselves undergoing further photochemical oxidation, in a poorly understood
manner. This in turn may alter their own optical properties. The overall goal of
this work is to improve the scientific basis for quantitatively modeling organic
aerosol radiative effects. The results have application in remote sensing data
retrieval algorithms, improving the reliability of radiative transfer models for
aerosol and climate forcing calculations, and better understanding the impact of
brown carbon (BrC) aerosol may have on atmospheric chemistry and climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work, University of Iowa researchers developed
specialized laboratory optical capabilities to measure dust aerosol optical
properties over the UV-Vis-IR spectrum, and have explored how physicochemical
processing of aerosols alters those properties. Here they will further extend
their experimental capabilities with a highly sensitive technique, cavity ring
down laser spectroscopy (CRDS). This will be used to precisely measure the
optical properties of the brown carbon (BrC) fraction of ambient and laboratory
mimics of organic aerosols, across the visible and the mid-IR spectral range.
How those properties may change as a result of UV photochemical processing will
be further studied.