* 1439591
* BCC: Collaborative Research: Designing SKOPE: Synthesized Knowledge of Past Environments
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Ann Kinzig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2017
* USD 157,128.00

An important focus of scientific research is understanding the complex
interactions between human societies and the climatic, physical, and biological
environments on which they depend, and which they, in turn, influence. Past
environments, of course, were often quite different from those we experience
today. Furthermore, important processes of social and environmental change
operate slowly and are sometimes visible only when viewed over decades or
centuries. In order to study social and natural processes operating over
anything other than short periods in recent decades, long-term environmental
knowledge specific to particular locations and times is essential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, state-of-the-art data on past environments
are difficult to find and even more difficult to integrate and interpret. Under
the direction of Dr. Kintigh and his colleagues, the project will develop plans
for an online tool, SKOPE (Synthesized Knowledge of Past Environments), that
will provide state-of-the-art information about the environment experienced by
humans at a given a place and time, past or present. Using explicit scientific
procedures, it will process the data to yield a cutting-edge synthesis of
environmental information specifically tailored to the user's request. Initial
development is planned for the Southwest US, but SKOPE's design will be designed
to be easily extended to other places and times. Once implemented, SKOPE will be
freely accessible on the Internet. It will be applicable in such fields as
sustainability, archaeology, sociology, economics, anthropology, and ecology as
well as for resource management and planning. For example, it will directly
benefit archaeologists comparing the social consequences of long-term climate
change across different civilizations and ecologists investigating long-term
changes in biodiversity. Planners could use its long-term environmental
reconstructions to investigate vulnerabilities in existing infrastructure that
are outside the experience provided by the historic record. Students and members
of the general public could learn how ancient environments differed from
contemporary ones in places they study, inhabit, or visit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SKOPE will access online databases of modern and historic
observational data (for example, on rainfall, temperature, and plant and animal
distributions) as well as databases of indicators for past environments (for
example, rainfall reconstructed from tree-ring widths, and plant remains and
animal bones found in dated archaeological sites). Scientific experts in the
interpretation of different classes of data will develop procedures that
transform these diverse environmental observations and indicators into a
thoroughly documented scientific synthesis of the environment for the time and
place of interest. The design of SKOPE will be guided by the needs stated by
potential users in meetings with academic, public-, and private-sector
professionals. The project will identify key sources of data on current and past
environments and will generalize the analytical procedures required to achieve
useful synthesis. Subsequent development could extend the tool to additional
areas and times and incorporate more classes of environmental data.