* 1439075
* XPS: EXPL: FP: Architecture and Software for Scalable Persistent Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Peter Varman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 269,735.00

Emerging Storage Class Memory (SCM) technologies combine the non-volatility of
storage devices like hard disks and solid state drives (SSDs) with the ability
to access data at byte granularity rather than at a block level. Application
developers can focus on a single fine-grained storage abstraction, rather than
deal with word-granularity access for DRAM memory and a block interface for
file-based disk storage. Accessing data directly from SCM instead of software-
arbitrated block access has significant performance advantages, especially for
modern data intensive applications based on graph and relation processing.
However the use of direct SCM access places a significant burden on the
application to achieve transactional and robust execution in the presence of
unexpected machines failures and software aborts.

The research will identify lightweight, scalable architectural and software
techniques for developing robust SCM-based software. The goal is to make the
development of software for persistent memory comparable to programming
conventional DRAM main-memory by relieving the programmer from the complexities
of managing transactional atomicity and persistence. Both hardware solutions
based on enhancements to the processor and memory-controller architecture, and
software approaches in the form of a lightweight persistence library will be
developed. The techniques will be scaled up to handle multiple threads and
cores, and scale out to multiple CPU sockets and to distributed clustered
architectures.