* 1439819
* Building Capacity for Disciplinary Experts in Math and Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Tiffany-Rose Sikorski, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,799.00

This project addresses the Nation's growing need to recruit, prepare, and
provide effective induction support for new STEM middle and high school teachers
with degrees in STEM fields and strong content-specific pedagogical preparation.
In particular the project will create an innovative pathway to teaching in
Washington, DC for STEM professionals and STEM majors. This population
represents an untapped supply of future teachers committed to teaching in high
needs schools. Upon completion, the project will have validated a strategy to
tap into this pool of STEM disciplinary experts, and will design and pilot a
comprehensive set of learning experiences tailored to them. The project work
will feature education and STEM faculty working with expert mathematics and
science teachers in developing and piloting new methods to support teacher
candidate development. Museum internships will be established and infused
throughout the program, because museums are places in the urban landscape where
teacher candidates can participate in authentic learning experiences and
practice teaching a diverse population of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of this collaborative effort is to greatly enhance the DC area's
ability to prepare "disciplinary experts" for urban mathematics and science
teaching. There are three project outcomes. First, the project will discover how
to increase the number of STEM professionals and undergraduate STEM majors
preparing to teach in the DC area. Second, the project will institutionalize a
sustainable nexus of collaboration among George Washington University's (GWU)
education and STEM faculty, the District of Columbia Public and Public Charter
Schools, the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, Carnegie Academy
for Science Education, and GWU's Center for Civic Engagement, to improve the
mathematics and science teacher education pipeline in Washington, DC. Third, a
robust program of study will be produced featuring redesigned teacher
preparation coursework, integrated and innovative field experiences, and early
career mentoring. A systematic analysis of pilot data collected from selected
student work and video from courses and field placements will facilitate the
development of new curriculum emphasizing methods that teach candidates to use
their knowledge in mathematics and science, not just to judge student reasoning,
but to recognize and use school age students' good thinking (i.e. good
scientific and mathematical ideas) as building blocks for learning. Finally, the
project is designed to respond to the need to extend the scope of teacher
training beyond what is traditionally done within the boundary of a university-
based teacher education program, and therefore will also produce a specialized
induction and early career support strategy that will link candidates with
mentors who will follow them in their early years of teaching in the Washington,
DC metropolitan area.