* 1439844
* Robert Noyce Capacity Building Proposal at Augustana College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Carrie Hall, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,829.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, this project will address the established and growing
national need to improve quantity and increase quality of the high school
teaching workforce in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
Augustana College in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, will work closely with partner
institutions to build an infrastructure to: (i) recruit and educate students to
become highly qualified STEM high school teachers, especially for high-needs
schools and (ii) provide several levels of support for future and current STEM
teachers. A particular focus will be to educate and support Native American
students to become STEM teachers. The Project Team from Augustana College will
work closely with personnel from partner institutions, which include tribal
colleges Sisseton Wahpeton College and Sinte Gleska University as well as Iowa
Lakes Community College to reach out to high-needs high schools in the Sioux
Falls Public Schools and surrounding rural and remote districts to provide
special opportunities for students from all of these institutions to become STEM
teachers and then to place these teachers in high-needs areas. The process will
include building capacity to provide educational, mentoring, and financial
support for future STEM teachers and networking opportunities for current and
future teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will take a
comprehensive approach to restructure the STEM secondary education program at
Augustana College to implement initiatives that feature two main components: (1)
the recruitment and support of a diverse pool of talented high school and
community college students with an interest in becoming high school science and
mathematics teachers and (2) the development and inclusion of an innovative
interdisciplinary STEM major that will allow any graduate to teach more
competently across the STEM disciplines. The support component will include
longitudinal mentorship and financial support throughout college training and
into the professional classroom, and will also include the creation of STEM
Teachers' Network to serve as a mentorship and professional development entity
for both current and future teachers. The interdisciplinary program will include
significant coursework spanning the STEM fields of biology, chemistry,
mathematics, and physics as well as a STEM disciplinary emphasis area in one of
these fields. A critical aspect of student academic training in this program
will be the inclusion of cultural competence for teachers to enhance a teacher's
ability to navigate a diverse cultural landscape with empathy and introspection,
and to evaluate and interpret cultural encounters with students, to lead to a
better understanding of both verbal and non-verbal communication in a learning
context. As part of this Robert Noyce Capacity Building project, the Project
Team will begin the process of addressing data needs and conducting research on
how cultural competency training for pre-service STEM teachers influence
teaching and learning outcomes in the high school classroom, especially for
rural areas and areas with diverse populations.