* 1439866
* Mobilizing STEM Talent for STEM Teaching in the Nashville Public Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Nathan Lang, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,203,770.00

Mobilizing STEM Talent for STEM Teaching in the Nashville Public
Schools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Mobilizing STEM Talent for STEM Teaching"
addresses the growing national need to recruit, prepare, and provide effective
induction support for new STEM middle and high school teachers with degrees in
STEM fields and strong content-specific pedagogical preparation. This project is
a collaborative effort that will attract, prepare and support a core group of
STEM teachers for high-priority schools in the Metro Nashville Public Schools.
The project is also intended to develop a tested model and sustainable pipeline
for STEM teachers for the foreseeable future. Recruitment of future teachers
will occur in two different populations at Vanderbilt University and Fisk
University, upper-level undergraduate students majoring in STEM fields and STEM
professionals who are completing advanced degrees and working on research or in
labs. A total of 25 students will be supported for a two year pre-service
program leading to licensure and one year of support during their first year
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two cohorts of students (one cohort of 13 and one
of 12) will receive financial support for the duration of a two-year program of
integrated coursework and field experiences resulting in secondary STEM
licensure, and a third year of induction support. In Year 1, as students
complete their degrees in progress, they will participate in a full-year,
practicum partnership with one teacher in a metropolitan Nashville public middle
or high school, and in a seminar to develop STEM content knowledge for teaching
in urban contexts. In Year 2, students will complete a twelve-month residency
pathway to licensure in urban schools and a MEd if they are not already earning
an advanced degree in a STEM content area. In this year, candidates will join an
instructional team to learn more about effective teaching from faculty members
beyond the mentor teacher's classroom. In Year 3, students will transition to
full-time teachers and participate in professional learning communities, both
online and face-to-face, during their initial induction year. Students will
attend urban seminars and in-service teachers will receive weekly instructional
coaching to help them tailor their teaching to the needs of urban students. The
results of formative and summative assessment will provide information for the
STEM teacher preparation community on best practices in training students to be
STEM teachers in urban schools. Students' pedagogical knowledge, skills, and
attitudes will be measured by pre/post surveys and assessments and classroom
data will be collected by observations and interviews.