* 1439311
* I-Corps:  Cyber Enabling Laparoscopy Devices
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Barbara Bass, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 04/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Laparoscopic surgery is a popular alternative to open surgery due to the
considerable reduction of recovery time, pain and complications. However,
limited access to the operating field, indirect vision, and operating rooms (OR)
originally built for open surgery conspire to make the surgeon's work more
difficult and inefficient. The goal of the proposed work is to provide a smart
OR system to improve safety and procedural success while reducing cost. To
achieve this goal, the team will focus on: a smart trocar prototype that
automatically recognizes the laparoscopic instruments and allows the accurate
reconstruction of the time line in any minimally invasive surgery; and, a smart
trocar that provides an accurate 3D localization of the tip of the laparoscopic
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology will provide
essential information to improve the management of any minimally invasive
procedure, reduce cost, and improve performance. In addition, the proposed
technology will dramatically advance the technology of the OR by setting up a
new REal Time Interactive Navigation Assistance (RETINA) for Surgery that
provides robust directions to improve safety. Real time parallel computing,
robust computer vision and finite element simulation are the main three
complementary building blocks of this OR system. Accurate assessment of the
surgeon &amp; smart OR interaction by surgical training experts and close
collaboration with industry will provide guidance to the agile development of
the OR service.