* 1439896
* UTeach Dallas Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Homer Montgomery, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 879,801.00

For the Nation to maintain its leadership in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) and respond to the growing diversity and needs of its
school population, it is important to increase the production of STEM teachers
who are well prepared to teach in high-need schools. This project, an extension
of an existing Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program on the University of
Texas at Dallas campus, is designed to meet that challenge. The Title I
independent school districts of Dallas, Carrollton-Farmers Branch, Garland, and
Richardson are partners in this project. UTeach Dallas features a compact set of
professional development courses that enable a STEM major to complete the
required science and mathematics education courses, student-teaching
experiences, and the requirements for a STEM major in four years. The program
emphasizes engaging students early and often in STEM teaching experiences. Each
year the project will offer an average of ten internships to support freshman
and sophomore STEM majors as they explore teaching as a profession through
proffered courses and mentored teaching opportunities. Additionally, eight Noyce
Scholarships will be offered - six to STEM undergraduates and two to STEM degree
holders, who want to return to the university in order to become STEM teachers.
The Phase II UTeach Dallas Noyce Scholarship project anticipates adding up to
forty new STEM teachers to the teaching workforce over the five years of its
operation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UTeach Dallas partners closely with high-need
school districts and student populations while working under the umbrella of the
School of Natural Sciences and Mathematics. Promising freshman and sophomore
STEM majors are recruited into, and supported through, two early practicum
courses in which they work with mentor teachers in local high-needs schools.
Students then make a commitment to continue as Noyce Scholars with the courses
and requirements needed to earn their STEM degree. Scholars also take a set of
professional development courses and mentored high school teaching experiences
to prepare for teaching certification. The extension of the UTeach Dallas Noyce
Scholarship program into Phase II will enable enhanced project evaluation and
research activities, along with strengthening identity and community among
UTeach Dallas Noyce Scholars. University of Texas at Dallas faculty will also
investigate and implement strategies to increase retention of UTeach Dallas
students in their STEM majors. Noyce scholars are provided three years of
induction and professional development opportunities once they begin teaching in
local schools. Tracking of graduates will be done both internally and in
partnership with the UTeach Institute which has a number of validated
instruments developed for this specific purpose. The project will produce
additional STEM teachers while simultaneously enabling more meaningful
longitudinal studies of early Noyce graduates now teaching.