* 1439418
* Workshop: Advanced Biomanufacturing, July 17-20, 2014, Talloires, France
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Kaplan, David L. Proposal Number: 1439418 Institution: Tufts University
Title: Workshop: Advanced Biomanufacturing, July 17-20, 2014, Talloires, France

A two and half day workshop on Advanced Biomanufacturing is planned for July
17-20, 2014 in Talloires, France. The goal of the workshop is to build upon the
outcomes generated from the prior NSF-sponsored workshop (held July 25-26, 2013
in Arlington, Virginia). This prior event included participation from academia,
industry and government and the outcomes were reported in a published workshop
report. A key element of this report was a set of recommendations from the
participants, out of which two needs emerged. One need is to amplify on the
scientific barriers in the field with more focused discussions to provide clear
guidance on future directions to help the field move forward. The second need is
to bring a small group together to hold more focused discussions with broader
representation from European colleagues, as the initial workshop only included
US colleagues. Such discussions will help identify international collaboration
opportunities as well as refine roadmaps of specific needs and ideas to address
the barriers in the field of Advanced Biomanufacturing. The outcomes will
include the identification of challenges to overcome and opportunities to
achieve maximal impact on science, scale up, jobs and economic growth and a
workshop report will be generated. The workshop will be run by David Kaplan
(Tufts University, david.kaplan@tufts.edu) and Jason Kelly, Ginkgobioworks, Inc.
(jason@ginkgobioworks.com)

The workshop topic is significant and timely based on the rapid growth and
potential impact of biomanufacturing in the US and around the world, including
synthetic biology, biopolymer engineering, 3D printing, tissue engineering and
many related topics. Advances in this field have the potential to return
manufacturing jobs to the US and lead a scientific and technological revolution
wherein sunlight, organisms, integrated synthesis and processing and novel
biological approaches and ingenuity would provide alternatives to current
petrochemically-derived feedstocks and processes and will also guide the
development of the next generation of biomedical therapeutics, especially those
based on the delivery of living cells. The scientific tools to support advanced
biomanufacturing have been emerging over the past 10-15 years, empowered by
advances in genomics and proteomics, cell biology, process engineering and
design and systems integration. The conference program will provide a
comprehensive overview of Advanced Biomanufacturing, including molecular
approaches and building blocks, cellular approaches, assemblies and polymers,
tissue and organ approaches, and systems integration. It will also provide
insight into future challenges and opportunities and will catalyze international
collaborations in this emerging area of research.