* 1439508
* Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum at the Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO, June 16-18, 2014
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Charles Kluth, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support the third biannual Structural Geology and Tectonics
Forum, which will be held in May 2014, at the Colorado School of Mines in
Golden, Colorado. The forum will bring together specialists in structural
geology and tectonics for oral and poster presentations, field trips, and short
courses. The meeting will include three days of presentations that will include
six technical sessions, including topics such as geoscience learning and spatial
cognition; lithospheric deformation and rheology; the relationship between
tectonics and earth surface processes, including neotectonics; linkages between
structural geology and natural resources; and quantitative approaches towards
structural analysis, and geoscience education. Each session will highlight an
important area of current research and/or education, will be anchored by a
distinguished keynote speaker, and will showcase relevance of work on the topic.
Poster sessions with abundant time for full participant interaction will
accompany each session. The forum will be organized to maximize the exchange of
ideas between participants in open discussions. Sessions will provide ample
opportunity to ask questions of individual presenters, assess the current state
of our knowledge, and consider productive areas for future research. In addition
to the formal meeting, there will be pre- and post-meeting field trips to
examine the geology of selected areas in and around the Colorado Front Range.
Short course topics will include: teaching structure lab with linear algebra and
simple computing; the application of shear sense indicators in shear zones;
introduction to terrestrial laser scanning (Ground-Based LiDAR) for Earth
science research; using geodesy data in undergraduate structural geology and
geophysics courses; strain programs for teaching and research; and preparing for
academic careers in the geosciences.

The forum is designed to facilitate community building and personal interaction
within different segments of the structural geology community. It will bring
together faculty from research universities, liberal arts colleges, community
and two-year colleges, and minority-serving institutions. Importantly, there
will be group discussions on critical developments in structural geology and
tectonics, and what future research priorities should be. This community
building effort will help create a stronger, more vibrant group of scientists
and help introduce graduate students and advanced undergraduates to the
structural geology and tectonics disciplines. The setting will be particularly
useful for graduate students, who will be able to use the venue and informal
nature of the forum to find out what research is taking place at other
institutions, meet a wide range of faculty, and develop useful contacts which
will be of great value to their future careers. Students will also be able to
present their own work in a friendly environment where they can obtain
thoughtful and useful feedback, as well as providing opportunity to build new
scientific collaborations. Abstracts, field guides, and short course notes will
be disseminated through a dedicated website that will be publicly accessible.