* 1439156
* XPS: FULL: CCA: Collaborative Research: CASH: Cost-aware Adaptation of Software and Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Henry Hoffmann, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Programming for and leveraging the benefits of scalable and
highly&lt;br/&gt;parallel computer architectures is becoming
increasingly&lt;br/&gt;challenging. In order to ease programmer and user effort
in achieving&lt;br/&gt;efficient use of parallel architectures and to enable
optimal usage of&lt;br/&gt;parallel hardware both within a single chip and
across a data center,&lt;br/&gt;this project explores the co-design of a fine-
grain configurable (down&lt;br/&gt;to the ALU, FPU, Cache bank, fetch unit, etc)
architecture along with&lt;br/&gt;a software optimizing runtime system which
controls the architecture?s&lt;br/&gt;configuration. This runtime management
system understands high-level&lt;br/&gt;goals and constraints such as optimizing
for power, latency, cost, or&lt;br/&gt;complex mixed-goals and dynamically
allocates fine-grain resources to&lt;br/&gt;meet the constraints. This project
will evaluate and design a configurable&lt;br/&gt;manycore-inspired architecture
and a self-adapting runtime system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the creation of a complete, scalable,&lt;br/&gt;self-adaptive
computing system; and will push the boundaries of&lt;br/&gt;adapting systems by
utilizing hardware that is configurable and&lt;br/&gt;monitorable below the
processor core level. By providing such a&lt;br/&gt;flexible and highly
monitored architecture to the adaptation runtime,&lt;br/&gt;this project will
explore the scalability of adaptive runtime&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to handle a
game-changing increase in the number of&lt;br/&gt;controllable parameters. This
project will explore the extent to&lt;br/&gt;which it is fruitful to configure a
parallel architecture.