* 1439682
* I/UCRC Phase I:  BWAC@NDWI: Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center at the Notre Dame Wireless Institute
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Thomas Pratt, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2019
* USD 617,188.00

NDWI is conducting research in the area of emerging wireless technology,
economics, and regulatory policy challenges. Addition of NDWI site to BWAC
facilitates the transfer of knowledge from these areas to industry members.
Close collaboration with industrial partners will ensure that problems of
practical relevance are studied, resulting in direct technology transfer into
innovative and practical wireless systems. The diverse research team, with
expertise ranging from RF circuit design and electromagnetics, communication
systems signal processing and coding, spatial statistics, visualization, and
application development, will ensure that many critical aspects of wireless
system design are addressed cohesively. Basic research will be combined with
robust experimental validation from the hardware level up to large-scale field
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques and solutions developed through NDWIs
cooperative research program will potentially impact worldwide wireless
standards, software and hardware components, and network deployments. The basic
and applied research activities will involve undergraduate and graduate students
in cutting-edge research, training them in multiple disciplines relevant to
modern wireless networks. Early exposure to the concerns and the approaches in
industry will be invaluable in students? education and career development.
Several mechanisms will be utilized to attract underrepresented undergraduate
and graduate students to the program, e.g., REU program in Experimental Research
on Wireless Networking (ERWiN).