* 1439776
* Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program for University of South Florida Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Ruthmae Sears, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,199,843.00

The University of South Florida (USF), with support from the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship program, will implement a model for encouraging science
majors to enter an attractive, viable and rewarding career pathway to teaching
at the secondary level through collaboration among the USF Colleges of Education
and Arts and Sciences, and the Hillsborough County Public Schools. Thirty-six
biology, chemistry, geosciences and physics majors will receive scholarships to
complete a 5-year Accelerated Study Program leading to a bachelor's degree in
the Sciences and a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) degree with certification in
secondary science. The project will also support 20 summer interns (freshman and
sophomore science majors). Under the guidance of science education faculty,
these interns will conduct research on how to develop professional learning
communities, and to engage teachers and have them adopt the practices described
in the Next Generation Science Standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
preparation will emphasize teaching science using reform, evidence-based
practices; acquiring a deep understanding of the nature of science; engaging and
helping others engage in good practices; special strategies to reach culturally
and linguistically diverse learners (i.e., English language learners, Hispanic
and African-American students, and students of low socio-economic status); and
building relationships among all USF Noyce scholars that lead to long-term peer
support through professional learning communities. Furthermore, the project will
utilize a cohort model with an intentional support network infrastructure
designed to encourage mentorship, collaborations and success as candidates make
the transition from students to teachers through the induction years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the project will supply high-need schools with
exemplary science teachers who deeply understand how to implement research-based
practices in response to student, district, and community sociocultural
characteristics and needs. The investigators will conduct research on the
development of professional learning communities and their implementation, as
well as the ways in which the interns learn to engage in the science practices
described in the Next Generation Science Standards. Findings from this work are
expected to be of benefit to the broader STEM teacher preparation field. In
addition, the evaluation will measure the effectiveness of the program, the
qualification and effectiveness of the scholars and their retention rate.