* 1439799
* Integrative Middle School STEM Teacher  Preparation: A Collaborative Capacity Building Project at Duke  University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ezra Miller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,967.00

There is a long-standing shortage of qualified and highly-qualified middle
grades math and science teachers in high-need school districts. This shortage
forces many schools, a disproportionately large number in high-minority and
high-poverty communities, to lower hiring standards to fill teaching vacancies,
in turn leading to high levels of underqualified mathematics and science
teachers and lower student achievement in STEM subjects. Through this Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Capacity Building grant, Duke University's Program in
Education will expand its long-standing partnership with Durham Public Schools
and Duke STEM departments to design and institutionalize an innovative, middle
grades (6-8) Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) STEM teacher preparation program
to recruit, prepare, and retain diverse STEM graduates and professionals to be
highly qualified middle school math and science teachers of culturally,
linguistically, and cognitively diverse students in high-need school districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use research findings from a previous
Noyce Scholarship project and data gathered during a national needs assessment
to establish the infrastructure for a Phase I Noyce Scholarship grant by
designing and institutionalizing an integrative MAT teacher licensure program
that includes a teaching internship in a high-need middle school. Investigators
will use a backwards-design approach to create a rigorous set of program
outcomes aligned with state standards for STEM teacher preparation. Despite the
enduring shortage of qualified or highly-qualified middle school math and
science teachers, there is surprisingly limited empirical research on middle
school math and science teacher recruitment among highly-successful STEM
graduates. This project will lay the groundwork for a Phase I grant proposal
that will further research in the recruitment, preparation, and support of
diverse groups of STEM graduates and professionals to become highly-effective
middle school math and science teachers in high-need school districts. Key
documents, such as the Conceptual Framework, Course of Study, Clinical
Experiences Plan, Syllabi, and Degree Requirements, will be reviewed by an
external evaluator to determine how and to what degree program objectives are
being met. A High-Needs Rubric will be created to determine the extent to which
the Duke Middle Grades MAT program design meets the needs of STEM education in
high-need middle schools.