* 1439962
* PECASE: Response of Novel Suspensions of Magnetic Nanoparticles to Time Varying Magnetic Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,399.00

ABSTRACT

CAREER: Response of Novel Magnetic Nanoparticle Suspensions to Time Varying
Magnetic Fields

Dr. Carlos Rinaldi, Assistant Professor Department of Chemical Engineering,
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez

This career development plan combines the PIs expertise in modeling and
magnetorheological characterization of suspensions of magnetic nanoparticles in
Newtonian fluids (ferrofluids) with synthesis and preparation of novel
magnetically active complex fluids such as suspensions of spherical magnetic
nanoparticles in non-Newtonian fluids and liquid crystals and suspensions of
non-spherical nanoparticles in Newtonian fluids. The response of these novel
magnetic fluids to time varying magnetic fields will be studied through a
combination of modeling and experiments using AC susceptometers, magnetic
birefringence, and magnetorheometers coupled with the Ultrasonic Doppler
Velocimetry method. The education and outreach components of the plan aim to
increase the participation and enhance the education of underrepresented groups
such as Hispanics through: (1) science demonstrations at underserved pre-college
schools in Puerto Rico and hosting of pre-college teachers in the laboratory
during the summers, (2) seminars on research ethics and manuscript and proposal
preparation aimed at establishing a Research Culture at UPRM, and (3)
development of the course Introduction to Chemical Engineering Research. Prior
NSF investments in education and outreach will be leveraged by partnering with
the UPRM Science on Wheels Educational Center (SONWEC) and the UW Madison MRSEC
Interdisciplinary Research Group (IEG) to translate educational modules for pre-
college audiences into Spanish, to be used in Puerto Rico and with US Latino
communities.

Intellectual Merit: Novel magnetically-active complex fluids will be developed
and their response to time varying magnetic fields will be characterized
experimentally and theoretically. Suspensions of magnetic nanoparticles are of
recent interest in nanobiosensors derived from the hydrodynamic size dependence
of the magnetic relaxation time, and in magnetic fluid hyperthermia treatment of
cancer. In these applications the particles are typically embedded in a non-
Newtonian fluid matrix and the response to oscillating or rotating magnetic
fields is of key concern. The proposed research is of fundamental interest in
colloidal hydrodynamics, rheology, nanotechnology, and will help develop
applications of magnetic nanoparticles in sensors and cancer treatment.

Broader Impact: By carrying out the proposed research at the UPRM, the
participation and education of students from underrepresented groups will be
significantly enhanced. The Chemical Engineering Department at UPRM serves over
650 Hispanic undergraduate students, 70% of which are female. There are also 27
PhD students, half of which are Hispanic US citizens. The proposed seminars and
the course Introduction to Chemical Engineering Research will integrate and
formalize research activities in the education of undergraduate and graduate
students while developing a Research Culture in which students will learn the
values, traditions, and responsibilities of being a researcher. The proposed
outreach and education tasks will impact thousands of Hispanic pre-college
students through the SONWEC and IEG. Research-based educational materials will
be developed for use in teaching Spanish-speaking communities in Puerto Rico and
the US. The PI will also provide meaningful research experiences for pre-college
teachers during the summer.

