* 1439725
* EAGER: Ultra-FFAST Alias Codes for Sparse Spectrum Estimation: Next Generation Compressed Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal targets the theoretical foundations and algorithmic design of
ultra-large-scale sparse signal recovery and spectral estimation problems, with
applications to fast MRI acquisition, low-power spectrum-sensing for cognitive
radio, and low-power spectroscopy for deep-space exploration. While compressed
sensing has recently emerged as a powerful framework for understanding the
fundamental limits of sparse signal processing, current algorithms based on
convex optimization, are difficult to scale efficiently. This proposal is
motivated therefore to address the challenge of scale in the theory and design
of sparse signal recovery problems, with the goal of enabling real-time
processing capability. This proposal develops the mathematical foundations as
well as practical sub-linear-time algorithms for ultra-large-scale sparse signal
recovery and spectral estimation problems. The theory and algorithms are derived
through an interdisciplinary mix of intellectual tools from coding theory, graph
theory, number theory, and statistical signal processing. This leads to the
proposal of new computational primitives dubbed as sparse-graph alias codes that
are analogous to Low-Density-Parity-Check (LDPC) codes that have revolutionized
modern communication systems. The proposed framework is envisioned to provide a
similar impact on next-generation sparse signal processing systems with respect
to (i) acquisition overhead; (ii) computational and energy efficiency; and (iii)
performance guarantees and stability.