* 1439085
* XPS: EXPL: CCA: A Framework for Portable Parallel Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* David August, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Unable to increase computer processor peformance growth at the historic rate,
the microprocessor industry has shifted to bundling more processor cores in each
computer. While additional processor cores puts more processing power in each
computer, the burden of making use of this power shifts to the programmer. To
make matters worse, the cores in each computer are not all the same and each
computer model may have a different number and mix of cores. Software optimized
for one computer may perform poorly for another, and having programmers optimize
for each computer model is not practical. This project intends to overcome these
problems by changing the way programmers write code for these systems and having
the computer optimize the software for its specific configuration. The project
will study ways to convey the richer set of information necessary to help
computers best optimize the software running upon it. This project has the
potential to fundamentally alter how programmers develop software for modern
architectures, relieving them of the arduous task of optimizing their code for
different systems. Users of any software---from computational scientists to home
desktop users---would experience an increase in performance and faster
deployment of new applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed software
interface must represent code in a way that is automatically analyzable and
highly amenable to automatic code transformations at runtime. The project will
explore many designs, including explicitly encoding register dependences in
Single Static Assignment (SSA) form, statically determining and encoding memory
dependency information into instructions, and using an expressive code layout
scheme to make runtime analysis and optimization more efficient. In concert with
this design space exploration, various runtime optimizations will be developed
which will customize the software execution for the specific computer while also
optimizing for dynamically changing user desires such as execution speed and
energy consumption. The synergistic design of the software interface and runtime
optimizations will allow determination of the optimal set of information to
include in the interface. This project also aims to create tools for developers
(compiler, assembler, and architectural simulator) to enable others to use and
evaluate it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will keep building on his past
successes in fostering diversity and educational outreach efforts. He will host
several undergraduate student researchers each year, teaming them with graduate
student mentors. He will also continue to incorporate current research results
into undergraduate and graduate courses.