* 1439848
* Recruiting, Developing, and Retaining Tomorrow's Outstanding STEM Teachers in Oklahoma
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2023
* John Coleman, Langston University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,449,955.00

Developing more, highly qualified science and mathematics teachers is a national
priority. Through funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program, this Phase I Noyce Teacher Scholarship project will
recruit, prepare, and support twenty-four students pursuing baccalaureate
degrees in a STEM discipline to simultaneously complete requirements for teacher
certification in Oklahoma over a five-year period. This project is responsive to
both the national and local shortage of outstanding STEM secondary teachers and
to the need to diversify the teaching workforce to take advantage of the
richness that this country offers. This project is a collaboration among
Langston University, the Oklahoma City Community College, and Oklahoma City and
Guthrie School Districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LU Noyce Scholar pre-service
teacher candidates will be recruited from four groups: community college STEM
majors; existing Langston University (LU) STEM Scholars who indicate a
preference for teaching or who are not committed to pursuing graduate school in
their discipline immediately upon graduation; LU undeclared majors who indicate
an interest in teaching and exhibit acumen in STEM subjects such that they would
pursue a degree in a STEM discipline; and pre-college students in Oklahoma's
high schools. This project will also leverage LU's decades of long demonstrated
capabilities as the primary training resource for Oklahoma's African-American
secondary teachers, and its track record to develop outstanding STEM majors who
will bring their core content knowledge, passion for learning and commitment to
social justice to the teaching and learning enterprise. In addition to strategic
recruitment activities, components of the project will include: a Pre-
scholarship Support Program; LU Noyce Teacher Preparation Program; LU Noyce
Program Performance, Retention, and Enrichment Experiences Program; and the LU
Noyce Post-Graduation Support/Retention Program. The project builds upon and
integrates a number of research-based approaches and tools, including the
Competency Performance Recordings for Learning (CPRL), a teaching and learning
protocol demonstrated to support students' problem solving skills, and the STEM
Digital Village, an online STEM learning community that supports and recognizes
the Scholar's activities and performance, provides educational resources, and
supports monitored, education-oriented discussion beyond LU's campus. The
ultimate societal benefit of this LU Robert Noyce endeavor, both within Oklahoma
and nationwide, will be the development and support of a diverse group of highly
qualified STEM teachers, who have a love for their STEM discipline and who are
well-grounded in teaching in high-needs school districts. An external evaluator
will conduct a formative and summative assessment, which will examine the impact
of the online aspects of the work, as well as the indicators of success
associated with the recruitment, development, and retention of the twenty-four
Langston Noyce Scholars.