* 1439718
* I/UCRC Phase I: iPerform - I/UCRC for Assistive Technologies to Enhance Human Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Dinesh Bhatia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2020
* USD 325,000.00

The I/UCRC for Assistive Technologies (AT) will attract support for the
advancement of AT research and promote innovation in academia that is driven by
industrial needs. In work environments, ATs can improve work efficiency,
identify safety risks, shorten the learning curve or worker training through
simulations, and improve resource allocation, creativity and communication. In
healthcare environments, AT tools can enhance sensory and cognitive
capabilities, improve training &amp; delivery, enable remote monitoring, delay
physical and cognitive decline in chronic conditions, personalize
rehabilitation, predict risks for the elderly who live alone, monitor sleep
disorders, design better prosthetics or drugs, design better robotic assistants,
smart wheelchairs, therapy games and tools to monitor mental/physiological
conditions, such as depression, epilepsy, or heart problems. The seed projects
conducted within the center will help advance basic research in computer vision,
machine learning, user interfaces, brain imaging, human robot interaction, human
computer interaction, virtual reality, simulation, and many other related
research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects conducted at I/UCRC for
Assistive Technologies will drive a broad spectrum of advances in the areas such
as worker productivity and safety, transportation, health, company operations
and intelligence, and promote the development of AT research infrastructure. The
center addresses real-world problems and thus can generate new jobs, products,
services, and impact all areas where a human has the potential to improve. The
center will play role in enhancing the quality and diversity of AT professionals
and prepare a future generation of competitive employees-scientists who can
solve problems due to unmet human needs. Through compelling projects, the center
will also attract students to CSE fields. UTA and UTD have a strong record in
training students and have ongoing NSF projects, e.g., to identify software
errors, analysis of facial expressions to identify arthritic pain, or efficient
multimodal database searches.