* 1439900
* Strengthening Teacher Education through Mathematics &amp; Science Teaching Scholars in Louisiana
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Pegge Alciatore, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,193,309.00

Developing more, highly qualified science and mathematics teachers is a national
priority. Through funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program, the Strengthening Teacher Education through
Mathematics &amp; Science Teaching Scholars (STEMS2) in Louisiana project is
attentive to the local, regional and national persistent concern of secondary
STEM teacher recruitment, preparation, induction, and retention. At the local
level, this project is responsive to current performance challenges of students
in Algebra and Biology on end-of-course tests. The project intends to produce
twenty-five exceptionally qualified mathematics and biology teachers, who upon
completing the project will have earned a baccalaureate degree in mathematics or
biology, as well as obtained secondary teacher certification. In addition to
scholarship support to STEM majors recruited to become teachers, the project
will provide a comprehensive system of supports anchored by a handpicked cadre
of in-service secondary STEM teachers who will serve as mentors to these pre-
service candidates. Furthermore, during the first years of teaching by these
Noyce Scholars, Induction Specialists, comprised of a select group of recent
retirees who are remarkably skilled and qualified at teaching their subject,
will provide direct support to the newly minted teachers. STEMS2 represents a
collaborative partnership between the University of Louisiana at Lafayette's
College of Education, College of Sciences, and two local school districts, the
Lafayette Parish School System and Iberia Parish School
System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEMS2 project attempts to further accentuate
the value of teacher preparation programs that model the interdependence of
content, pedagogical, and practical knowledge as catalysts for teacher
effectiveness, thereby validating the supposition that Colleges of Education,
Colleges of Sciences, and local school districts should share responsibility for
training STEM teachers. Programmatically, the design features a distribution of
duties among university faculty and the STEMS2 K-12 partners which increases the
likelihood of graduates mastering variables that pertain to teachers' knowledge
and skills, namely, knowledge of the subject matter content to be taught;
knowledge of how to teach that content to a wide range of learners; and the
ability to manage a classroom, and design and implement instruction. In addition
to the preparation program, the project features include semi-annual stakeholder
retreats, internships with Master Teacher Fellows from the Louisiana-Lafayette's
Louisiana Mathematics Masters in the Middle project, and seminars in
transitioning to higher-level mathematics and sciences. The summer internships
for freshmen and sophomore STEM majors, which will support their work with
middle school students in STEM camps, will serve as a fundamental strategy for
recruiting Noyce Scholar recipients. The all-inclusive nature of this project,
with recruitment, preparation, mentors, and induction support, will allow the
deployment of exceptionally qualified teachers, armed with a robust knowledge of
STEM pedagogy and content, to high-need school districts with the ability to
make immediate positive impacts on student learning in STEM areas. While the
major measurable outcome of the STEMS2 project will be the production of twenty-
five exceptionally qualified secondary STEM teachers, the project evaluation
will also assess the project's explicit intents related to fostering
collaboration among mathematics, science and education faculty, as well as among
the University of Louisiana at Lafayette faculty STEMS2 participants and partner
school districts. The scholarly findings from the STEMS2 project will have the
potential to serve as a model for other institutions.