* 1439559
* Early Career: Technical support for a uranium-series isotope geochemistry laboratory focused on Earth?s climate and surface processes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2018
* William McGee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 355,536.00

Advances in our understanding of the evolution of Earth's climate and surface
processes depend in large part upon absolute dating of Earth materials. In
studies of past climate changes, high-precision age determinations during the
last several hundred thousand years undergird efforts to determine rates of
change and test temporal relationships between climate events. This award
provides technical support for an early career researcher's laboratory which
will allow rapid development of radioisotope based dating methods that optimize
precision and efficiency, and foster the development of high-resolution records
of past climate tied to precise and accurate ages for a wide variety of
collaborative projects. Additional applications of high-precision data
throughout the Earth sciences will provide key insights into marine sediment
accumulation rates, timescales of weathering and sediment transport, and trace
metal cycling in the modern ocean. In addition to substantially accelerating the
analytical, collaborative and outreach activities of an early career faculty
member, the technician's contributions to method development and new user
training would benefit several other internal and external researchers by
increasing their access to cutting-edge analytical facilities. In addition, the
technician will facilitate hands-on training for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers both within and outside of the research group, helping
prepare the next generation of analysts and broadening exposure to high-
precision isotope analysis. The technician will facilitate isotopic analyses as
a part of an undergraduate course that gives students first-hand geochemistry
research experience. The technician will offer training and mentorship to ensure
that these undergraduates receive the maximum benefit from their time in the
lab. The analytical facility managed by the proposed technician will provide an
important resource for the geoscience community, substantially increasing the
availability of precise and accurate uranium-thorium ages and uranium-series
isotope data for Earth science research. The targeted method development enabled
by the technician will help increase the efficiency and precision of existing
uranium-series applications and contribute to the development of new tools
involving uranium-series.

Specifically, this award funds three years of support for a laboratory
technician who will facilitate the development of an isotope geochemistry lab
for the application of uranium-series isotopes to studies of Quaternary
geochronology, paleoclimate and Earth surface history. The technician will also
enable advances in applications of uranium-series isotope systems to other parts
of the Earth system through targeted method development and the collection of
pilot data, focused in particular on improving the use of uranium-series
disequilibrium to estimate timescales of weathering and sediment transport. In
addition, collaborations facilitated by the technician's contributions will
further extend the impact of the proposed support. The technician will work with
other labs to intercalibrate tracers and analytical procedures, helping to
establish a geochronology facility that integrates the uranium-thorium and
uranium-lead geochronometers to push detailed climate records past the limits of
uranium-thorium geochronology back to several million years. In addition, the
technician's contributions to developing new analytical protocols and training
external users will broaden the facility's capabilities beyond uranium-series to
other isotope systems including chromium, iron, and hafnium, directly benefiting
researchers with interests ranging from crustal evolution to trace metal cycling
in the ocean.