* 1439258
* The Neurodevelopment of Stress Regulation, Social Buffering and Fear Learning: Integration and Crosstalk
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Megan Gunnar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 10/31/2017
* USD 222,150.00

The burden of stress and fear of threats to our well-being are parts of modern
society that sap productivity and induce mental and physical diseases. The child
is particularly hard hit by stress and fear because it can change the actual
structure of the brain and produce strong vulnerability to crime, addiction and
pathology later in life. Recent research suggest that social support can greatly
reduce stress and fear by suppressing the physiological effects of stress, but
also by actually preventing some of the brain's response to fear and stress.
This ability of social cues to prevent the brains's immediate and enduring
response to stress and fear is most pronounced in children and the caregiver is
most effective in influencing the impact of stress. Thus, understanding
mechanism of the physiology of stress, the psychology of fear and its rescue by
caregivers and romantic partners (called social buffering) is critical for
developing social policies and interventions to support child development and
life long wellbeing. Significant advances in this area can be made via improved
communication between researchers who typically work separately due to
historical reason. Dr. Megan Gunnar at the University of Minnesota will lead a
steering committee consisting of leading scientists from several disciplines to
conduct a series of three workshops to break down barriers and unite researchers
across previously disparate disciplines to transform our current understanding
of the neurobiology of fear. This workshop series will bring together
researchers from the behavioral sciences (social, cognitive, and developmental
sciences), biological sciences (neurophysiology, neuroendocrinology,
neuroimaging), as well as researchers involved in the development of new
technologies and computational modeling (engineering and mathematics) to
generate innovative ideas and transformative projects to significantly advance
our understanding of fear and its management by social context. Such advance is
expected to have broader societal impact by informing policy making and by
suggesting effective behavioral methods and technological supports for reducing
stress and fear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this workshop series aims to
break down disciplinary boundaries and historical norms to address the problem
of how fear is acquired and controlled by social stimuli throughout all stages
of development across life span and across different species (humans and non-
human animals) and what neural mechanisms underlie these psychological, social,
and developmental processes. The aim for the first year is to develop a platform
for dialogue among researchers from behavior, brain science, computational
scientists, and engineers to develop a shared vision to tackle this grant
challenge for society. We will assess recent development in nanotechnology that
can transform the way scientists observe and measure stress related behavioral
and psychological changes and the way biological scientists to obtain neural and
physiological indices of stress regulation. The outcome of the first workshop
will be a joint vision statement in a high profile journal and joint selection
of major research themes for subsequent workshops' scientific sessions and
methodological tutorials. The aim of the second and third years will be
systematically transforming this shared vision (in terms of major thematic
areas) into concrete collaborative projects and conduct pilot studies and
identifying major technological, scientific, and organization challenges and
considerations of possible solutions, and actively involving postdoc and
graduate students in creating sustainable training plan for interdisciplinary
research across the newly expanded collaborating research communities. While the
focus of the second year will be on developing pilot studies and coordinated
effort in obtaining funding to support the jointly developed projects, the focus
of the third year will be on developing long-term training mechanisms to support
the newly formed community. The final outcome of this workshop series will be
the development of large-scale and cross-cutting collaborative project
proposals, possibly international, that link multiple research centers within
the US and on the global scale.