* 1439839
* Recruit and Engage - Mathematics And Science Teachers, while Conducting a Longitudinal Study of Factors Influencing Effectiveness
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Christina McCartha, Newberry College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 01/31/2021
* USD 797,823.00

Developing more, highly qualified science and mathematics teachers is a national
priority. Through funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program, this Phase II Noyce project will continue much of
the work initiated in Newberry College's Phase I Noyce award. This Recruit and
Engage--Mathematics AND Science Teachers (RE-MAST) Phase II project will produce
nine to sixteen additional STEM teachers over the course of the next five years,
add leadership and mentor training for all parties in the project, and also
conduct a longitudinal study of factors that contribute to Noyce Scholar
recipients' pre- and in-service effectiveness and their persistence and
leadership in the teaching profession. In this Phase II project, Newberry
College will partner with the Retain and Empower Teachers through Action,
Innovation, and Networking (RETAIN) Center of Excellence, a state-supported
research hub focused on teacher retention, which is currently housed at Newberry
College. The partner school districts of Fairfield, Newberry, Lexington, and
Richland Counties in South Carolina will provide diverse settings for Noyce
Scholars to explore and experience teaching, while at the same time benefitting
from the number of nascent STEM teachers with solid backgrounds in science
and/or mathematics, pedagogical skills and dispositions of determination for the
potential of each student in their classrooms to learn consequential mathematics
and science.

Specific activities of the RE-MAST Phase II project include 1) recruiting nine
to sixteen additional STEM majors into teaching; 2) delivering educational
supports for Noyce Scholars; 3) providing professional development opportunities
for Mentors, Noyce Teaching Fellows (former Noyce Scholars), and grant
personnel; and 4) pursuing a rigorous research agenda related to teacher
retention, or persistence of mathematics and science teachers in the teaching
profession. This research study will examine factors at both the program level
and the Noyce Scholar level. The project is explicit in its intent to benefit
others through the sharing of research derivatives, including protocols,
instruments, and professional development materials appropriate for use by
practicing school professionals and teacher educators, as well as through
scholarly publication of results and findings.