* 1439746
* Howard University Science Teacher Certification Program (HU-STCP)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Courtney Robinson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2017
* USD 331,888.00

The Howard University Science Teacher Certification Program (HU-STCP) in
collaboration with Prince George's Community College will address the national
need for more underrepresented STEM talent who pursue careers in teaching. This
capacity building project specifically strives to improve science teaching and
learning among minority students in both college and K-12 settings. The intended
outcomes of the HU-STCP capacity building program design include: (1) the
implementation of a teacher certification program that prepares highly qualified
biology and chemistry teachers (2) coursework that emphasizes creative
pedagogical practices that emphasize authentic science instructions and (3)
early field work opportunities. The impact of the HU-STCP capacity building
project will grow the number of minority STEM educators in urban school systems
as well as the collaborations between universities, school districts, and STEM
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of capacity building project
include (1) development of new courses and teacher certification requirements
for a one-year intensive teacher certification program, and (2) development of
recruitment and retention plans that prepare post-baccalaureate candidates for
teacher licensure in the fields of biology and/or chemistry. The HU-STCP project
will use inquiry and problem-based learning approaches to engage teacher
candidates in promoting critical thinking, problem solving, and collaborative
skills needed to conduct authentic, scientific learning experiences in urban
classrooms. Inquiry and problem-based learning approaches will provide a
framework to convert traditional classroom activities into unique science
related experiences for minority students in an urban K-12 educational setting.
In addition, this project will further explore the relationship and affects
between teacher knowledge, quality instruction, and student achievement in
science. The HU-STCP project combines a mix of quantitative and qualitative data
in formative and summative assessments to measure outcomes, lessons learned and
effective strategies that emerge during the capacity building period.