* 1439272
* Learning Sciences and Online Learning: Interaction and Influence for Quality Practice and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Eric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Symposium on Learning Sciences and Online Learning: Interaction and Influence
for Quality Practice and Research

The world is currently witnessing a revolution within higher education due to
the rapid emergence of online courses designed for large enrollment. Meanwhile,
learning science research has been contributing to an increased understanding of
how people learn and what it means to learn within specific disciplines,
particularly for Science, Engineering, Technology and Mathematics (STEM). The
potential to improve learning and reduce cost, coupled with the resources and
efforts currently focused on emerging forms of online learning, provides the
impetus for conducting conversations on how findings from the learning sciences
can inform the development of meaningful and effective online learning education
and, in turn, how online learning efforts can inform learning research.

Given the rapid growth and evolution of online learning and learning research,
it is often challenging for designers and practitioners to take into account
findings from the learning sciences. Similarly, it is challenging for
educational researchers to be well-informed of the various online learning
experiments underway. As a response to these challenges, a symposium will bring
together experts in the learning sciences and practitioners of online learning
to provide recommendations for the design and implementation of online learning
experiences that is grounded in research findings, outline future research
directions in the learning sciences afforded by online learning. The symposium
will create and catalyze a new publication and community site for the broader
dissemination of research, practice, and resources in online learning. The
outcomes of this symposium will be instrumental in guiding the development of
quality online learning experiences for students worldwide and future research
on student learning.