* 1439717
* I/UCRC Phase I: Robots and Sensors for the Human Well-being
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2022
* Julia Rayz, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 637,202.00

The proposed I/UCRC for Robots and Sensors for the Human Well-being (RoSeHuB)
will focus on complementing a broad variety of off-the-self sensors with
intelligent processing software that enables them to extract useful information
about the operating environments in medicine and agriculture. RoSeHuB research
will make heavy use of commercial cameras that can work in different parts of
the electro-magnetic spectrum (i.e., visible, IR, Thermal, etc.), laser or radar
sensors, etc. Sensors or sensor systems may exhibit different degrees of
mobility. They may be embedded in robots or flying drones or they may be fixed
with limited degrees of motion (PTZ cameras). In the areas of algorithms and
learning methods the focus and the challenge is on creating methodologies that
can balance real-time operation and computational power while providing high
level semantic information either for planning, interaction or situational
awareness for human operators. With respect to robots, efforts will focus on
building systems with advanced mobility, manipulation, human-machine
interaction, and coordination skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robots and sensors
can lead to more effective precision agriculture techniques that provide more
food than current levels while they save water and prevent soil erosion.
Similarly, robots play a critical and growing role in modern medicine, from
training the next generation of doctors, dentists, and nurses, to comforting and
protecting elderly patients in the early stages of dementia. The proposed Center
will attract large companies to the pertinent domains and energize innovative
startup companies, both through research and through the production of highly
trained graduate students with advanced coursework in sensory-based robotic
systems and hands-on exposure to multi-disciplinary, integrative systems. The
Center will also fund a projects to pursue new pertinent high-risk initiatives,
ensuring that technology continues to meet emerging societal needs. RoSeHuB
faculty will aggressively recruit women and minority graduate and undergraduate
students and host an annual summer camp for middle-schoolers from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;