* 1439765
* Community Alliance for STEM Teaching (CAST): Building Capacity for Recruiting and Preparing Future STEM Teachers through Community-based Research
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Patrick Pfaffle, Carthage College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,131.00

In this Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program capacity building project the
Carthage College Teacher Education Program and the Division of Natural Sciences
propose to develop a partnership with Kenosha Unified School District (KUSD) to
encourage and prepare the college's top STEM students to teach science in high
needs schools. The outcome of this project will be a new interdisciplinary
curriculum component, the Community Alliance for STEM Teaching (CAST), that can
engage majors from a number of science disciplines in a community centered
effort designed to increase their interest in a STEM teaching career. By
engaging a variety of agents (teachers, students, administrators from high needs
schools as well as college faculty and students) in the planning, the project
will also help strengthen ties between the partners as they explore new ways of
interacting. The project will engage such community based organizations as the
Root-Pike Watershed Initiative Network, the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, the Wisconsin Space Grant Consortium, and local municipal water-
treatment faciilties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several aspects of the
project resonate beyond the immediate audience and offer the promise of
sustained community involvement in teacher education. Developing a high-profile
curricular component in integrated sciences and linking it to pre-service
teacher education will significantly enhance the visibility and appeal of the
Carthage Teacher Education Program in a community that is embracing modern and
reformed STEM-focused curricula. Dissemination of this project will occur
through the traditional mechanisms of social media, web presence, print
campaigns, and conference presentations, and through the physical presence of
monitoring equipment in partner schools, attendance at community forums and city
meetings to discuss the monitoring research on air and water, and through
informal public education.