* 1439283
* Lagrangian Flow Boundaries, Transport, and Vortex Cores in Pre-genesis Disturbances
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Blake Rutherford, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 589,806.00

This research builds on the "marsupial paradigm" to examine which pre-genesis
disturbances eventually become tropical storms and hurricanes. A favorable
environment most typically exists within African Easterly Wave (AEW) critical
layer flows as an essential precursor environment for the dynamics (wind) and
thermodynamics (heat and moisture) to support development. Though a protected
kinematic environment is necessary for development, typically less than 20% of
these waves actually produce hurricanes. Classic methods to evaluate the near
storm environment use an Eulerian framework in which the storm is studied as it
flows through a fixed domain. The proposed research seeks to study these flows
through the use of Lagrangian Coherent Structure (LCS) analysis in which the
diagnostic tools follow the air flowing into the developing pre-storm
environment. Influx of moisture, dry air and vorticity (spin in the atmosphere)
across closed streamlines of the steady flow disrupt the dynamics that support
development in an otherwise protected environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The use of Lagrangian
Coherent Structures in diagnosing the pre-genesis storm environment may lead to:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) An improved understanding of the lateral flow-following transport
and exchange of air masses interior and exterior to the wave pouch&lt;br/&gt;(2)
An improved description of transitions from tropical depression to tropical
storm including diagnosis of the kinematic protection due to the shear-
sheltering of the vortex core&lt;br/&gt;(3) Extending the kinematic analysis to
study vertical alignment of Lagrangian boundaries and consequences of alignment
or misalignment for cyclogenesis (storm spin-up)&lt;br/&gt;(4) Addressing
predictability of cyclogenesis by applying these methods to ensemble
forecasts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A more complete
understanding of the role of flow-following (Lagrangian) boundaries and vortex
cores may aid in improved forecasting of storm spin-up with greater lead-time
and lower false alarm rates.