* 1439768
* Capacity Building Towards Development of a Graduate Teaching Certification Program for STEM Graduates and Professionals
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Earl Blodgett, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,617.00

Developing more, highly qualified science and mathematics teachers is a national
priority. Through funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity Building grant will support the
development of an innovative and financially self-sustaining Graduate Teaching
Certification (GTC) program that will provide initial STEM teaching
certification to an unreached and underserved population of recent STEM
graduates and STEM professionals with relevant science and/or mathematical
expertise. This project is responsive to a persistent concern at the University
of Wisconsin-River Falls (UWRF) related to the traditional undergraduate teacher
certification pathway. The issue is that completing the coursework for earning
both a baccalaureate degree in a STEM major and completing requirements for
teacher certification as an undergraduate is extremely difficult. This problem
of completing both a major and earning certification is found in many
institutions across this nation, therefore, what is learned from this work at
UWRF will have implications for other institutions facing similar
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the two years of this Capacity Building
grant, UWRF will build upon what has been learned in the UTeach program for
undergraduates at the University of Texas-Austin. However, UWRF will focus on
the graduate level as it designs a UTeach-inspired Graduate Teaching
Certification program with an optional Master's degree. This project will
develop the GTC curriculum, recruitment strategies, and marketing activities.
Among the recruitment strategies will be the implementation of learning
assistant internships and the development and implementation of a novel
undergraduate STEM education course to "try out teaching," with the added
advantage of meeting a university communications undergraduate course
requirement. Field experiences will include both urban and rural schools and
schools with different compositions of students, with an emphasis on learning
about and experiencing different learning styles and the importance of cultural
context first hand. Ultimately, the new GTC program will expand and diversify
the pool of teacher candidates as it will actively seek to offer high quality
academic instruction to a broader population, including adult learners and
recent UWRF and University of Wisconsin System graduates. Success of this effort
will be evaluated by the UTeach Institute at the University of Texas-Austin. The
evaluation plan will map to the UTeach Elements of Success (distinctive program
identity, cross-college and school district collaborations, long-term
institutional and community support, active student recruitment and support, a
dedicated Master Teacher, rigorous research-based instruction, early and
intensive field experiences, and continuous program improvement).