* 1439779
* Access in Mathematics for All: Increasing the number of diverse and low-income STEM majors who become secondary school mathematics teachers.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Richard Kitchen, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,971.00

"Access in Mathematics for All" (AMA) supports an emerging partnership between
the Community College of Aurora (CCA) and the University of Denver (DU) to
develop a program in mathematics education designed specifically to improve
access and opportunities for underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities and
low-income students who are mathematics majors, to teach in high-need schools.
The legacy of a lack of access to a high quality and rigorous education in
mathematics for historically marginalized populations is that these groups are
significantly and consistently underrepresented in STEM education, degrees, and
careers. The primary goal of AMA is to develop capacity at DU to significantly
increase the number of diverse and low-income students graduating from DU with a
degree in mathematics and a master's degree and teaching license in secondary
mathematics. A secondary goal is to create an academic pipeline for students at
CCA who have finished substantial mathematics coursework to transfer to DU as a
mathematics major and eventually become mathematics teachers in secondary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be directed by the following five
guiding principles: (a) instruction that is considerate of students' backgrounds
and needs carried out by well-trained and dedicated faculty; (b) academic
support for students to develop intellectually as well as confidence in their
mathematical abilities; (c) social support for students to be integrated into
the DU community; (d) ongoing student access to successful (student and faculty)
role models; and (e) recognition and celebration of students' achievements. This
project will address the underrepresentation of diverse and low-income students
in STEM by creating a mathematical pipeline between CCA and DU. Three courses
will be developed in the early stages of this project. The first two courses, a
"transition to college calculus" course, and a proofs/logic course in
mathematics, have specifically been selected because success in these courses is
critical to the future success of mathematics majors. The third course is a
"capstone" course in secondary mathematics. A goal in all of these courses will
be to foster students' mathematical reasoning as they solve problems and share
and develop mathematical ideas with peers. A working hypothesis of the project
is that through engaging students in instruction in which the development of
mathematical reasoning through discourse is modeled, students will learn how to
implement such instruction and this will benefit them when they start teaching.
Each of these courses will include instruction in best practices for teaching
mathematics to English language learners (ELLs) and will leverage the extensive
social and financial support provided for students in two existing DU programs,
the Volunteers in Partnership (VIP) program and the Center for Multicultural
Excellence (MCE). The VIP program provides financial support for low-income
students who commit to working on a volunteer basis in local high schools
through the year. In addition, a Math Club at CCA will be initiated and members
of this new club will carry out supplemental instruction in Aurora schools. AMA
Fellows will also serve as volunteers in participating VIP high schools. The
service activities that AMA Fellows will experience through VIP and the CCA Math
Club will help prepare them to be effective teachers in high-need schools. This
project will initiate a research study to understand the complexities associated
with recruiting, retaining, and graduating diverse students and low-income
students who major in mathematics in order to become secondary mathematics
teachers in high-need schools. It will also initiate a longitudinal study of
diverse, low-income students to determine best strategies for recruitment as
well as obtaining student perspectives of what program activities are most
beneficial. This will involve individual and focus group interviews with the
students.