* 1439708
* I/UCRC Phase II: Center for the Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Sami Rizkalla, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

Efficient infrastructure systems such as highways, bridges, buildings,
pipelines, flood control systems and utilities are all necessary for a healthy
economy and comfortable standard of living. Concrete, steel and timber are the
backbones of physical infrastructure. High strength polymer composites have been
used for aerospace structures for about five decades and their use in civil
infrastructure spans about 20 years. To accelerate the adoption of polymer
composites into infrastructure, the NSF I/UCRC Center of the Integration of
Composites into Infrastructure (CICI) was established as a joint effort of West
Virginia University (WVU), North Carolina State University (NCSU) and the
University of Miami. Recently, NSF has awarded a travel grant to establish an
additional CICI site at Nanjing University of Technology in China. The NSF
I/UCRC program brings together universities, private companies and government
agencies together to leverage the research dollars for all parties by engaging
in highly cooperative research. CICI's work with civil infrastructure has a
tremendous effect on daily life, thus the Nation as a whole benefits as
composite and hybrid materials lead to infrastructure systems of higher safety,
shorter construction times and longer life spans at a reduced overall cost and
improved labor productivity with the creation of new and higher skilled job
opportunities. Member companies and end users benefit from the interaction with
others in their field including highly trained students, with over 100 students
expected to pass through CICI in the next 5 years. CICI is prolific technology
transfer machine, exceeding the output for most I/UCRCs through the publishing
of journal articles and conference presentations to promote the scientific
research and knowledge dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly speaking,
the technical focus of CICI can be broken into four different areas. Initially,
fundamental research projects are undertaken to broaden the knowledge base on
infrastructure composites. This includes lifecycle performance, aging studies,
evaluation of bond strength within a composite and as a substrate, and many
others. From this on-going research, products are being developed that can be
mass-implemented in infrastructure markets, including innovative hollow core or
basalt fiber FRP rebar, waterway products that are noncorrosive or fabric
reinforced cementitious composites for masonry wall strengthening and many
others. The implementation of these products is the next focus area and is
primarily accomplished through the development of codes and specifications. CICI
has worked on the ASCE LRFD pultruded GFRP composites code, ASTM specifications,
ACI building design and construction codes, the International Code Council and
IIFC. Finally, CICI has an evaluation component based on IAB member feedback to
ensure the composites that are implemented in the field are performing as
designed as a part of our long-term performance program. Thus, through research,
development, implementation and evaluation, CICI is involved in all facets of
composite product evolution.