* 1439042
* XPS: FULL: SDA: Collaborative Research: RUI:  SCORE: Scalability-Oriented Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Stephen Freund, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 252,000.00

Title: XPS: FULL: SDA: Collaborative Research: SCORE: Scalability-Oriented
Optimization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern CPUs, which contain an increasingly
large number of processing units or "cores", offer the promise of continued
increases in performance as the number of cores increases. Unfortunately, it is
notoriously difficult for programmers to fully take advantage of this processing
power. Computations can be viewed as cars on a network of highways: we want
traffic to flow as fast as possible without any crashes. Programming languages
offer "synchronization operations"---the programmer equivalent of traffic lights
---which improve safety but reduce speed. For large programs, managing the
tension between the twin goals of safety (more lights) and performance (fewer
lights) can be out of reach for all but expert programmers. This project, SCORE
(scalability-oriented optimization), lifts this burden by automatically
maximizing program performance while maintaining correctness. The intellectual
merits of this work are the development of a suite of techniques to identify
bottlenecks in programs, and transform their code or execution environment to
eliminate those bottlenecks. The project's broader significance and importance
are to enable non-expert programmers to achieve high performance on modern,
multicore platforms, and thus dramatically increase the performance and
efficiency of existing and new software; contributing to the national software
research infrastructure; and increasing access to science research opportunities
and training for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As with optimizing compilation
for sequential code, SCORE lifts the burden of concurrency optimization from
programmers, letting them focus exclusively on getting the logic of their
program right. By handling architectural and synchronization optimizations
without programmer involvement, SCORE lets programmers deliver applications that
portably and effectively harness a wide range of multicore architectures. SCORE
comprises a suite of new dynamic analyses, static analyses, and runtime systems
to enable scalability-oriented optimization. It uncovers bottlenecks and ranks
them by the performance impact of removing them. This information guides a
bottleneck-remediation dynamic analysis to identify a range of opportunities for
concurrency optimizations. Finally, a code robustification phase augments the
optimized code with lightweight checking and recovery code to ensure correct
execution.