* 1439326
* Student Travel Support for the 2014 North American Power Symposium (NAPS), Held at Washington State University, Pullman, WA, September 7-9, 2014
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Anjan Bose, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal requests funding to subsidize student-related expenses (e.g.,
travel, registration,&lt;br/&gt;and accommodation) incurred by US students
attending the 46th annual North American Power&lt;br/&gt;Symposium (NAPS). NAPS
2014 will be hosted by Washington State University in Pullman,
WA,&lt;br/&gt;from September 7 to September 9, 2014. NAPS is a nonprofit event
with technical sponsorship&lt;br/&gt;from IEEE and is aimed primarily at a
student audience. Traditionally, the overwhelming majority&lt;br/&gt;of papers
in NAPS are presented by students. NAPS has been supported by the National
Science&lt;br/&gt;Foundation in the past, which has positively influenced
student participation. Based on the&lt;br/&gt;attendance trend from previous
years, it is anticipated that the subsidy provided through&lt;br/&gt;this grant
can significantly increase the number of students participating in NAPS in
this&lt;br/&gt;year as well. In addition to providing subsidized accommodation
for students, our efforts&lt;br/&gt;to foster and encourage student
participation include a comprehensive student program, tours&lt;br/&gt;of nearby
attractions, and a student paper competition. Moreover, measures will be taken
to&lt;br/&gt;encourage participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
NAPS.