* 1439267
* Neural basis of the memory for sequences of events: A synergistic approach in rats and humans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Craig Stark, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 625,132.00

The capacity to remember where and when certain events occur in one's life is of
critical importance for survival and for participation in society function. This
capacity, called episodic memory, is associated with the functions of the
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Several neurological and psychiatric
disorders involve dysfunctions in these brain regions. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Norbert Fortin and colleague Dr. Craig Stark of
the University of California at Irvine respectively will conduct an innovative
series of parallel experiments in humans and rats, which are expected to
contribute to a better understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying both
normal and abnormal memory functions. This cross-species investigation will
utilize a memory task that can be performed by humans and the rats, which is
critical to make findings from animal studies relevant to our understanding of
human memory and treatment of its deficit. This project will also provide an
opportunity to develop effective educational practices and materials to promote
early science training and awareness. These educational activities have a
special emphasis on groups underrepresented in science (women and minority
students), including a "Memory and the Brain" workshop that will be offered at
schools with diverse student populations that also consistently perform below
standard on the science portion of the California Standards Tests.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Although episodic memory has been extensively investigated, its
neurobiological basis remains elusive. A major reason for this limited progress
has been the inability to directly link evidence obtained from invasive
techniques used in animal models (e.g. rodents) with that from non-invasive
techniques used in humans because of differences in the demands of memory tasks
used across these two species. Drs. Fortin and Stark will address this critical
issue by using an integrated approach combining single-cell electrophysiological
recordings in rats and BOLD fMRI in humans, to study episodic memory using their
newly developed sequence memory task that can be performed by both rats and
humans. This cross-species study will provide the first systematic examination
of the functional correspondence between rodent and human sub-regions of the
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, known to play a critical role in memory and
other higher-level cognitive functions. The knowledge gained from this study
will significantly advance our understanding of the contribution of these brain
structures to the memory for sequences of events, as well as of their
fundamental role in learning and memory, executive functions, and decision-
making.