* 1439359
* 2014 Solid State Chemistry Gordon Research Conference: Solid State Compounds and Materials for Emerging Technologies and Sustainable Energy Generation, July 27 - August 1, 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Susan Kauzlarich, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

NON TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;The 2014 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Solid
State Chemistry: Solid State Compounds and Materials for Emerging Technologies
and Sustainable Energy Generation funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program will be held at Colby-Sawyer College July 27-August 1, 2014.
This meeting will directly impact all of the attendees by providing an open
atmosphere for exchange of ideas on the cutting edge of Solid State Chemistry
and it will provide a unique forum to bring together experts, young scientists,
and students to disclose unpublished data, to challenge and discuss novel ideas,
and to push the frontiers of science and innovation forward. New collaborations
can be formed and new ideas generated that would not otherwise occur if not for
these important conferences. Speakers are expected to convey cutting edge
information to their colleagues with the objective that this disclosure will
stimulate expansive discussion among all attendees and progressively advance the
field. The inclusive, collegial atmosphere of the meeting, and the emphasis on
sharing previously unpublished information, enables the cultivation of
innovative approaches to address the most important challenges facing our world.
This strategy is a hallmark of GRC and has served the scientific community and
facilitated the advancement of science for over eight decades. There is special
funding for underrepresented groups. The intent of this meeting is to promote
the exchange of ideas and the building of partnerships between researchers from
the academic world, industry and government laboratories. Many younger
scientists are included in the program along with more senior and distinguished
scientists, promising to make the presentations and discussions representative
of new directions in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this conference is the design and properties of materials for energy
and environment applications, and the conference highlights the challenges that
we face in producing enough energy while maintaining our environment. To conquer
this important problem, the design of new compounds, the optimization of
existing materials and the understanding of the relationship of structure and
physical properties require a multidisciplinary approach in which Solid State
Chemistry is the bedrock, and this conference brings together a diverse array of
scientists to discuss the latest advances and challenges in Solid State
Chemistry. Speakers and poster presenters are explicitly encouraged to emphasize
advances, unpublished results, new and risky ideas on a variety of current
topics. The organizers strongly encourage active contribution to discussions and
participation in poster sessions, which offer an excellent opportunity for
presenting new and exciting research. Solid State Chemistry is a
multidisciplinary field whose importance continues to increase not only with the
discovery of new classes of materials, but also through a deeper understanding
of the diverse properties of solids made possible by modern techniques. The
importance and scope of the field has grown in response to the continuing
challenge to understand, control, and predict the structures and properties of
solids and the need to synthesize new materials with enhanced physical
properties.