* 1439011
* XPS:FULL:SDA: Reflex Tree - A New Computer and Communication Architecture for Future Smart Cities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Haibo He, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2020
* USD 865,769.00

This project studies a new computing and communication architecture, reflex-
tree, with massive parallel sensing, data processing, and control functions
designed to meet the challenges imposed by future smart cities. The central
feature of this novel reflex-tree architecture is inspired by a fundamental
element of the human nervous system -- reflex arcs, or neuro-muscular reactions
and instinctive motions in response to urgent situations that do not require the
direct intervention of the brain. The scientific foundation and engineering
framework built by this project will pave the way for enhanced monitoring and
management of critical smart city infrastructure, from gas/oil pipelines, water
management, communication networks, and power grids, to public transportation
and healthcare. The interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of the project
will inspire broader participation in related areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the human body, a neural reflex arc is
able to cause an individual to immediately react to a source of discomfort
without the need for direct control from the brain. The reflex-tree architecture
mimics such human neural circuits, using massive numbers of intermediate
computing nodes, edge devices, and sensors to gather, process, and, most
importantly, to react to data concerning critical infrastructure elements. Key
innovations of the proposed reflex-tree architecture include: 1) A novel,
4-level, large scale, and application-specific hierarchical computing and
communication structure capable of carrying out sensor-based decision-making
processes. The required computation and nodal computing power increases at each
successive stage in the hierarchy, with the level-1 cloud performing the most
complex tasks. 2) A densely distributed fiber-optic sensing network and parallel
machine learning algorithms will be developed targeting smart city applications.
3) Novel, complementary machine intelligence algorithms will be developed,
providing accurate control decisions via multi-layer adaptive learning, spatial-
temporal association, and complex system behavior analysis. 4) New parallel
algorithms and software run-time environments will be proposed and developed
that are specifically tailored to the novel reflex-tree system
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To demonstrate the feasibility and
performance of the reflex-tree architecture, a proof-of-concept prototype will
be constructed utilizing a miniaturized, laboratory-scale municipal gas pipeline
system. The prototype will incorporate a complete 4-level reflex-tree--a
distributed fiber-optic sensing network deployed alongside pipelines, edge
devices performing data classification using parallel SVM, intermediate nodes
performing massively-parallel spatial and temporal machine learning, and the
cloud as the root node running sophisticated parallel behavioral analysis and
decision making tasks. The resulting system is a cross layer, high performance,
and massively parallel computing platform, providing a foundational sensing and
computer architecture for future smart cities.