* 1439626
* Increasing Quality STEM Secondary Educators in Western Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Karen Resendes, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,027,300.00

Through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, Westminster College seeks
to increase the number of talented STEM teachers in high-need public, secondary
schools (grades 7-12) in western Pennsylvania. Over the course of funding 20
students will receive scholarships during their junior and senior years to
complete a STEM major and an education minor in order to become certified
science teachers. Several strategies will be used to ensure that these pre-
service teachers will be trained to meet the needs of the community including
(a) implementation of a new course on teaching STEM in high-need areas, (b)
increasing the practicum experiences, and (c) providing students with
opportunities to improve their content knowledge through experiential learning.
The recruitment plan involves interactions with high school students during the
college's Careers in Science Workshop and Scholarship Days and providing
freshmen and sophomores with summer internships. The project will be conducted
in collaboration with Sharon City, Farrell Area, Union Area, and New Castle Area
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Scholars will take part in a
redesigned program of study based on a Winchester college assessment of the
existing needs of high-need schools in the region. Students will take an
innovative course on Teaching in Areas of High Need in which they will implement
research-based strategies and participate in a practicum in a high-need school
science class. This course will be preceded by a general practicum during the
sophomore year followed by a specialized practicum in the junior year. Students
will also participate in a capstone, discipline-specific research experience and
education research in order to better prepare them as scientists and teachers.
Data generated through assessment and evaluation should support the rationale
that students who have had a variety of experiential learning opportunities will
have increased content knowledge and students who have had early exposure to
high needs classrooms will become more effective teachers in these schools.
Formative and summative evaluation will focus on whether or not the project
objectives have been met and the effectiveness of project activities. Assessment
of students' progress and performance will include both qualitative and
quantitative data collected through entry and exit questionnaires, praxis and
Pearson test scores, pre-service and post-service observations, participant
evaluations, and learning process analyses. Dissemination of the project results
will provide a model for using research as a motivator and tool for training
future STEM teachers. The project team plans to present their work through
annual meetings of the National Council for the Teachers of Math and the
National Council for the Teachers of Science, among others and through
publication of research and evaluation findings in journals such as the Journal
of Teacher Education, Journal of Technology, and Teacher Education. Project
deliverables will include results of summative evaluation and the new course
materials.