* 1439774
* Whillans Ice Stream Subglacial Access Research Drilling: Integrative Study of Marine Ice Sheet Stability and Subglacial Habitats in West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jeffrey Becker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2017
* USD 997,705.00

Proposal Title: Whillans Ice Stream Subglacial Access Research Drilling:
Integrative Study of Marine Ice Sheet Stability and Subglacial Habitats in West
Antarctica&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Montana State University&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
Date: 06/25/2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WISSARD (Whillans Ice Stream
Subglacial Access and Research Drilling) Project has been awarded a two-part,
multi-year grant (September 2009-August 2015). The aim of the project is to
drill beneath the 1000 meter thick West Antarctic ice sheet, allowing
investigation of glaciological, geological, microbiological, geochemical, and
oceanographic systems, with a focus on the role of subglacial liquid water
including subglacial lakes. A 2007 National Research Council (NRC) report stated
"It is time for scientific research on subglacial lakes to begin". The WISSARD
project is the United States contribution to subglacial lake research. The
current award is a renewal of the earlier project, and will allow completion of
one component of the work (the grounding line studies).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall WISSARD project continues to study the overarching hypothesis that
active water drainage connects various subglacial environments and exerts major
control on ice sheet flow, geochemistry, metabolic and phylogenetic diversity,
and biogeochemical transformations. Global warming, melting of ice sheets, and
subsequent sea-level rise are of high societal relevance, and the WISSARD
project contributes significantly to our understanding of carbon cycling and ice
sheet dynamics. The technological infrastructure built as part of the project
will benefit the broader science community for years to come. The project has
increased student&lt;br/&gt;participation in polar research, introduced new
investigators to the polar sciences,&lt;br/&gt;enriched K-12 teaching and
learning programs, and reached a larger public audience through such venues as
popular science magazines, museum based activities and videography and
documentary films. In summary, WISSARD promotes scientific exploration of
Antarctica by conveying to the public the excitement of accessing and studying
what may be some of the last unexplored aquatic environments on Earth.