* 1439057
* XPS: FULL: DSD: End-to-end Acceleration of Genomic Workflows on Emerging Heterogeneous Supercomputers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Padma Raghavan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/29/2020
* USD 849,984.00

The proposed research harnesses parallelism to accelerate
the&lt;br/&gt;pervasive bioinformatics workflow of detecting genetic
variations.&lt;br/&gt;This workflow determines the genetic variants present in
an&lt;br/&gt;individual, given DNA sequencing data. The variant detection
workflow&lt;br/&gt;is an integral part of current genomic data analysis, and
several&lt;br/&gt;studies have linked genetic variants to diseases. Typical
instances&lt;br/&gt;of this workflow currently take several hours to multiple
days to&lt;br/&gt;complete with state-of-the-art software, and current
algorithms and&lt;br/&gt;software are unable to exploit and benefit from even
modest levels of&lt;br/&gt;hardware parallelism. Most prior approaches to
parallelization and&lt;br/&gt;performance tuning of genomic data analysis
pipelines have targeted&lt;br/&gt;computation, I/O, or network data transfer
bottlenecks in isolation,&lt;br/&gt;and consequently, are limited in the overall
performance improvement&lt;br/&gt;they can achieve. This project targets end-to-
end acceleration&lt;br/&gt;methodologies and uses emerging heterogeneous
supercomputers to&lt;br/&gt;reduce workflow time-to-
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on holistic methodologies
to accelerate multiple&lt;br/&gt;components within the genetic variant detection
workflow. It explores&lt;br/&gt;lightweight data reorganizations at multiple
granularities to enhance&lt;br/&gt;locality, investigates compute-,
communication-, and I/O task&lt;br/&gt;cotuning, locality-aware load-balancing,
and coordinated resource&lt;br/&gt;partitioning to exploit high-performance
computing platforms. A key&lt;br/&gt;goal of the proposed research is to design
domain-specific&lt;br/&gt;optimizations targeting the massive parallelism and
scalability&lt;br/&gt;potential of current heterogeneous supercomputers, so that
the&lt;br/&gt;developed techniques can be easily transferred and applied to
&lt;br/&gt;dedicated academic cluster and commercial computational
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Outreach efforts target undergraduate students through
recruiting&lt;br/&gt;workshops and attract them to interdisciplinary graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Curriculum development activities emphasize cross-layer
parallelism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, see project web site
at &lt;br/&gt;http://sites.psu.edu/XPSGenomics