* 1439402
* STEM Educational Engagement: Engaging Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics and Computer Science Majors in Becoming Teaching Professionals at the Kindergarten-12 Level
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Rachel Davis-Haley, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,199,198.00

Developing more, highly qualified science and mathematics teachers is a national
priority. Through funding from the National Science Foundation, Xavier
University of Louisiana's STEM Educational Engagement Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship project will offer scholarship support to thirteen outstanding
junior and senior students majoring in biology, chemistry, mathematics, physics,
and computer science to enable them to become K-12 teachers. These students will
earn their baccalaureate degrees in a scientific, mathematical or computer
science major and complete a Master of Arts in Teaching degree which will
certify them to teach. In order to spark the interest of undergraduate science,
mathematics, and computer science majors in teaching, forty freshman and
sophomore students will participate in summer internships working with students
from varying grade levels in a variety of summer camps. This investment by the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program in undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds from Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA) will contribute to
addressing the documented shortage of teachers of science, mathematics and
computer science, particularly from students underrepresented in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the coursework that comprises the
particular majors in biology, chemistry, mathematics, physics, and computer
science, as well as the Master's level teaching courses, Noyce Teacher Scholars
will be supported during the life of the grant by participating in educational
seminars, training workshops, teaching experiences and activities focusing on
the improvement of pedagogy to meet the needs of diverse student populations.
These experiences will be facilitated by collaborations of education and STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) faculty at XULA and other
organizations including: Xavier University's Summer Science Academy "Stars"
Program, The Audubon Nature Institute, National Society of Black Engineers
Summer Engineering Experience for Kids (SEEK) summer camp, STEM NOLA, The
Teacher Resource Center at NASA's Stennis Space Center, the National Science
Teachers Association (NSTA), International Society for Technology in Education
(ITSE), the NSTA Mickelson ExxonMobil Teachers Academy, and the National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). The United States is faced with the challenge
of preparing its students to become international achievers. Researchers argue
that teacher quality directly affects student achievement. Specifically,
students whose teachers are grounded in content and pedagogical knowledge are
more successful than students whose teachers have content and no pedagogy, or
pedagogy and no content. The independent evaluation will examine indicators
associated with recruitment, retention, the intern and scholar components,
including the MAT, and teacher quality. The production of thirteen teachers with
significant content depth, pedagogical acumen, and confidence and commitment to
teaching students in high needs schools in Orleans, Jefferson, and St. Charles
Parishes in the State of Louisiana is the major contribution that the STEM
Educational Engagement project is making to improving teaching and learning in
the sciences, mathematics and computer science.