* 1439744
* Travel Support for the 6th Orogenic Lherzolites Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2015
* USD 9,888.00

This award will provide partial support for the travel and associated expenses
of graduate students and post doctoral scientists to attend the 6th Orogenic
Lherzolite Conference in Marrakech, Morocco, May 4-15, 2014. The Orogenic
Lherzolite Conferences are held at widely spaced intervals to bring together the
international scientific community interested in studies of the Earth's upper
mantle, as exposed in alpine Orogenic belts, ophiolites, continental margins,
and the sea floor. In these conference, international scientists present new
research relating to shallow mantle evolution, magma genesis, and the role of
peridotites and serpentinites in different tectonic environments. The overall
objective of this upcoming meeting will be to assemble specialists in studies of
peridotite massifs and upper mantle processes for a field conference to share
recent results and discuss key outcrops in a group setting. Many geochemists,
petrologists and geophysicists primarily situated in laboratories or using
remote sensing, particularly marine scientists, have little opportunity to
examine the record of mantle processes visible in the field as exposed in rock
outcrops. In past conferences of this nature, there has been a focus on
providing all participating scientists with the opportunity to visit classic
field outcrops, which is a particularly valuable education experience for
students and post-docs at the early stage of their careers. The Beni Bousera
orogenic lherzolite is one such classic mantle locality, where processes of
mantle melting were first identified and studied in a sub-continental or
continental margin setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will benefit early
career scientists to participate in the major international meeting that is
exclusively focused on research and field observation of upper mantle
composition and processes. Their participation will enable them the tools to
advance their careers both through examining mantle outcrops and processes in-
situ, and through interaction with a large group of international experts that
is only infrequently assembled. This meeting also serves as an introduction for
students and post-docs to allow them to network with each other as a cohort and
also with others from the international scientific community working on these
research questions. It is expected that these personal interactions will lead to
valuable research collaborations for the next generation of scientists.