* 1439640
* I-Corps:  Novel Adsorbents for Water Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Rominder Suri, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology was developed in the NSF I/UCRC for Water and
Environmental Technology (WET), and involves novel adsorbent material that can
be used to efficiently remove organic contaminants and suspended particles from
water. After use, it can be regenerated in-situ and its capacity to remove
contaminants is recovered. The material can then be reused for water treatment.
The proposed work will address the challenges identified for the
commercialization of this technology, including a pilot scale demonstration.

The proposed technology would provide a cost efficient and environmentally
sustainable solution to treat water and wastewater. Unlike other processes, such
as activated carbon adsorption and air stripping which are widely used in the
industry for water and wastewater treatment, the proposed technology does not
create a secondary waste since the adsorbed contaminants are destroyed. The
proposed work would be of interest to municipal water and wastewater utilities,
manufacturing industry that need to treat their wastewater, companies that
market point-of-use water filters and companies that provide water treatment
solutions. In addition, the project would advance the state of the art in
environmental science and engineering fields by providing a new adsorbent
material for the removal of organic contaminants and suspended particles from
water. Activated carbon (AC) has been designated as the Best Available
Technology (BAT) by the US EPA for the removal of organic contaminants from
water, and is very widely used world-wide; hence, there is tremendous market
opportunity for the proposed technology as a superior replacement to AC.