* 1439947
* Broadening Participation Activities EBSD 2014:  Electron Backscatter Diffraction Topical Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Yoosuf Picard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

This award will partially support a conference focused on Electron Backscatter
Diffraction (EBSD) planned for June 17-19, 2014, at Carnegie Mellon University,
under the sponsorship of the Microanalysis Society (MAS). EBSD is an important
technique that utilizes the diffraction of high-energy electrons to determine
the orientations of crystals in natural and synthetic materials. This approach
has major applications in both material science and geology related to
understanding everything from crystallization processes to microstructures that
record material histories and affect material properties (such as strength and
conductivity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The previous three meetings of this type
were held in the U.S. and occurred in May 2008 and May 2010 at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and in June 2012 at Carnegie Mellon. All were extremely
successful, where participation grew from ~100 to ~165. The most recent workshop
brought together 40 students, over 100 professionals, and 7-12 vendors to
exchange information and experiences involving the EBSD technique. We will
repeat the format with some modifications for EBSD 2014. The first day is an
all-day tutorial aimed at beginners (students and others) who wish to get up to
speed with this technique. In the afternoon, there will be more advanced
tutorials for more experienced users. Throughout the session, attendees will
have the opportunity to see live EBSD demonstrations by all four major EBSD
vendors on CMU instruments. The next two days will consist of invited and
contributed talks spanning various material science and geosciences topics:
materials processing, nuclear materials for energy, high temperature/tectonics,
strain, 3D reconstructions and high performance ceramics. These talks and a
planned poster session will allow significant participant interaction. Students
will particularly benefit from these interactions while also having the
opportunity to present their research via oral or poster presentations. Student
attendance is hoped to be increased to ~45. Since 2008, NSF has supported 99
student scholarships for attendance to this conference series.