* 1439319
* GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Improving understanding of controls on the distributions of selected anthropogenic radionuclides in the Amerasian Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Timothy Kenna, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 398,279.00

In this project, a group of investigators participating in the 2015 U.S.
GEOTRACES Arctic expedition will determine the concentrations of a suite of
anthropogenic (human-made) radioisotopes in the Arctic Ocean. Anthropogenic
radioisotopes are unstable forms of elements that have a human-made origin; they
may leak into the environment as by-products of nuclear weapons testing or
nuclear energy production. In common with other multinational initiatives in the
International GEOTRACES program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions. Results from this
research will help to characterize distinct contaminant sources for
anthropogenic radioisotopes and identify the influence of important mechanisms
that lead to their observed distributions in the Arctic. Researchers will
collaborate with the NSF-funded Polar Learning and Responding Climate Change
Education Partnership in order to develop web-based spatial tools for sharing
results of their work with students and the general public.

Although a significant amount of work has been done in the Arctic, data sets on
radionuclides are entirely lacking in some cases or limited with respect to
particular elements or isotopes of interest including characterization of
different sources, water column, sea ice, and sediments. The U.S. GEOTRACES
Arctic section offers an unprecedented opportunity to study the sources, fate
and transport of anthropogenic radionuclides in the Arctic, a region that has
been heavily impacted by nuclear industrial activities and exhibiting dramatic
and rapid responses to global climate change. Using a comprehensive, multi-
tracer approach, these researchers will determine the concentrations of a suite
of anthropogenic radionuclides, including cesium-137, cesium-134, plutonium-239,
plutonium-240, and neptunium-237 in a variety of different types of samples from
the Arctic. This study will provide information on the horizontal and vertical
distributions of the anthropogenic radionuclides of interest, which will
substantially add to the global data set, constrain the budgets of several
anthropogenic radionuclides through collaboration with European colleagues, and
address not only the transport and fate of these contaminants in the Arctic, but
also provide insight into the dominant processes that affect them. The data will
support efforts in data modeling, which will integrate the dissolved and
particulate anthropogenic radionuclides data on a basin-wide basis, and then
compare and evaluate the contributions from different oceanic processes as well
as the influence of sources of contamination.