* 1439709
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Markets, Mining And Commercialization In The Colonial Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Douglas Smit, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Research into the relationships between markets and states is a pressing issue
for the social sciences, notably in an effort to understand the roots and
ongoing expansion of an increasingly globalized economy. Archaeology is uniquely
suited to provide a deeper historical context to this research, by studying how
goods have been exchanged over the centuries and illuminating the long-term
trajectories of past economic systems. With the support of his advisor, Dr.
Brian Bauer, doctoral candidate Douglas Smit will examine the relationship
between emerging markets, colonial states, and indigenous labor in Colonial Peru
(AD 1572-1824). Specifically, this research will investigate the role of
indigenous labor in the colonial markets of Huancavelica, the largest mercury
mine in the Americas and one of the critical centers of early globalization
between the 16th and 18th centuries. More broadly, this project will build
relationships with descendant indigenous communities to assist their ongoing
application for Huancavelica to be classified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The project will strengthen cross-cultural academic relations through the
inclusion of Peruvian university students, including instruction on advanced
analytical techniques in archaeological science. Results will be published in
English and Spanish, presented at conferences in the United States and Peru, and
presented in a museum exhibition in association with the Peruvian Ministry of
Culture. Consequently, this project presents an excellent opportunity to publish
and initiate interdisciplinary and international dialogues beyond the
traditional bounds of academia, further underscoring the role of archaeological
research as an essential tool for understanding the role of markets in the past
and present.&lt;br/&gt; The central question of this research asks how the
growth of colonial markets over three centuries impacted the social organization
of indigenous laborers and their larger political relationships with the Spanish
colonial state. The investigators will conduct excavations at the colonial ruins
of Santa Barbara, the central settlement for indigenous laborers at the mines of
Huancavelica. Initially, the Spanish colonial state forced indigenous
communities to supply labor for the mines, but as Huancavelica grew as a
commercial center, new economic systems such as wage labor and commodity markets
increasingly dominated the region. As a critical node for trade networks that
extended from Bolivia to the Peruvian Coast, and eventually across the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans, Huancavelica presents an ideal location to compare and
contrast distinct yet overlapping economic systems over an extended time period.
Through the use of advanced analytical techniques, such as laser ablation-
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and portable X-Ray
Florescence (pXRF), this project will uncover past exchange networks by sourcing
ceramics and stone tools. By tracing how household goods were produced, traded,
and eventually acquired by indigenous laborers in the midst of a rapidly
developing market system, this project will reveal the broader impacts of
economic change on social and political relationships.