* 1439366
* RAPID-Improving Students' Mathematical Proficiency through Formative Assessment: Responding to an Urgent Need in the Common Core Era
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Edward Silver, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 05/31/2017
* USD 184,499.00

The products of this project will be useful to national organizations, their
state and local affiliates, and school districts as they plan and offer
mathematics professional development to support the implementation of high
quality mathematics instruction to meet the urgent national need for smart and
effective approaches to support ambitious college and career-ready standards in
mathematics. Directing mathematics instruction toward ambitious learning goals
is intended to address the critically important national priority of improving
students' mathematics achievement. It is widely recognized that successful
attainment of the content and practices contained in any ambitious set of
learning goals, requires well-designed, smartly delivered, professional
development for the nation's mathematics teachers. The information generated
from this project is critical to inform nationwide mathematics professional
development to support the implementation of ambitious mathematics learning
goals. For our nation's teachers and students to attain ambitious learning
goals, it is imperative that formative assessment becomes a more prominent
feature of mathematics instruction as there is an evidence base that suggests
formative assessment positively impacts student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this RAPID project is to
contribute to the national goal of improving students' mathematical proficiency
by providing much-needed information and guidance to mathematics education
practitioners and scholars to support a sharpened focus on formative assessment.
The project produces, analyzes, and makes available to the field timely
information regarding the views and practices of mathematics teacher educators
and professional development specialists regarding formative assessment early in
the enactment of ambitious standards in mathematics. Moreover, it offers a
potentially transformative view of formative assessment as integrated with other
promising mathematics instructional frameworks, approaches and practices that
have already established a strong presence in the mathematics education
community and have influenced the instructional practice of many teacher
educators and teachers. The project will result in: (a) an in-depth analysis of
the responses of mathematics teacher educators and professional development
specialists to a recent survey that probed their practices and beliefs related
to formative assessment and its intertwined relationships with promising
mathematics instructional frameworks, approaches and practices; (b)
collaborative work among mathematics teacher educators and professional
development specialists to elaborate effective ways to focus on formative
assessment in the preparation and continuing education of teachers of
mathematics; and (c) a set of design features and principles, along with
associated activities, intended to undergird creating and sustaining an approach
to mathematics teacher professional development that both attends to critically
important instructional practices of formative assessment and links to other
promising mathematics instructional frameworks, approaches and practices.