* 1439296
* EAGER: Ejector Cooling System with Evaporation/Condensation Compact Condenser
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Hongbin Ma, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 04/30/2017
* USD 175,000.00

1439296&lt;br/&gt;Ma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently nine out of ten power plants
in the United States that generate electricity from steam power require
condensate cooling which accounts for approximately 40% of the nation's total
freshwater withdrawals and approximately 3% of the nation's total freshwater
consumption. In order to significantly reduce or eliminate the use of water for
cooling power plants, the proposed research will demonstrate a new generation of
ejector-based cooling technology that can result in significant reductions or
elimination of the use of water for cooling power plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using low-grade thermal energy of steam, an ejector can
create a supersonic flow and low pressure zone that can be used to produce
cooling. Combining an innovative evaporation/condensation compact condenser,
that utilizes hybrid hydrophobic and hydrophilic condensing surfaces and thin
film evaporation, an innovative concept of ejector-based cooling technology will
be demonstrated. This innovative and potentially transformative system can
significantly reduce or eliminate the use of water and significantly reduce the
condenser size; furthermore, and it can significantly reduce condensation
temperature from 50 °C to 35 °C at an ambient temperature of 30 °C. In addition,
this system can be easily integrated into ongoing cooling
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed cooling system integrates state-of-
the-art technologies of ejector refrigeration powered by a low-grade thermal
energy, hybrid hydrophobic and hydrophilic condensing surfaces, thin film
evaporation, and efficient low-cost oscillating heat pipes. The low-grade
thermal energy of steam is utilized to power the ejector refrigeration system.
Fundamental understanding of supersonic flow in nozzles, mixing chambers, and
diffusers, and its effect on the entrainment in particular, is a missing piece
that has restrained ejector refrigeration from wide-spread application.
Thermodynamic analysis and fluid dynamic modeling of the supersonic flow will be
conducted resulting in a better understanding of ejector performance. A
prototype of 5 kW with optimized nozzle, mixing chamber, and diffuser will be
demonstrated. The effect of a hybrid hydrophobic and hydrophilic condensing
surface on the condensation heat transfer will be conducted in order to provide
an insight into fluid flow and condensation mechanisms. Optimization of thin
film evaporation can further push the evaporating heat transfer limit to the
next level. Low-cost fins embedded with no-wick oscillating heat pipes will be
demonstrated to increase the heat transfer efficiency of the air side. The
resulting ejector-based compact condenser, if successful, will have significant
impact on power plant cooling.