* 1439434
* I-Corps:  Bioconversion of Agricultural Waste Residue into Value-added Manufacturing Chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Laura Simdon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 10/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Stereolithography and 3-D printing are examples of emerging technologies that
are revolutionizing prototyping and manufacturing. These technologies not only
allow consumers to fabricate custom products on demand but also present ways for
the military, NASA, medical providers and others to solve problems in the field.
These rapid fabrication procedures employ polymer materials which are typically
generated from petroleum. As these technologies become more commonplace it will
be important to find alternative and sustainable ways to produce the input
materials required. This I-Corps proposal is designed to analyze the market
potential for manufacturing polymers generated from agricultural waste residues.

This I-Corps proposal is designed to analyze the market potential for
manufacturing polymers generated by microbial biocatalysts from agricultural
waste residues. Research by others and the team has revealed unique metabolic
capabilities of non-traditional yeast. The team has identified pathways that
will allow a percentage of the metabolic flux to be diverted to produce specific
high value polymers. The proposed technology platform, which is built around
abundant monomers and takes advantage of readily available inexpensive
substrates, has potential for cost-effective production of value added chemicals
and materials. The technology developed by the team will expand the
understanding of how environmental resources can be better used.