* 1439963
* Dynamics of Magnetic NanoProbes in Polymer Melts
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 203,576.00

We propose to systematically study the dynamics of nanoparticles in polymer
melts by measuring the response of magnetic nanoprobes (MNPs) to oscillating
magnetic fields. The effects of nanoparticle core size, graft molecular weight,
graft density, melt molecular weight, melt polymer radius of gyration, and melt
entanglement length will be elucidated. These experiments will provide
definitive tests of various theories advanced in the literature regarding the
dynamics of small particles in polymer melts. Methods will be developed to
produce MNPs consisting of cobalt ferrite nanoparticles in a silica matrix, with
select able core size in the 10-500 nm range, narrow size distribution, grafted
polymers of selectable molecular weight and graft density, and permanent
embedded dipoles such that the nanoparticles respond to oscil lating magnetic
fields by physical rotation. MNPs will be characterized through a combination of
scanning and transmission electron microscopy, dynamic light scattering, and
SQUID magnetometry. The MNPs will then be dispersed in polymer melts of
poly(isobutylene), poly(dimethyl siloxane), and poly(ethylene glycol) and the
stability of the MNPs in these melts will be studied. Stable suspensions will be
used for AC susceptibility measurements, in which an oscillating magnetic field
is applied and the response of the magnetic nanoparticles provides a direct
measurement of the rotational diffusion coefficient of the nano-particles. This
in turn will allow us to calculate the rotational drag on the particles and
hence the so called nanoviscosity, which will be systematically compared to the
macroviscosity obtained through rheological measurements. By studying the effect
of MNP size, graft molecular weight, and graft density on the critical melt
molecular weight for which the nanoviscosity and macroviscosity diverge we will
determine their effect on the dynamics of the nanoparticles in polymer melts,
with particular emphasis on the phenomena of breakdown of the Stokes Einstein
relation and dewetting of the melt polymer from the graft polymer. These
experiments will be complemented by measurements of the translational diffusion
coefficient of fluorescent MNPs in polymer melts, using the technique of
Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP). Comparing results for
rotational and translational diffusion of the nanoparticles will provide deeper
insight into the dynamics of nanoparticles in polymer melts. Contrast matched
Small Angle Neutron Scattering (SANS) will be applied to directly observe if the
melt polymer dewets the polymer grafted to the nanoparticles, and this will be
correlated to the measurements of nanoparticle dynamics. Education and outreach
activities are aimed at increasing participation of underrepresented groups in
Science and Engineering and disseminating the results of the proposed research
to a wide audience. Pre-college Hispanic students will be motivated to pursue
science and engineering degrees through mentoring of Middle and High School
Materials Science and Engineering clubs. The PI will visit universities with
high proportions of Hispanic students and meet with members of their Society of
Hispanic Professional Engineers student chapters to motivate them to pursue
advanced degrees in engineering and careers in research and academia. Web based
educational modules on nanoparticles and complex fluids will be developed and
widely disseminated through the NanoHub.

Intellectual Merit:

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity lies primarily in the
transformative potential of the proposed AC susceptibility measurements using
MNPs to provide new and unique insight into the rotational dynamics of
nanoparticles in complex fluids. In particular, the proposed systematic
experiments will elucidate the dynamics of bare and polymer grafted
nanoparticles in polymer melts. Additionally, methods will be developed to
produce composite nanoparticles consisting of iron oxide cores in a silica
matrix, with selectable size and grafted polymers. Such particles could find
applications beyond the specific research tasks proposed here, such as in
similar nanoviscosity measurements in other complex fluids, or in the biomedical
field as MRI contrast agents or in the treatment of cancer through hyperthermia
induced by magnetic nanoparticles in oscillating magnetic fields.

Broader Impact: By carrying out the proposed research at the UPRM, the
participation and education of students from underrepresented groups will be
significantly enhanced. The Chemical Engineering Department at UPRM serves over
650 Hispanic undergraduate students, 70% of which are female. The department is
also developing capacity to become a significant contributor of Hispanic PhDs in
the USA. This project will support 2 graduate students and 46 undergraduate
students, most likely of Hispanic origin, who will participate in exciting,
transformative research with nanoparticles and complex fluids. By partnering
with the Science on Wheels Educational Center and the NSF funded Wisconsin
Puerto Rico Partnership for Research and Education in Materials and
Nanotechnology Center for Biomedical and Energy Driven Systems and Applications
at UPRM the proposed K-12 outreach activities will reach thousands of Hispanic
pre-college students. The project will also impact Hispanic engineering college
students throughout the nation through the proposed visits to student chapters
of the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers.