* 1439719
* I/UCRC Planning Grant:  Computing and Genomics - An Essential Partnership for Biology Breakthroughs
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2015
* USD 16,258.00

The proposed ?I/UCRC for Computing and Genomics - An Essential Partnership for
Biology Breakthroughs? proposed by the U. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the
U. of Chicago, and Mayo Clinic will enhance the research, education, and
entrepreneurship while performing the important technology transfer by bringing
together an interdisciplinary team of industry partners from computer systems,
health care/pharmaceuticals, and life sciences working in collaboration with
genomic experts to address the colossal big-data challenge. The application of
genomics across the life sciences industry is currently challenged by an
inadequate ability to generate, interpret, and apply genomic data quickly and
accurately for a wide variety of applications. One challenge has been that of
integrating thought and market leaders across what had historically been
orthogonal industries: those involved with computer sciences, and those involved
with biological sciences. With the advent of Next Generation Sequencing
technology, those industries are now interdependent and have a critical need to
synthesize and coordinate activities at the interface of computing and genomics.
The participating sites propose to establish a collaborative environment that
improves the applicability, timeliness, efficiency, and accuracy of the
computational infrastructure to address the pressing genome-based challenges.
The CompGen consortium?s vision is to engineer and optimize computing systems
needed by industry for genome analysis.

The CompGen Center will address the experimental process for genomic data. A
variety of questions on health and social problems will be addressable, enabling
much needed biological and healthcare breakthroughs. Outcomes will enrich
research infrastructure, develop next generation of leaders in engineering and
science, improve the quality of workforce, and involve international partners.
Collaborations will produce artifacts such as new algorithms, optimizations, and
statistical models, in turn driving the design of the computing enterprise. The
goal is to generalize those artifacts to drive the design and evaluation of
computational models and hardware/software co-designed architectures, tightly
coupled with new memory and computing technologies for scalability and accuracy.