* 1439980
* Collaborative Research: A Search for the Electric Dipole Moment of the Neutron
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Bradley Filippone, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 11/30/2019
* USD 2,331,500.00

At the high energy frontier in particle physics there are several key,
unanswered questions. As yet undiscovered, more massive particles could explain
a number of these mysteries. For example, in the universe today, there is much
more ordinary matter than antimatter. However, no mechanism of known particle
interactions can explain how the universe evolved from the matter-antimatter
balance at the time of the Big Bang to the present, highly unbalanced,
situation. By making precision measurements, it is possible to detect the echoes
of such massive particles, common at the time of the Big Bang, in quantities
like the electric dipole moment of the neutron, which just reflects the
separation of the neutron's composite positive and negative charges. In addition
to advancing our knowledge in particle physics and cosmology, and generating
technological progress, this experiment will involve post-doctoral scholars,
graduate and undergraduate students as an essential part, affording the young
researchers exceptional opportunities to advance their education and training in
a forefront area of nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The neutron electric dipole moment (nEDM) is an explicitly
time-reversal-violating observable that has played an important role in
descriptions of elementary particle physics; measured upper limits continue to
limit extensions of prevailing models. For example, at present, supersymmetry
(SUSY) predicts a value of roughly 10^-25 e-cm for a SUSY mass scale of 1
Teraelectronvolt and maximal mixing. It is clear that measurements at the scale
of 10^-28 e-cm as proposed here will provide important input at combinations of
very high mass scales and small mixing angles. The neutron EDM is also important
for understanding the general pattern of T-(CP-) violation and the cause of the
observed asymmetry of matter and antimatter in the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experiment, to be performed at the
Fundamental Neutron Physics Beamline of the Spallation Neutron Source at ORNL,
is based on a technique that is qualitatively different from the strategies
adopted in previous measurements. The basic technique in the present experiment
involves formation of a three-component fluid of polarized neutrons and Helium-3
atoms dissolved in a bath of superfluid Helium-4 at a temperature T ~ 0.5 K. The
ultracold neutrons in this volume, trapped in a plastic measurement cell, are
produced by the collision of 8.9 Ã…ngstrom neutrons with the phonons of the
superfluid. The neutron and Helium-3 magnetic dipoles precess in the plane
perpendicular to an applied external magnetic field, B0 in a traditional Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance arrangement. The nEDM, dn, is determined by measuring the
neutron precession frequency in the presence of a strong electric field, E0.
Application of the electric field parallel (antiparallel) to B0 changes the
Larmor precession frequency, nu, in proportion to dn. With B0 = 30 milliGauss
and E0 = 50 kiloVolt/cm, nu = 88 Hertz and the frequency shift is 4.8 nanoHertz
for an EDM of 10^-28 e-cm. Operationally, the neutron precession frequency is
measured relative to that of the Helium-3 by taking advantage of the strongly
spin dependent nuclear capture reaction and detecting the recoiling proton and
triton via scintillation produced in the liquid Helium-4. The polarized Helium-3
atoms (in the same volume as the neutrons) also comprise a co-magnetometer
(since any EDM of the Helium-3 atoms is suppressed by its atomic electrons);
their precession is observed directly using SQUIDS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides important training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students and postdocs as they participate in forefront physics research that
stretches across areas including low temperature, atomic, nuclear and particle
physics. The results of the experiment potentially impact particle physics as
well as astrophysics and cosmology. Some technological developments are expected
as several SBIR and STTR grants related to the experimental apparatus have been
awarded to date.