* 1439439
* I-Corps:  Hardening Programs Against Cyber Attacks
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Michael Franz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses cyber security from a programming language perspective.
Of the five most used programming languages today, three (including the most
used language C) lead to programs that are highly susceptible to cyber-attacks.
The goal is to establish software diversity as a viable cyber defense approach,
to be used in concert with other defenses. Commercializing this team's research
may have the effect of changing both the way that software is distributed as
well as many of the assumptions and models underlying current threats to
deployed software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team?s 'multi-compiler approach'
may provide solutions for many security problems. The multi-compiler approach
provides automatic hardening of binaries before they are distributed to end
users. The use of hardened binaries does not remove the need to fix security
vulnerabilities by patching the source code and distributing software. However,
it makes it substantially harder for attackers to exploit vulnerabilities. This
solution may appeal to a broad spectrum of customers: software vendors as well
as large institutions such as the US government. This team's project aims to
commercialize automated software diversification mechanisms, providing a
solution that can scale both to potentially millions of users (i.e., millions of
distinctly different software versions) as well as very large programs,
including even operating systems. To this end, they plan to provide the
variation mechanism through a "cloud computing" service in which subsequent
requesters download different unique variants of the same software, rather than
identical binaries. In addition, this team is also working on making their
solution almost completely transparent to developers by "normalizing" error
reports that flow back from users. .