* 1439614
* II-EN: Device and Display Ecologies
* CSE,CNS
* 01/02/2014,01/31/2018
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2018
* USD 337,512.00

As new personal devices of various form factors (from smart phones to laptop
computers) proliferate, we believe that their potential to support human
learning, activity, and information access can be fully realized only when these
devices function together with a broader technology environment and with each
other. We envision the day when such technology envelops society, and in concert
empower individuals to function more effectively both individually and as
members of society. In essence the projected infra-structure will allow us to
investigate this future.

In a sense, technologically savvy users already construct ecologies for
themselves in an ad hoc manner. We ensure that hand-held devices we carry will
synchronize with our larger devices like laptops and desktops. We ensure data
exchange among the various applications we use, and we create personal and group
workflows among our computational environments. We keep appropriate adaptors so
that our portable devices have access to the projection screens or group
displays in our work environment. We learn the interaction that is needed on
each platform to ensure cross-platform interactivity. Finally, we organize our
work and life around these interoperations ? synching our iPods and iPads
periodically, selecting applications on each platform to support the way we work
and our lifestyle as a whole. The challenge of this proposal is to remove the ad
hoc nature of the construction of such one-of-a-kind ecologies.

Our proposed infrastructure comprises two related subgroups. First, we propose a
Rapid Prototyping Laboratory (RPL) where faculty and students can develop new
devices to populate the ecologies. The RPL will support electronic and single-
board-computer designs, printed-circuit board prototyping, and 3D object
construction. Second, we will construct the larger environment to be populated
by these devices. This environment includes a variety of large to personal
display technologies and a set of tracking technologies to enable devices to
situate themselves in space.

We have assembled two sets of research projects that benefit from this
infrastructure. First we inves-tigate how our envisioned ecologies may be
realized. We will study how this myriad of technologies may interoperate to give
the user a set of consistent expectations of interaction across devices and
display environments. We shall also investigate HCI methodologies for humans to
function within the 3D world populated by devices and displays. Our second set
of projects investigates various uses of our envi-sioned ecologies. Extending
the ecology analogy, each use scenario furnishes a habitat that contextual-izes
the ecologies within it. We advance a set of research areas: education and
learning; universal access; insight formation; smart homes; usable security;
mediated social interaction; and electronic-textiles to furnish such contexts
where technology-interoperation and user-interaction may be explored.

An important aspect of this project is to encourage a kind of computational
thinking among our re-searchers and students that span the digital and physical
environment. As such our proposed infrastruc-ture will facilitate a broad
interdisciplinary research. We will be using the infrastructure in the classes
we teach bringing graduate students, undergraduates, and individuals from
underrepresented populations into our research programs.