* 1439490
* Regulation of Gene Expression by the Yeast Cap Binding Complex:  Coordinating Transcription and RNA Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/31/2013,02/28/2017
* Tracy Johnson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2017
* USD 283,981.00

Intellectual Merit. Proper expression of genetic information is crucial to every
function performed by the cell. One of the first steps in gene expression is the
synthesis of a messenger RNA molecule from its DNA template. This messenger RNA
(mRNA) must be extensively processed in order for this molecule to be exported
from the cell nucleus and translated to make the proteins that sustain the
functions of the cell. As part of its "processing" the RNA must be modified at
both of its ends to ensure its stability and export. Furthermore, noncoding
sequences that interrupt the protein-coding sequence of the RNA must be removed
through the process of mRNA splicing. Each step in gene expression--from the
synthesis of messenger RNAs to their extensive processing--is a potential target
of regulation. Although each of these regulatory steps has been historically
studied as a biochemically distinct reaction, in recent years it has become
clear that these processes are highly interconnected and coordinated, and that
this coordination is an essential feature of gene regulation. However,
identifying and characterizing the functions of the factors that coordinate
these reactions has remained a difficult challenge. The research described here
highlights the unexpected role for the yeast cap binding complex (CBC), a
protein complex that binds to the 5' end of the mRNA and has well-characterized
roles in RNA splicing and RNA processing, in tight control of RNA synthesis.
This work explores the extensive network of interactions that are orchestrated
by the cap binding complex and elucidates the mechanisms by which the CBC acts
to regulate RNA synthesis and coordinate RNA synthesis with the various other
steps of gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Educational
activities associated with this project focus on directed approaches to increase
access and opportunities for students from groups traditionally underrepresented
in the sciences. Using skills and experiences acquired from a broad repertoire
of previous education and outreach endeavors, this educational plan has two main
goals. First, strategies will be developed for sustained engagement with local
high schools with high populations of underrepresented minority students. These
specific outreach activities expose students to mentored research opportunities
and assist teachers in developing curricula that integrate the high school
curriculum with cutting-edge gene expression research. Furthermore, they
establish mechanisms to facilitate these students' transitions to undergraduate
studies and, ultimately, to careers in the biological sciences. The second goal
is to develop research opportunities for minority undergraduates at University
of California-San Diego that will broaden participation of these
underrepresented groups in the sciences.