* 1439051
* Reciprocal Organizational Architecture of Human Brain Function
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Tianming Liu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 10/31/2018
* USD 297,822.00

Understanding how different brain regions work together is fundamental to the
understanding of brain functions in both health and diseases. Segregation and
integration is a general principle of the brain's functional architecture. The
diverse range of human brain functions emerges from and is realized by the
interaction of multiple concurrent neural processes, each of which is spatially
distributed across specific structural substrate of brain areas. A fundamental
question in cognitive neuroscience is how to robustly and faithfully reconstruct
concurrent functional networks from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data and quantitatively measure their network-level interactions. Dr. Tianming
Liu of University of Georgia will develop novel computational methods to
investigate how different brain regions form distinctive networks. Using the
publicly available Human Connectome Project (HCP) fMRI datasets, Dr. Liu will
not only develop and evaluate a novel theory of organizational architecture to
explain human brain function but also produce a set of freely available software
tools for analyzing brain network activity. Through this project, Dr. Liu will
integrate research into educational and outreach activities. The novel
educational materials generated from this project will contribute to cultivate
the next generation of scientists.

Dr. Liu plans to employ innovative dictionary learning methods to sparsely
represent whole-brain fMRI signals, where the time series of each over-complete
basis dictionary represents the functional activities of a brain network and its
corresponding reference weight vector stands for the spatial map of this brain
network. This project aims to (1) identify and characterize a large number of
reproducible and robust functional networks, including both task-evoked and
resting state networks, across the HCP data; (2) explore to what extent these
task-evoked and resting state brain networks overlap spatially with each other;
(3) test the hypothesis that cognitive brain functions are realized by hybrid
combinations of reciprocally localized highly-heterogamous regions and highly-
specialized regions. Collectively, this project will contribute novel tools and
insights for understanding intra- and inter-network interactions, which are
expected to benefit a variety of cognitive neuroscience and neural engineering
studies.