* 1440786
* CC*IIE Campus Design: Advancing Research at Carleton College via 10Gbps Upgrade to the Northern Lights GigaPOP and Implementation of a Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Deborah Gross, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 349,897.00

This project broadly improves Carleton's cyberinfrastructure design and
integration to ensure system performance and reliability, including rate and
security of data transfer, in support of computational science. Project goals
include (1) Upgrading campus Internet2 connection to the Northern Lights GigaPOP
to a speed of 10Gbps; (2) Designing and building a prototype Science DMZ to
provide immediate support for researchers constrained by the current limitations
of the campus building and data infrastructures; (3) Blending the experience
gained from the prototype Science DMZ with the ongoing work of the Carleton
Science Planning Group to formulate the most effective plan for end-to-end
research connectivity, with attention to proposed expansion and remodeling of
campus science facilities; (4) Leveraging the knowledge and experience gained by
the faculty and staff in this process into the ongoing collaboration efforts to
facilitate shared research nationally and internationally. The project's design
and implementation is based on best practices developed by successful NSF-funded
projects, with particular focus on design of a Science DMZ to meet the needs of
researchers at a research-oriented liberal arts college. The design and
implementation of the project improves high bandwidth connections accessible to
end-users in order to improve network performance and predictability for a wide
range of applications. The project addresses specific cyberinfrastructure
limitations that impede faculty research with external research partners.
Project leaders will present findings regarding design challenges and
innovations at national workshops, meetings, and conferences in order to advance
small-institution understanding of SDN across wide-area and campus
cyberinfrastructure.