* 1440415
* Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 22,612,265.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award DMS 1440415, Principal Investigator Russell E.
Caflisch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Institute for Pure
and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) is to foster the interaction of mathematics with
a broad range of science and technology, to build new interdisciplinary research
communities, to promote mathematical innovation, and to engage and transform the
world through mathematics. Mathematics is an essential ingredient in much of
current technology, including internet search engines, medical imaging such as
magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography, voice recognition systems,
DNA sequencing methods, and many others. Future developments -- such as smart
electrical grids, personalized medicine, and new forms of social networking --
will require further mathematical innovation. IPAM's overall goal is to foster
the interaction of mathematicians with doctors, engineers, physical scientists,
social scientists, and humanists to enable such future technological and social
progress.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;IPAM fulfills its mission through workshops and
long programs that connect mathematics and other disciplines or multiple areas
of mathematics. These activities bring in thousands of visitors annually from
academia, government, and industry. IPAM also has programs that encourage the
inclusion of women and members of minorities underrepresented in the mathematics
community, that serve specific needs of government agencies, and that inform the
public about the excitement of modern mathematics and the important
contributions that have come to society through mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through these activities, IPAM serves the national interest. IPAM
promotes the progress of science by stimulating the mathematical developments
that are needed for this progress; advances the national health, prosperity, and
welfare through programs that address challenges such as disease modeling,
systemic financial risk assessment, and traffic control; and helps to secure the
national defense through programs that address defense requirements such as
advanced radar, computer-aided decision making, and new communication
modalities.