* 1440655
* Data-Driven Networking Infrastructure: The Development of Cyberinfrastructure to Support Scientific and Engineering Research at West Virginia University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* John Campbell, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 486,897.00

West Virginia University (WVU) is, with the support of the National Science
Foundation's Campus Cyberinfrastructure - Infrastructure, Innovation and
Engineering program, deploying a new campus cyberinfrastructure architecture.
This new architecture is specifically designed to support, foster and advance
scientific and engineering research and discovery through the implementation of
a high performance research data networking infrastructure. This project
capitalizes on previous investments in a high performance campus network
backbone and creates high performance end-to-end connectivity between the campus
core and critical scientific and engineering research and education assets. More
specifically, the WVU project team is 1) creating high speed connectivity
between the campus network core and its Genomics Core research facility, the
astrophysics analysis center, its neuroscience research program, and the
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) Education Lab; 2) implementing
a science DMZ (a science "express lane") within the campus network for high
performance science application data transfers; and 3) establishing a data
transfer node to serve as a high performance end-point for large scale transfers
of scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will result in high
performance end-to-end bandwidth connecting these research assets to the campus
network backbone, and in turn, connecting them to the research community and
other resources across campus and to the international research and education
network infrastructure. This will enable new levels of data-driven science that
have been difficult if not infeasible to carry out at WVU.