* 1440580
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Ship-based Technical Support in the Arctic (CY2014-2018): Science Services for Research onboard USCGC Healy
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2024
* James Swift, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,269,060.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Oregon State University propose to
support technical services for research on the U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Healy.
Healy is a research icebreaker operated by USCG in collaboration with NSF and
other agencies that fund research in the Arctic. SIO and OSU will provide or
coordinate the long-term maintenance and improvements to science systems
onboard. They will provide technicians to operate scientific instruments and
data systems on the Healy. They will arrange the use of items from the shared-
use pools of science vans, coring equipment and other pooled equipment that is
part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). SIO
will provide one full-time person to act as a cruise planner and to coordinate
the research needs for all cruises on Healy. The awardee will maintain updated
content on the website http://icefloe.net. As needed the awardees will also
assist the Arctic Sciences Section with coordinating science cruises on other
national icebreakers to ensure safe and efficient operations. SIO and OSU will
provide many coordination services including working with the USCG to perform
upgrades to the ship for science and working with USCG and other ships operating
in the Arctic to coordinate bathymetric mapping to ensure the most efficient and
complete coverage is obtained each year to contribute to a more complete mapping
of the Arctic Ocean, which is largely uncharted. Pending availability of funds,
several system upgrades may be funded including the addition of a shallow-water
multi-beam sonar for collecting bathymetric data in parallel with the existing
multi-beam system that performs best in deep water. Each year of this five-year
award will be funded based on the planned work at the start of each Arctic field
season.