* 1440783
* CC*IIE Engineer: A Model for Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Research and Education Facilitators
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Amy McGovern, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal describes facilitation activities for a Cyberinfrastructure (CI)
Engineer at the University of Oklahoma (OU). Building on the success of recent
leadership activities at OU in CI and leveraging related activities elsewhere in
the country in research and educational facilitation in campus-based
computational research support, this project addresses: Data-Intensive Research
Facilitation, including utilizing Software Defined Networking across OU's
research network; leading and facilitating adoption of a campus level
engineering engagement model and approach across Oklahoma; a national training
regime, providing a "virtual residency" program for campus CI engineers and
facilitators; and Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU), fostering
undergraduate research at OU by integrating REU sites and supplements into STEM
research, including by all research teams on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been designed to enable
transformative research across STEM disciplines, including weather prediction
(real time forecasting, warn on-forecast and data mining of forecasts), high
energy physics, weather radar, ecological informatics, and research on advanced
networking, supporting over 200 researchers (undergraduate and graduate
students, postdocs, staff and faculty).