* 1440788
* SI2-SSE: Enhancement and Support of DMTCP for Adaptive, Extensible Checkpoint-Restart
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gene Cooperman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 514,427.00

Society's increasingly complex cyberinfrastructure creates a concern for
software robustness and reliability. Yet, this same complex infrastructure is
threatening the continued use of fault tolerance. Consider when a single
application or hardware device crashes. Today, in order to resume that
application from the point where it crashed, one must also consider the complex
subsystem to which it belongs. While in the past, many developers would write
application-specific code to support fault tolerance for a single application,
this strategy is no longer feasible when restarting the many inter-connected
applications of a complex subsystem. This project will support a plugin
architecture for transparent checkpoint-restart. Transparency implies that the
software developer does not need to write any application-specific code. The
plugin architecture implies that each software developer writes the necessary
plugins only once. Each plugin takes responsibility for resuming any interrupted
sessions for just one particular component. At a higher level, the checkpoint-
restart system employs an ensemble of autonomous plugins operating on all of the
applications of a complex subsystem, without any need for application-specific
code.

The plugin architecture is part of a more general approach called process
virtualization, in which all subsystems external to a process are virtualized.
It will be built on top of the DMTCP checkpoint-restart system. One simple
example of process virtualization is virtualization of ids. A plugin maintains a
virtualization table and arranges for the application code of the process to see
only virtual ids, while the outside world sees the real id. Any system calls and
library calls using this real id are extended to translate between real and
virtual id. On restart, the real ids are updated with the latest value, and the
process memory remains unmodified, since it contains only virtual ids. Other
techniques employing process virtualization include shadow device drivers,
record-replay logs, and protocol virtualization. Some targets of the research
include transparent checkpoint-restart support for the InfiniBand network, for
programmable GPUs (including shaders), for networks of virtual machines, for big
data systems such as Hadoop, and for mobile computing platforms such as Android.