* 1440547
* SI2-SSE: Genetic Algorithm Software Package for Prediction of Novel Two-Dimensional Materials and Surface Reconstructions
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Richard Hennig, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2018
* USD 344,696.00

The ability to control structure and composition at the nanoscale has introduced
exciting scientific and technological opportunities. Advances in the creation of
nanomaterials such as single-layer materials and nanocrystals have led to
improved understanding of basic structure-property relationships that, in turn,
have enabled impressive progress in a broad range of nanotechnologies with
applications for energy storage, catalysis and electronic devices. Yet,
significant knowledge gaps persist in what single-layer materials could be
synthesized and in our understanding of the nature of the surfaces of
nanocrystals, particularly in the complex environment of solvents and ligands.
The discovery of potentially stable novel single-layer materials and the
prediction of nanocrystal surface structures are arguably among the most
critical aspects of nanoscale materials. This research will provide the
computational tools for the detailed prediction of the structure of two-
dimensional materials and nanostructure surfaces in complex environments. This
will impact the development and the design of novel nanomaterials with
properties optimized for applications ranging from catalyst for chemical
reactions, to energy conversion materials, to low-power and high-speed
electronic devices. Progress in the field requires better computational methods
for structure prediction. This project will (i) transform the Genetic Algorithm
for Structure Prediction (GASP) software package developed by the PI into a
sustainable scientific tool, (ii) extend its functionality to 2D materials and
materials interfaces, and (iii) increase its performance by coupling to
surrogate energy models that are optimized on the fly. These complementary goals
will be achieved through expansion of the developer and user base, transition to
portable software interfaces and data structures, and the addition of modular
algorithms for functionality and performance enhancements. To enhance the
functionality, the GASP algorithms will be extended to two two-dimensional
materials and materials surfaces with adsorbates and ligands. To enhance the
performance of the genetic algorithm, the optimization approach will be coupled
to surrogate energy models such as machine-learning techniques and empirical
energy models that are optimized on the fly. The publication of user tutorials,
and documentation on the data structures and software interfaces will enhance
the GASP codes overall utility, increase the user and developer base, and enable
further extension to other data-mining and structure prediction approaches. The
students involved in this project will receive extensive training and experience
in algorithm development, scientific computation, and structure/property
determination of complex nanomaterials. As part of the education and outreach
component of the project, the PI will develop a course module on Materials
Structure Predictions and widely distribute it. A weeklong workshop for students
and postdocs in the third year of the project on Materials Discovery and Design
will broaden the research?s impact beyond the creation of new software and the
discovery of novel single-layer materials and nanocrystal surface and ligand
configurations.