* 1440558
* Collaborative Research: Reassessing Primate Origins through Digital Investigation of Eocene Fossils from the Bridger Basin, Wyoming
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Bloch, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 139,503.00

Fossil skeletons of the first primates are extraordinarily rare, limiting our
understanding of their ecology, anatomy, and evolution. Despite their rarity and
central importance to understanding the initial steps in the biological
radiation that ultimately includes humans, the most completely known skeletons
from North America remain uncollected and unstudied, with museum specimens
largely still entombed in rock and in need of preparation. To address this
problem, the research team will 'virtually' extract the most complete primate
skeletons yet known from the Eocene (48 million years old) of North America
using 3D imaging technology for museum samples and newly collected specimens
from the Bridger Basin, Wyoming. These three-dimensional images provide uniquely
informative quantitative morphometric data that will be analyzed in the context
of a massive comparative 3D digital dataset of fossil and extant primate
specimens, utilizing sophisticated statistical and mathematical techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is generally accepted that these early primates
were most similar to the lemurs of Madagascar among living primates, preliminary
analyses have begun to suggest that this perspective is not entirely accurate.
Because of their completeness, Bridger skeletons provide evidence allowing
critical tests of these ideas, transforming understanding of early primate
evolution through detailed analyses of their anatomy in evolutionary context.
Additionally, new evidence on the anatomy of early primates will allow tests of
competing phylogenetic hypotheses about whether these Eocene primates are more
closely related to anthropoids (monkeys, apes, and humans), strepsirrhines
(lemurs, lorises, and galagos), or perhaps represent a more primitive branch of
the primate tree. Finally, Bridger skeletons will provide the first detailed
characterization of locomotor and positional behavior in these specimens,
clarifying this aspect of the adaptive context for the origin and early
evolution of primates. Examining the anatomy of the new skeletons in
evolutionary context will test the idea that several early primate lineages may
have independently evolved specialized acrobatic leaping, previously considered
to be a uniting characteristic of primates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes the involvement of five undergraduate students; a postdoctoral scholar;
hosting of lab and field workshops involving K-12 educators, fossil clubs, and
local museums; and posting of digital atlases of skeletons on a publicly
accessible website (www.morphosource.org). MorphoSource allows both researchers
and the public to study every detail of each skeleton (including in situ bone
positions) processed by the investigators. A digital atlas of 3D data and other
related images will be published, providing both improved archival documentation
and enhancing participation by all interested individuals in the discovery
process. In this aspect, the project can be seen as a model for future research
in its transparency through exhaustive, open-access documentation of research
materials.