* 1440784
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Data Driven Expansion at The University of South Alabama
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Alec Yasinsac, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 497,307.00

The project's purpose is to expand the University of South Alabama
Cyberinfrastructure to improve collaborative research capability between
scientists in the Mitchell Cancer Institute and the School of Computing.
Infrastructure improvements are necessary to handle the high volume data
transfer required for large databases and imagery data that form the core of
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research enabled by these campus network
improvements includes investigations into the degree to which descriptive data
driven analysis methods can discover relationships among groups of cancer
mutations across user-defined tumor groupings. Because the traditional hallmarks
of cancer commonly arise in diverse forms of cancer, mutational interplay
between seemingly unrelated genes must exist and must play a role in fine tuning
tumor behavior to its environment. By employing a data driven approach, where
each tumor genome is viewed as an independent evolution experiment, it is
possible to evaluate the unique mutational signatures composed predominately of
passenger mutations, in addition to the traditional focus on driver mutations.
This project increases underlying data networking capacity by a factor of 10,
and results in benefits to research and education across the University of South
Alabama by transforming the campus core network to a high performance 10Gbps
network.