* 1440450
* CC*IIE Region: Transforming a Regional Network and the Regional Community to Serve Diverse and Emerging Research Needs
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Pankaj Shah, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

With the ever-increasing cyberinfrastructure needs of science in an era of "Big
Data", many campuses and regional networks are ill prepared to deal with the
requirements researchers need to carry out their work. Some solid progress has
been made in areas of campus infrastructure, but all too often these efforts
fall short. In general, backbone networks at both the regional and national
levels are competently run. However, frequently it is the case that many hours
of troubleshooting across the campus, regional and national networks are
required to get good performance and often require many hours of work by
multiple staffs at multiple organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two
issues at the regional network level being addressed. The first issue is
knowledge exchange and best practice. Having staff at each layer of the campus,
regional and national layer equipped with correct skill sets and resources to
call upon for resolution is paramount. In the latter case, the resources include
the "human network", specifically,a network of individuals at the campus and
regional level to function collaboratively. Secondly, having a widely deployed
and easily accessible monitoring and measurement infrastructure is required for
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OARnet is convening a forum for regional
stakeholders to articulate needs, solutions and best practices via a workshop
series. Secondly, OARnet is providing technical engagement and knowledge
exchange directly with stakeholders and is developing the "human network" of
support amongst the stakeholders. Thirdly OARnet is deploying perfSonar widely
throughout the Ohio Academic Resources Network (OARnet) infrastructure, for
highly granular data collection.