* 1440166
* EAGER: Science in the Time of Big Data
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Kris Havstad, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 289,696.00

The scientific community is awash in 'big data' but few practicing ecologists
use these data to answer important ecological questions. They rely instead on
the traditional approach of collecting new, experimental data focused on
particular species, habitats, or problems. In addition, the data-intensive
computational methods commonly needed to analyze big datasets are not easily
accessible to most researchers. This high-risk, high-reward project could
dramatically alter both the ways in which ecologists address questions and the
types of questions that they tackle. It therefore represents a major
contribution to NSF's efforts to extend ecological research in new directions to
provide answers to more complex questions.

A knowledge-driven, open access system that 'learns' and becomes more efficient
and easier to use as data streams increase in variety and size is needed for
timely scientific progress in an era of big data. This approach is centered on
establishing linkages between databases and hypothesis-based inquiry that result
in the derivation of new or refined hypotheses as a result of improved access to
dynamic databases. The investigators recently implemented a hypothesis-driven,
process-based analytical methodology that was conceptually integrated with a
data-intensive machine learning approach. This integrated approach allowed them
to use multiple long-term datasets to narrow a diverse suite of mechanistic
explanations to a single, most likely process. This process was then tested by a
short-term experiment that saved time and money and yielded a more definitive
answer than the more traditional approach described above. To further this
approach, this project will test, refine, and automate this new integrative
effort to develop a prototype cyber-infrastructure capable of significantly
advancing the environmental sciences. Open access data, programming scripts, and
derived data products will reduce the time lag for knowledge transfer from an
individual to the research community, likely increase the speed of scientific
progress, and provide a filter and memory for how to deal with large amounts of
data of mixed quality. A postdoctoral researcher will work collaboratively with
computer scientists, ecologists, and eco-informatics experts from three
universities (New Mexico State University, University of Texas El Paso, and
Evergreen College) and one corporation (Microsoft) to develop, test, and
automate this knowledge-learning analytics system. Two workshops will be
organized to test the ability of the system to learn while using diverse
datasets and to introduce the approach to a wide variety of users.