* 1440653
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Capacity and Capability Network Enhancements to Support Data-Driven Research at the University of Arkansas
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2016
* David Merrifield, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2016
* USD 496,948.00

This project upgrades University of Arkansas (UA) campus and shared network
infrastructure provided by the Arkansas Research and Education Optical Network
(ARE ON), which connects institutions of higher education in Arkansas. These
upgrades increase ARE-ON's backbone bandwidth to 100 Gbps between the UA and the
Internet2 point-of-presence (PoP) in Tulsa, OK, provide scalable bandwidth
greater than 10 Gbps to an existing science DMZ at the UA, and create a 10 Gbps
science DMZ at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock (UALR). The result is a
faster, more reliable network connection for the UA and for 35 other ARE-ON
universities, colleges, two-year institutions, and educational affiliates. The
project also provides connectivity to the Internet2 Advanced Layer 2 Service
with support for OpenFlow traffic between ARE-ON members and other Internet2
member institutions, and OpenFlow tagging and traffic management on the UA and
UALR campuses. These upgrades provide needed capacity to meet research needs and
will enable new network services such as dynamically provisioned layer 2
circuits in support of specific data intensive and instrument-related research
collaborations and training programs that will have state, national and
international scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new network capabilities will
enable research in human and agricultural genetics powered by XSEDE computing
resources, the development and characterization of novel materials at the
Institute for Nanoscience and Engineering, and will provide a technical
framework for research, education and training in software defined networking
for the UA and other institutions in the state.