* 1440774
* CC*IIE Region: Leveraging Partnerships Across the Great Plains to Build Advanced Networking and CI Expertise
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Gregory Monaco, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 129,880.00

Major scientific breakthroughs are accomplished by teams of scientists working
together, remotely, and accessing distributed datasets and advanced tools via
the United States and global research networks. As new cyberinfrastructure
technologies emerge to meet the growing needs of the science community, campus
personnel at U.S. institutions must learn and adopt the new technologies for
U.S. scientists to remain competitive. This need extends to smaller colleges and
universities where cutting edge expertise may be less readily
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, the Great Plains Network is
partnering with experts to improve knowledge, expertise and research
cyberinfrastructure at campuses in Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, Oklahoma and
South Dakota. Partners are KanREN, MOREnet, OneNet, Reed Network, Network
Nebraska, Internet2, ESnet, University of Chicago and University of Oklahoma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives include benchmarking and periodically
reassessing progress of campuses in the region toward implementing existing and
emerging cyberinfrastructure technologies, developing and delivering an online
curriculum to improve expertise, creating opportunities for campus participants
to learn from leaders in advanced cyberinfrastructure and network technologies,
providing outreach to campuses and building a community of support and
encouragement for the implementation of new technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project measures progress by growth in the number of
active campus participants across this project's lifespan, growth in the number
of unique campuses participating in the project, participant mastery of advanced
technology concepts covered in training, and an increase in number of campuses
implementing these specific technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
promises to directly benefit scientists in the fields of physics,
bioinformatics, climate modeling, and weather forecasting.