* 1440457
* Student Design Essay Competition "Challenges in the Design of Complex Systems"; Travel Support to ASME IDETC 2014, ASME IDETC 2015, AIAA MAO 2016, and ASME IDETC 2016 Conferences
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Janet Allen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

This award supports the NSF goal to 'achieve excellence in U.S. Science,
mathematics, engineering, and technology education at all levels', and will
'provide opportunities for young people that will attract them to and prepare
them for careers in science, mathematics, and engineering'. Through a student
essay competition, undergraduate and graduate students will be selected to
attend two premier conferences in engineering and systems design. The
competition will be widely advertised through the conference websites of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and the American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and to researchers in engineering design.
Posing the essay assignment as an exercise by an industry employee requires the
students to consider the effect of global competitiveness on engineering design
practices, particularly in light of complex systems. Conference experiences
promote growth in individual students and can also serve to strengthen the
overall research quality of the research at the student's home institution when
this knowledge is shared among their peers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this award is to support undergraduate and graduate student attendance at the
annual ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences (IDETC) and
the AIAA Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization (MAO) Conference. A
secondary objective is to encourage students to think deeply about what
engineering design of complex systems will be like 20-30 years in the future.
Students will communicate their thoughts on this topic in an essay which will be
judged by a distinguished group of engineering design researchers and educators.
Travel funds will be provided for students who are selected through the design
essay competition. A poster session will be organized at the conferences to give
the students an opportunity to interact with researchers and discuss their ideas
on the future of engineering design of complex systems.