* 1440727
* SI2-SSE Collaborative Research: Molecular Simulations of Polymer Nanostructures in the Cloud
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Chunyu Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 349,804.00

The use of polymers, their composites, and nanostructures is growing at a fast
pace, both by displacing traditional materials and by enabling emerging
technologies. Examples range from the all-composite airframe of the Boeing 787
and the new Airbus 350 to wearable electronics. This project aims to develop a
software infrastructure to simulate these materials with atomic resolution and
make these tools universally accessible and useful via on-line computing. These
simulations have the potential to accelerate the development of optimized
material formulations that can benefit society and reduce the associated costs
by combining physical with computational experiments. Making these advanced
tools available for free online simulations and complementing them with
tutorials and educational material will encourage their use in the classroom and
will impact the education of new generations of engineers and scientists
familiar with these powerful tools that will be required to address tomorrow's
challenges.

The objective of this effort is to enable pervasive, reproducible molecular
simulations of polymeric materials using state-of-the-art tools and with
quantified uncertainties building on recent breakthroughs in molecular
simulations, cyber-infrastructure and uncertainty quantification. The framework
will consist of three main components: i) powerful simulation tools for polymer
nano structures including: state-of-the-art molecular builders, a parallel MD
engine with stencils that enable efficient structure relaxation and property
characterization and post-processing codes; ii) a UQ framework to orchestrate
the molecular simulations and propagate uncertainties in input parameters to
predictions and compare the predictions to experimental values; iii) databases
of force fields and molecular structures as well as predicted and experimental
properties. The simulation framework will be deployed via NSF's nanoHUB where
users will be able to run online simulations without downloading or installing
any software while expert users will have the option to download, modify and
contribute to the infrastructure. Usage of and contributions to the software
framework will be facilitated and encouraged via online and in-person user
guides, learning modules and research tutorials.