* 1440504
* North America-East Asia Workshop on Big Data Analytics for Infrastructure and Building Sustainability and Resilience (IBSR) Research Changsha, China - September 19-21, 2014.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Wai Kiong Chong, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2015
* USD 55,000.00

1440504 (Chong). The focus of this workshop is to develop a knowledge framework
and identify research needs for the application of big data analytics on
infrastructure and building sustainability and resilience (IBSR) research. This
is an area related directly to urban sustainability, of high interest in China
due to rapid urbanization, and also in the U.S., since 80% of the U.S.
population now lives in urban regions. The NSF funds will be used to support the
travel and participation costs of the U.S. research delegation to the workshop.
The workshop will develop a platform for attendees to connect with other
researchers from around the world who share similar research interests, and
layout the framework for such research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A website will be
developed in the U.S. after the conference to (a) connect researchers from
around the world and (b) disseminate the discussions, framework, research
interests, and ideas from the workshop. The knowledge framework and research
needs will also be published on the website. Workshop participants (including
the PI) will assist in developing the framework and identifying research needs,
while the PI will be responsible for developing the website in the U.S. and
disseminating the findings gathered from the workshop. The workshop will be held
in conjunction with ICSDEC 2014 (International Conference on Sustainable Design,
Engineering and Construction 2014) at Changsha, Hunan, China between September
19th to 21st, 2014. ICSDEC 2014 will be chaired by Dr. Guangcai Gong, Professor
of the Hunan University, Department of Building Environmental Engineering, Civil
Engineering College. He is also the Head of the Lab of Building Environment at
Hunan University. Dr. Wai Kiong (Oswald) Chong (Arizona State University) and
Dr. Jae Chang (University of Kansas) will be co-chairing the conference. The
workshop will be held in conjunction with the conference, with the conference
chairs being co-chairs for the workshop. This grant is co-funded by NSF's
International Science and Engineering section (ISE), through the ISE Program
Officer Action Fund, as well as the Environmental Sustainability program in the
CBET division of NSF's Engineering Directorate.