* 1440689
* CC*IIE Campus Design: Network Infrastructure for Improved Science Discovery and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Charles Peck, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 347,228.00

This project, "CC*IIE Campus Design: Network Infrastructure for Improved Science
Discovery and Education", provides a robust, responsive cyber-infrastructure
which enables Earlham College science faculty and undergraduate students to
engage more effectively and successfully in scientific discovery and education.
Earlham is upgrading the cyber-infrastructure backbone connections of its entire
Science Complex from 1Gbps to 10Gbps, adding a dedicated network for science
research traffic, and correspondingly upgrading its Internet connection to
I-Light, the regional optical network provider for higher education institutions
in Indiana, providing high-speed access to Internet2. These cyber-infrastructure
improvements remove the limitations that have stifled the effective use of data
and also significantly improve the transfer of large datasets and the
computational research being conducted by STEM faculty using both on-campus and
off-campus resources. Research initially benefiting from this project includes
collection of microbial DNA from local farm fields and soils covered by glaciers
in Iceland, and computational topology calculations to identify potential anti-
cancer drugs and classify protein structures.

Earlham College has a long tradition of undergraduate participation in research,
both collaboratively with faculty and independently, and all science departments
engage students in hands-on research within specific courses in their curricula.
This project expands Earlham's ability to advance undergraduate science
education specifically in the more effective use of computational resources both
on and off campus. It exposes a greater number of undergraduate students to
scientific research and discovery through hands-on research projects with
faculty and through access to scientific resources and applications available
through the research and education networks.