* 1440099
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Using geochemical signatures to evaluate the impact of a recent coal ash spill on trace elements in water and sediments of the Dan River
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Louis Derry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2015
* USD 24,499.00

1440099/1440067&lt;br/&gt;Derry/Schreiber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On February 2,
2014, the third-largest coal ash spill in the Nation occurred at Eden, North
Carolina where a drainage pipe under a 27-acre Duke Energy Dan River Steam Plant
waste pond collapsed, discharging coal ash and millions of gallons of
contaminated water into the Dan River. The Dan River originates in Virginia and
flows into North Carolina and then flows north back into Virginia crossing the
state lines eight times. It eventually flows into the Roanoke River, and into
Lake Kerr then Lake Gaston and eventually into the Albemarle Sound, NC. The
waters serve as a highly used recreation system and as a source of drinking
water for cities from Danville, VA to as far away as Virginia Beach. The toxic
constituents of coal ash include various contaminants from metals such as
arsenic (As), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg) to selenium (Se) along with a suite of
organic compounds. While the element concentrations in impoundment water can
exceed drinking water criteria and aquatic life water quality criteria, less is
known about the fate of trace elements bound to ash in the new biogeochemical
environment of the Dan River. Dissolution and changes in speciation can increase
metal toxicity thus threaten wild life and water usability for years to come. To
answer some of these questions a multidisciplinary approach is necessary. The
proposed work should provide a clearer picture to environmental agencies and
water managers of the extent, transport time scales, and removal processes of
coal combustion residue-derived pollutants in this river
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide unique insight into the
evolution of coal combustion residue-derived contaminants in the basin over
longer time and spatial scales, and at levels that may be considered below
immediate remediation targets but are still important for the overall
biogeochemical function and health of the aquatic ecosystem. The development and
application of novel and independent geochemical tracers for coal combustion
residue input will help remove some of the ambiguity associated with data on
contaminant concentrations, and identify the extent of coal combustion residue
inputs even in the absence of action levels of contaminants. While the initial
focus by the state/federal agencies and other organizations has been on
identifying the levels of contaminants in the coal combustion residue pond
outflow and the river, there are several techniques which allow scientists to
trace the response of the system in time and length scales consistent with the
transport of coal combustion residue to the Kerr Reservoir. This proposed
research will provide tools to track the concentrations of major, minor and
trace elements as well as the stable isotope S-34 (sulfur-34) in water and
sediments in the Dan River in the post-spill period. Because germanium (Ge) is
enriched in coals and should act as a conservative tracer, we expect Ge to be
anomalous and Ge/Si (silicon) ratios to be a unique fingerprint for coal
combustion residue input. It is thought that the As/Ge; (chromium) Cr/Ge and
other trace element/Ge ratios should be a powerful tools for identifying coal
combustion residue-related anomalies in those elements. The stable isotopic
analysis of S-34 in dissolved sulfate will act as a second constraint on the
coal combustion residue input that can be compared to the Ge/Si and trace
element/Ge ratios. This RAPID funding is to provide funds to continue a sampling
and analysis program begun in the immediate aftermath of the spill. Both river
hydrologic process and biogeochemical processes are expected to significantly
modify and attenuate the immediate impacts of the contamination event. It is
vital to establish and continue a regular sampling program in order to assess
the impact of transport and biogeochemical removal on contaminants of concern.