* 1440351
* Earthcube RCN:  iSAmplEs:  The Internet of Samples in the Earth Sciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Yue Cai, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,965.00

Across many Earth Science disciplines, research depends on the availability of
representative samples collected above, at, and beneath Earth?s surface, on the
moon and in space, or generated in experiments. These samples are fundamental
references that are studied to generate new knowledge about the earth and the
entire universe and a deeper understanding of the processes that created and
shaped it, the availability of natural resources and the risk of natural
hazards. Many samples have been collected at great cost and with substantial
difficulty, are rare or unique and irreplaceable. The use of information
technology and the internet to make these samples easily accessible, to ensure
persistent access to relevant sample metadata, to allow unambiguous linking of
the physical objects to the digital data in a distributed data infrastructure,
will have a broad impact across the entire Earth Sciences. It will open new
opportunities to reexamine existing samples in response to new societal issues,
environmental concerns, scientific interpretations, and analytical techniques.
The activities of this coordination network will allow domain scientists,
curators, and computer and information scientists to learn from each other about
the requirements of physical and digital sample and collection management and to
articulate a vision of and a path forward toward an Internet of Samples in the
Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EarthCube Research Coordination Network
iSamplES (Internet of Samples in the Earth Sciences) is intended to advance the
use of innovative cyberinfrastructure to connect physical samples and sample
collections across the Earth Sciences with digital data infrastructures to
revolutionize their utility for science. The ultimate goal of this RCN is to
dramatically improve the discovery, access, sharing, analysis, and curation of
physical samples and the data generated by their study for the benefit of
science and society as part of the EarthCube program. In order to work toward
this objective, the project will help build, grow, and foster domain scientists,
curators of sample repositories and collections, computer and information
scientists, software developers and technology innovators to engage in and
collaborate on defining, articulating, and addressing the needs and challenges
of physical samples as a critical component of digital data and information
infrastructures (theme 1: socialization). The RCN will compile information about
existing resources (technologies, architectures, tools, profiles, workflows)
that facilitate the management of samples, sample collections, and sample-based
data in the field, in the lab, in repositories, in data systems and scientific
publications, and identify critical gaps and needs (theme 2: knowledge
creation). The RCN will recognize and promote best practices and standards for
sample identification, documentation, citation, curation, and sharing across the
entire Earth Science community as a foundation to building a shared cyber-
infrastructure (theme 3: best practices).