* 1440778
* CC*IIE Engineer: Campus CI Engineer in Support of Data-Intensive Science and Knowledge-Sharing Statewide
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Michael Turner, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 399,491.00

This project evolves and sustains human expertise in advanced networking
technologies to support data-driven science applications at the University of
Alabama in Huntsville, and fosters a community of engagement, learning, and
knowledge-sharing for cyberinfrastructure and cybersecurity professionals
throughout Alabama and adjoining states. The campus CI Engineer plans and
maintains the Science DMZ at UAH, identifying and addressing key campus network
engineering and performance challenges, and building both a theoretical and
practical knowledge base to contribute to the regional CI community, for which
the CI Engineer acts as a resource. UAH is hosting a workshop for local, state,
and regional professionals to address the challenges and opportunities inherent
in advanced networking technologies to support data-driven science applications.
Specific workshop sessions cover emerging topics in data networking and security
such as Software Defined Networking (SDN), federated network measurements
including perfSONAR, network tuning, federated identity management (InCommon),
and security and policy development. A regional digital knowledge warehouse
hosted at UAH complements the workshop in supporting the regional community of
practice. This project augments and bridges outstanding activities and
communities of practice elsewhere in the nation. The activities enable data-
driven science of regional, national and international significance, and
significantly augment the regional knowledge base of advanced networking
expertise for the University of Alabama System Regional Optical Network (UASRON)
and Alabama Research and Education Network (AREN), as well as for the entire
University of Alabama system, with whom UAH collaborates via both a statewide
CIO council, and a statewide Cybersecurity Council.