* 1440085
* Extending the Spatiotemporal Scales of Physics-Based Seismic Hazard Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jacobo Bielak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 40,000.00

Earthquake simulations at the spatiotemporal scales required for probabilistic
seismic hazard analysis (PSHA) present some of the toughest computational
challenges in geoscience. PSHA is the scientific basis for many engineering and
social applications: performance-based design, seismic retrofitting, resilience
engineering, insurance-rate setting, disaster preparation and warning, emergency
response, and public education. This project will extend deterministic
earthquake simulations to seismic frequencies of 2 Hz and greater with the goal
of reducing the epistemic uncertainties in physics-based PSHA. The research will
address fundamental scientific problems that limit the scale range in current
representations of source physics, anelasticity, and geologic heterogeneity. The
research will improve the physical representations of earthquake processes and
the deterministic codes for simulating earthquakes, which will benefit
earthquake system science worldwide. The consequent decrease in mean exceedance
probabilities, which could be up to an order of magnitude at high hazard levels,
would have a broad impact on the prioritization and economic costs of risk-
reduction strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research on Blue Waters has
verified the scalability and computational readiness of the simulation codes.
These codes will be used to advance physics-based PSHA through a coordinated
program of numerical experimentation and large-scale simulation targeted at
three primary objectives: (1) validation of high-frequency simulations against
seismic recordings of historical earthquakes; (2) computation of high-frequency
CyberShake hazard models for the Los Angeles region to support the development
of high-resolution urban seismic hazard maps by the U. S. Geological Survey and
the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), and (3) high-frequency
simulation of a M7.8 earthquake on the San Andreas fault to revise the 2008
Great California ShakeOut scenario and improve the risk analysis developed in
detail for that scenario. The plan to accomplish this research has five
computational milestones: (a) dynamic rupture simulations up to 8 Hz that
include fault roughness and near-fault plasticity; (b) simulations of historic
earthquakes up to 4 Hz for model validation; (c) simulations of the 1994
Northridge Earthquake up to 8 Hz for verification and validation; (d) extension
of the 2008 ShakeOut scenario to 4 Hz; and (e) calculation of a complete
CyberShake hazard model for the Los Angeles region up to 2 Hz.