* 1440622
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Building a Science DMZ and Enhancing Science Data Movement to Support Data Intensive Computational Research at South Dakota State University
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Michael Adelaine, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2016
* USD 494,521.00

South Dakota State University's (SDSU) strategic plan, Impact 2018, challenges
segments of the university to be high performing; research and innovation was
singled out as one such area that would take up that challenge. In order to
achieve this level of performance, the plan specifies that information
technology be the foundation on which this success is built. With this in mind,
the Division of Technology and Security has targeted the construction of a
Science DMZ to enhance current end-to-end science data transfer scenarios and
position university researchers to take advantage of the next generation in
network connectivity for cross-institutional collaboration. The Science DMZ
project is designed according to the architecture and practices established by
the Energy Sciences Network (ESNET) to enable fast end-to-end transfers of
scientific data and optimize network components for high-performance scientific
applications. Specific elements of the Science DMZ include support for virtual
circuits, software defined networking, network testing and enhancements in high-
speed data transfer processing. The need for these cyberinfrastructure
improvements are driven by increased levels of scientific activity across campus
research areas, namely big data users found within the Geographic Information
Science Center of Excellence (GSCE), the Image Processing Lab, and several
groups within the Biology and Plant Science departments involved with state-of-
the-art genomics processing and applications. This effort promises to transform
SDSU's infrastructure, providing a coordinated resource to systematically
process, transfer and analyze large science data sets, resulting in enhanced
collaborative opportunities for the research community.