* 1440753
* SI2-SSE: Adding Research Accounts to the ASSISTments' Platform: Helping Researchers Do Randomized Controlled Studies with Thousands of Students
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 486,209.00

ASSISTments is a free, university-based platform created to perform controlled
experiments with the potential to help increase the quality, speed, and
reliability of results related to K12 education. ASSISTments' mission is "to
improve education through scientific research while not compromising student
learning time." Each day, teachers assign problems to thousands of students
(currently 50,000 students) in ASSISTments. These problem sets often contain
controlled experiments. ASSISTments has used this platform to do controlled
experiments that have resulted in 17 peer-reviewed publications. For a typical
education researcher, developing relationships with schools is costly.
ASSISTments has built relationships with teachers and researchers to run
experiments to improve education without disrupting classrooms. This project
will add researcher accounts to ASSISTments to better facilitate the research
process. Researchers will create their own experiments, get approval from WPI
for release to teachers, and get anonymized data. ASSISTments will reach out to
its community of teachers who trust ASSISTments, to invite them to run the study
in their classrooms. The intellectual merit of this work will be the
contribution of the studies that this system would support. ASSISTments' ten-
year goal is to have a community of hundreds of scientists that use this tool to
do their studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Psychologists tend to study human
learning in lab studies; researchers in education and learning sciences point
out that it's not clear if those studies generalize to K12. These communities
need to work together, but are lacking common ground. Thousands of researchers
in psychology, mathematics education, and learning sciences care about using
science to better understand human learning. Some researchers study how to help
students with motivational messages, spaced retesting, or comparing feedback.
Many researchers have used thousands of psychology undergraduates as subjects,
but want their ideas tested and validated in authentic K12 settings. Everyone
understands physicists need a shared scientific instrument to do their work, but
so do educational psychologists. The broader impact of this work will be as a
demonstration, showing how a tool could be built that helps many researchers
conduct controlled experiments. This will include showing how the project can
increase the efficiency of the scientists? work.