* 1440226
* Advanced ACTPol
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2024
* Lyman Page, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 11,970,827.00

This program will upgrade the existing camera on the Atacama Cosmology Telescope
in Chile to incorporate new multi-color pixels in large detector arrays at five
frequencies, and develop instrumentation to allow wide area measurements of
cosmic microwave background (CMB) polarization. This Advanced ACTPol (AdvACT)
system will answer questions about the first moments of the universe, the
properties of its contents, the formation of structures under the influence of
gravity, and the nature of dark energy. In terms of broader impacts, the project
will focus on three areas: training graduate and undergraduate students in
AdvACT and related science, informing the public, and enhancing the STEM
pipeline of students from underrepresented groups through outreach projects.
Students and postdoctoral researchers will be involved in the design, assembly,
and testing of the new detector arrays. Two summer schools will be hosted
coincident with major data releases to train graduate students and postdocs in
deriving science from the data. In collaboration with the Franklin Institute,
team members will co-produce a new cosmology program and deliver shows at
various planetariums. Special efforts will be made to extend research
opportunities to undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AdvACT intensity and polarization maps of the CMB will
1) overlap the entire Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) survey as well as
other surveys not accessible from the South Pole; 2) have excellent resolution
of order one arcminute (depending on frequency); 3) span 25-280 GHz in five
bands, essential for the removal of Galactic foregrounds; and 4) have the
spatial dynamic range to detect large-angular-scale signatures of inflation at
one end, and galaxy clusters and dusty galaxies at the other. AdvACT will
perform a large-area survey to search for gravitational waves generated during
inflation (B-modes), and measure the isotropy, frequency spectrum, and scale
dependence of any detected signal. Measurements of primary CMB fluctuations will
improve our knowledge of key cosmological parameters, and measurements of
secondary fluctuations will map out the dark matter distribution, potentially
providing the first high-signal-to-noise measurement of the sum of the neutrino
masses. In addition, AdvACT maps will contain measurements of approximately
20,000 clusters of galaxies via the Sunyaev-Zeldovich Effect, with heightened
scientific impact due to overlap of the survey with X-ray and optical surveys
such as eROSITA, the Dark Energy Survey, and LSST. AdvACT millimeter-wavelength
source lists will provide many thousands of targets for study by ALMA. The
program will deliver a number of astronomy community benefits, including public
maps, assistance to other teams, and free sharing of technology techniques.