* 1440333
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  Collaborative Proposal: A Geo-Semantic Framework for Integrating Long-Tail Data and Models
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Scott Peckham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 262,299.00

The project offers a unique and transformative approach to integrate existing
and emerging long-tail model and data resources. Many challenges hinder the
seamless integration of models with data. These challenges compel scientists to
perform the integration process manually. The primary challenges are a
consequence of the knowledge latency between model and data resources and others
are derived from inadequate adoption and exploitation of information
technologies. Knowledge latency challenges increase exponentially when a user
aims to integrate long-tail data (data collected by individual researchers or
small research groups) and long-tail models (models developed by individuals or
small modeling communities).The goal of this research is to develop a framework
rooted in semantic techniques and approaches to support ?long-tail? models and
data integration. The vision is to develop a decentralized knowledge-based
platform that can be easily adopted across geoscience communities comprising of
individual and small group researchers.

This project offers a unique and transformative approach to integrate existing
and emerging long-tail model and data resources. The project will develop a
knowledge framework to close the loop from models? queries back to data sources
by first investigating the required concepts architecture for integrating two
leading examples of long-tail resources in geoscience: Community Surface Dynamic
Modeling System (CSDMS) and Sustainable Environment Actionable Data (SEAD). The
project will also develop a context-based data model that provides an explicit
interpretation of a metadata attribute. The researchers will capture the
metadata concepts and semantic from various geo-informatics systems and provide
tools for ensuring conceptual integration between the resources. Next, the
project will develop a knowledge discovery tool that allows automated coupling
of a model and data coming from different contributors. Finally, the project
will provide a prototype physical implementation of the knowledge framework in
CSDMS modeling framework to demonstrate how it can advance the seamless
discovery, selection, and integration between models and data, and how to
achieve dynamic reusability of resources across multiple Earth Science long-tail
resources.