* 1440002
* Workshop: US-Korea Collaboration in Advanced Manufacturing Research; San Antonio, Texas; May 28-30, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 03/31/2016
* USD 76,631.00

This award will fund 25 United States experts in advanced manufacturing to
attend a workshop in San Antonio, Texas to discuss four specific topics in
advanced manufacturing with a similar number of researchers from the Republic of
Korea. The workshop will be held in May 28-30, 2014. The Republic of Korea
delegation travel and hotel will be funded by the Korean National Research
Foundation. The working meals for all participants will be funded by the United
States National Science Foundation. This second workshop follows a similar
workshop organized last year in May in Republic of Korea and hosted by the
Korean National Research Foundation. At the end of last year's workshop, it was
decided that further discussion is needed on the four topics of industrial
robotics, manufacturing mathematics, materials processing and sub-micron and
nano-manufacturing. The goal of this year's workshop is to continue to identify
additional research topics of mutual interest to academic researchers supported
by National Science Foundation domestically, and by the Korean National Research
Foundation in Korea. The workshop discussions will again focus in four topical
areas: industrial robotics, manufacturing mathematics, materials processing and
sub-micron and nano-manufacturing. Additionally this year the participants will
also discuss very large manufacturing and bio-materials processing. The workshop
will be preceded by tour of the Southwest Research Institute facilities. The
workshop itself will be two days in duration. The result of the workshop will be
a report detailing areas for beneficial collaboration between Korea and the
United States with the expectation that it will be followed up with proposals
for research in these areas.

This workshop will promote international collaboration in academic research,
particularly in the four topic areas of the workshop. By so doing, it will
accelerate research in these areas which is expected to lead to better products
and economical products made with environmentally friendly advanced
manufacturing processes. Further, it will help involved students gain an
international perspective and broaden their educational experience.

This project is co-funded by the International Science and Engineering Section
of OIIA through the Global Venture Fund.