* 1440293
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  Collaborative Proposal:  Enabling Scientific Collaboration and Discovery through Semantic Connections
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Daniels, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 856,480.00

Data, information, ideas, and technologies diffuse through social and
organizational networks, if the impediments to their adoption are low and the
benefits of new approaches are clear. This project brings together the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), UNAVCO, and Cornell University to
understand how to improve the processes of collaboration and resource sharing in
the geosciences by demonstrating and encouraging the adoption of structured
information systems rooted in common standards. Using two large geoscience
research programs as case studies, this effort will demonstrate how semantic web
and linked data technology can play an essential role in the coordination and
organization of scientific virtual organizations and their products, thereby
accelerating the pace of scientific discovery and innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a well-developed open
source web application as an integrating data layer to expose the informational
relationships and organizational collaborations within the case studies. This
project will be an exemplar of using linked data to support virtual
organizations in the geosciences. These efforts will feed into new tools that
leverage linked data to support information and data exchange, and will produce
recommendations on engaging user communities in linked data projects. This
project will provide insight into how the geosciences can leverage linked data
to produce more coherent methods of information and data discovery for large
multi-disciplinary projects and virtual organizations. They will use the open
source VIVO software application to illustrate how linked data can transform
scientific project communication and dissemination via front end discovery based
on rich networked metadata. The VIVO platform provides new capabilities for
researchers and educators to use structured, interpretable data, permitting
direct interlinking of information and data across platforms and projects. The
project will structure data into an ontology-based, standard data format (RDF)
for re-use, leveraging web identifier and vocabulary structures that have been
well developed and widely adopted in the geoscience and cyberinfrastructure
communities. &lt;br/&gt;