* 1440733
* SAVI: GECAT-Global Initiative to Enhance Collaborative Computing and Analysis Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* John Towns, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,000,000.00

Major scientific research initiatives and enterprises are global in nature,
requiring national cyberinfrastructure capabilities to not only be interoperable
worldwide but to be designed to support collaborations spanning national
boundaries. Collective knowledge and skills of teams is increasingly required to
solve the key technical and scientific issues facing us today. In order to
realize continued scientific discovery in the United States, international
collaboration in interoperable forms of large-scale distributed computing,
access to remote data, development of collaboration technologies and skill sets
are required. Many scientific projects are international in scope, necessitating
collaboration across borders, including the coordination of resources .
International collaborations to construct telescopes with associated virtual
observatories (such as LSST, DES and SKA), particle detectors (such as ATLAS and
CMS for the Large Hadron Collider), climate (IPCC) and biological and
environmental data repositories are already underway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports international virtual research organizations (IVROs) that
promote and enable efficient collaboration and co-operation of researchers and
developers in multiple countries. It aims to seed the development of new,
innovative cyberinfrastructure features enabling international scientific
collaboration for scientific advances. It builds on existing relationships and
activities previously established by the PIs and institution. The project
directly supports the participation of multiple U.S .participants (senior and
junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students) in workshops, and to
interact, communicate, and collaborate in small research and development "seed"
projects with international partners from multiple countries in Europe and Asia.
The project provides an annual series of forums for publicly sharing cutting-
edge research, education and training experiences covering all aspects of
cyberinfrastructure, including distributed data management, system resilience,
performance issues with scaling, efficient mechanisms for training and support.
The project focuses on the development and study of strong International Virtual
Research Organizations promoting interoperability of national
cyberinfrastructures for international research. These IVROs are intended to
facilitate defining and developing strategies and action plans for collaborative
projects, and activities leading to the availability of high end middleware
tools, and interoperability of national cyberinfrastructures for addressing and
resolving grand science challenges through advancing cyberinfrastructure and
computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is designated as a Science
Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International and Integrative Activities and the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engieering.