* 1440743
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: NWIRED - Network Innovation for Research and Education at Georgetown
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Ardoth Hassler, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 452,373.00

Georgetown University is creating a Research Community Science DMZ network for
scientific collaboration internally and with external researchers, leveraging
GU's extant plan for Multi-Processing Label Switching deployment on campus. The
IP networks at the off-campus GU Virginia Data Center (VDC) are securely
extended via encrypted Layer-2/3 connection into cloud services, including
access to Amazon Web Services, Internet2 Net+, and compute and storage
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These enhancements provide a friction-free,
high-speed network to support Big Science and Big Data. Campus data use is
expanding from terabytes to petabytes, extending into campus labs, commercial
cloud services, and Mid-Atlantic Crossroads Regional Gigapop and Internet2
researchers through a layer 3 Virtual Private Cloud (VPC). The GU Science DMZ
and campus MPLS network architectures securely and deterministically separate
research traffic from general Internet and administrative traffic. This flexible
infrastructure enables faculty and others involved in STEM to work with
colleagues on campus and at off-campus sites as though they were in the same
lab, leveraging the speed of the 10 Gbps connection to Internet2. The Science
DMZ includes the addition of a Data Transfer Node (DTN) host to support high-
speed data transfers, Software Defined Networking (SDN) to extend services
beyond GU?s borders and perfSONAR to maintain performance data on network
throughput, availability, and latency. The Science DMZ, with the ability to
access cloud compute and storage resources, leverages 10Gbps network
enhancements on campus and to Internet2,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM research and
education are expanding at GU. Strategic investments have been and are being
made in faculty, programs and infrastructure. The GU network, including the
Science DMZ, enables flexible access to on campus and cloud resources, enabling
more compute and storage intensive research. As research programs expand, the
quality of education and research available to STEM undergraduate and graduate
students is enriched.