* 1440884
* Collaborative Research: CS10K: Infusing Cooperative Learning into Computer Science Principles Courses to Promote Engagement and Diversity
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Frances Trees, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2018
* USD 86,719.00

The University of Alabama Tuscaloosa, in collaboration with Duke University and
Rutgers University, propose a project aimed at infusing Collaborative Learning
(CL) into the new AP Computer Science Principles (CSP) courses. The curriculum
framework for CSP was designed to be engaging to a broad and diverse group of
students. However, curriculum alone is not enough to ensure student engagement:
the most interesting and innovative curriculum can still be taught in a
disengaged manner. The learning science literature on CL has shown that it
increases class participation and student learning while also promoting
diversity in a manner that supports the differentiated instruction needed to
engage students who have mixed abilities. This project seeks to understand how
the best practices of CL can be applied across the CSP curriculum framework and
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide deep professional
development opportunities for CSP teachers through face to face training and to
create a publicly available collection of CL strategies applied to the CSP
context. The project will connect the CL strategies within a series of 36 lesson
plans, a teacher workbook, a YouTube video channel with examples on using CL
strategies, while also providing direct professional development during an
intensive week-long workshop. The project will directly reach 180 teachers but
the developed materials will be disseminated through the CS Community.