* 1440677
* SI2-SSE: RADICAL Cybertools: Scalable, Interoperable and Sustainable Tools for Science
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2020
* USD 526,915.00

To support science and engineering applications that are the basis of many
societal and intellectual challenges in the 21st century, there is a need for
comprehensive, balanced, and flexible distributed cyberinfrastructure (DCI). The
process of designing and deploying such large-scale DCI, however, presents a
critical and challenging research agenda. One specific challenge is to produce
tools that provide a step change in the sophistication of problems that can be
investigated using DCI, while being extensible, easy to deploy and use, as well
as being compatible with a variety of other established tools. RADICAL
Cybertools will meet these requirements by providing an abstractions-based suite
of well-defined capabilities that are architected to support scalable,
interoperable and sustainable science on a range of high-performance and
distributed computing infrastructure. RADICAL Cybertools builds upon important
theoretical advances, production-software-development best practices, and
carefully-analyzed usage and programming models. RADICAL Cybertools is posed to
play a role in grand-challenge problems, ranging from personalized medicine and
health to understanding long-term global and regional climate. All software
developed through the project will be open source and will be licensed under the
MIT License (MIT). Version control on the SVN repository will be accessible via
http://radical.rutgers.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing and current
utilization of RADICAL Cybertools is built upon preliminary research prototypes
of RADICAL Cybertools. There is a significant difference, however, in the
quality and capability required to support scalable end-usage science, compared
to that of a research prototype. It is the aim of this project to bridge this
gap between the ability to serve as a research prototype versus the challenges
of supporting scalable end-usage science. This will be achieved by addressing
existing limitations of usability, functionality, and scalability. We will do so
by utilizing conceptual and theoretical advances in the understanding of
distributed systems and middleware, resulting in a scalable architecture and
robust design. We will employ advances in performance engineering, data-
intensive methods, and cyberinfrastructure to deliver the next generation of
RADICAL Cybertools. This project will take the existing research prototypes of
RADICAL Cybertools to the next level towards becoming a hardened, extensible,
and sustainable tool that will support a greater number of users, application
types, and resource types.