* 1440066
* EarthCube RCN:   An EarthCube Oceanography and Geobiology Environmental Omics Research Coordination Network (ECOGEO RCN)
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Edward DeLong, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2017
* USD 359,995.00

The network elements of the ECOGEO RCN reach across diverse communities of ocean
scientists, geoscientists, computer scientists and bioinformaticians, and will
forge new cross-disciplinary connections. Although the scientific goals of the
proposed ECOGEO community network are diverse, common challenges and
requirements for big data analyses be identified across this broad community.
This project will provide new solutions and ideas that reach beyond disciplinary
boundaries, since the challenges of rich omic datasets share commonalities
across areas as diverse as soil science, oceanography, geobiology and studies of
the human microbiome. Best practices and use case scenarios developed in this
project will integrate across challenges of diverse science domains, and provide
well documented approaches for omic data management and analyses, that will
serve as models and test cases for new cyberinfrascructure systems. These
efforts will impact not only ocean scientists and geobiologists, but also other
allied areas that use the same approaches, that range from environmental
assessment to human health.

Inexpensive sequencing has facilitated the generation of billions of
environmental DNA sequences, and allied techniques to survey gene expression
(metatranscriptomics) and protein expression (metaproteomics) are advancing as
well. The large and complex environmental omic datasets now present major
challenges to the ocean and geoscience communities. These omic datasets are
diverse, complex, and exponentially expanding, and require the construction,
curation, and query of diverse federated databases, as well as development of
shared interoperable, big-data capable analytical tools. To help address these
current big data challenges, this project establishes a virtual network called
EarthCube Oceanography and Geobiology Environmental Omics Research Coordination
Network (ECOGEO RCN), that will foster collaborations, communication,
innovation, and education in omic data management and analyses in the
oceanography and geobiology communities. The effort will identify and
communicate needed data standards, sharing and access mechanisms and analytical
strategies across the broader community of ocean and geosciences. Major outcomes
of ECOGEO RCN will be: 1)Establishment of a virtual network that coordinates
collaboration and communication in omics, data sharing and analyses; 2)Training
of a cyber-savvy generation of ocean and geo science graduate students, postdocs
and young professionals in the rapidly evolving environmental omics and
bioinformatics field. 3)Identification and elaboration of environmental omic
data standards, ontologies, sharing mechanisms, and analytical strategies;
4)Development of use case scenarios that will inspire creation of a new palette
of user friendly inter-operative community data management, analytical and
visualization tools for oceanography and geobiology omic science and beyond.

The establishment of the ECOGEO RCN will provide a collection of online
resources to enable the access, management and discovery of oceanographic and
geobiology omic data, metadata, analysis tools, methodologies, and other user-
driven needs. An EarthCube hosted ECOGEO-Wiki will serve as open forum for
network participants to share content and link to data repositories, models, and
tools. The ECOGEO centralized network and web-based portal will promote better
communication within and between ECOGEO microbial oceanography and geobiology
scientists and the broader scientific community. This will enable greater access
and organization of large and heterogeneous datasets, greater efficiencies in
scientific discovery, and broader collaborations based on both survey and
experimental data. The overall result will be to facilitate access and use of
existing and rapidly accumulating new omic datasets for a wide range of ocean
science and geoscience users, to observe measure and model community
composition, biological and biogeochemical activities and ecosystem structure
and function from ocean surface waters to the deep subsurface.