* 1440588
* CC*IIE IAM: Data at the Speed of Trust: Matching Computational Resources to Researchers using Sensitive Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Tracy Futhey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,997.00

Increasingly, scientists use data that are considered sensitive as they conduct
research, and protecting these sensitive data significantly adds to the
complexity of doing research. This project reduces that complexity. Sensitive
data requires strict security and confidentiality, complicating scientific
collaboration vital to conducting research. Secure computing environments that
protect data also tend to be inflexible, burdensome to use, and difficult to
expand, reducing research efficiency. To safeguard sensitive data while
supporting scientific collaborations, the project uses software-defined
networking (SDN) technologies that allow researchers to establish customized
network routes with special provisions for security and performance, creating
(for example) a high-speed, secure, and exclusive data connection between
distant computers and storage devices. Attribute-based access control systems
allow facts (as certified by a trusted entity) about a potential user to
determine whether and what access should be granted to the user. This project
combines emerging SDN networking technologies and the attribute-based access
control systems arising from Internet2's Scalable Privacy initiative. Together,
they secure data while also simplifying the granting of data access to
collaborators from different organizations federated by a trusted attribute
registry. Duke's existing protected network for sensitive research data serves
as the project testbed, leveraging Duke's past experience with SDN and open
source identity and access management tools widely deployed in academic research
institutions. Thus, the project expects to safely enable research collaborations
across institutions that use sensitive data, while providing an easy-to-use
means to network powerful, diverse, and even geographically remote computational
resources necessary to analyze the sensitive data.