* 1440360
* EAGER: III: CIFRAM: Strategic Modeling of Dynamic Credit Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Wellman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The 2008 financial crisis demonstrated that complex and opaque networks of
credit relationships among firms can set the stage for sudden and unexpected
propagation of financial uncertainty throughout the economy. In this project,
new models of dynamic credit networks will provide a basis for evaluating
systemic risks of this kind, and for designing institutions and policies that
improve robustness to asset price fluctuations and economic shocks of various
kinds. Investigators will construct large-scale simulations, where key actors
(banks, non-bank financial firms, and non-financial enterprises) make dynamic
credit decisions based on uncertain information that changes over time. Analysis
of the data promises to yield new insights about credit networks, and techniques
for reasoning about complex credit relationships. Such a capacity can lead to
new tools for risk management, supporting applications within individual
financial firms as well as for central banks and other economic
regulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ models based on graph-
based trust accounting mechanisms, developed in recent years by computer
scientists and economists. The investigation takes an agent-based approach,
where decision makers are instantiated by computational objects executing
strategies aimed to optimize objectives (profit) given available information.
Evidence about systemic properties is derived by simulation, which affords
heterogeneity and accommodates complex information and fine-grained dynamics.
Salient agent strategies will be selected according to game-theoretic solution
concepts, helping to bridge between agent-based and mainstream economic analysis
methodology. By providing new ways of analyzing complex financial networks, this
project promises to produce new insights about the formation and evolution of
complex credit relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, see
the project web site: http://web.eecs.umich.edu/srg/?page_id=1593