* 1440017
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Inferring Social Organization Through Mortuary Practice
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Jessica Beck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 25,180.00

The broad and fundamental significance of this research rests on the insight it
will provide into how small scale traditional societies are organized. Placed in
broader context with other such studies it has the potential to elucidate how
social complexity develops and is maintained. Small scale social groupings
continue to exist within nation states today and there can be practical benefit
to understand how they function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Does equal treatment in
death reflect equal treatment in life? The Iberian Copper Age is a period
dominated by the emergence of early complex societies, which are characterized
by agricultural intensification, political centralization and population
aggregation. Previous research has focused on the phenomenon of collective
burial to suggest that these broad-scale social processes are underwritten by a
"communally-organized society." However the internal organization of such
communities is still poorly understood, particularly because the preservation
issues and social function of such collective burials are
underexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to a growing body
of work on the significance of collective burials in prehistory. While this
topic has merited increasing anthropological attention in recent years, few
Iberian-specific analyses have been conducted that permit researchers to
understand what such large-scale sites represent in terms of social
organization. Importantly, a better understanding of the communal interments so
characteristic of the Iberian Chalcolithic will allow for a more detailed
understanding of how these amorphously "collective" early complex societies were
actually organized. This project's intellectual merit lies in the fact that its
multi-component bioarchaeological and archaeological analysis offers a novel
approach to mortuary work in Spain, and should offer a framework for future
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At 113 ha in size, Marroqu√≠es Bajos is one of
the largest settlements known for the time period, and contains evidence of four
different burial programs. This project's bioarchaeological analysis of the
mortuary variability at the site will allow for the investigation of the degree
to which Iberian Copper Age societies were collectively organized. In
particular, it is unclear whether collective burials mask significant
differences in individuals' access to food, disease burdens and activity levels
as a result of social characteristics like gender, age, or social group
affiliation. Through analysis of human remains, isotopic analysis of diet, AMS
radiocarbon dating, and an examination of tomb form and grave goods, this
research will allow for a more nuanced reconstruction of the ways in which
Copper Age societies were organized, while deepening our understanding of how
and why collective burials were used by prehistoric populations.