* 1440221
* EarthCube Building Blocks:   Collaborative Proposal: GeoLink - Leveraging Semantics and Linked Data for Data Sharing and Discovery in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Robert Arko, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 369,179.00

The proposed work addresses a challenge central to the EarthCube program's
success: How to employ state of the art technology for geoscience data
discovery, access, and integration. The project brings together significant
geosciences holdings in the ocean, earth and polar sciences to demonstrate how
innovative technologies can be robustly applied to these facilities to enhance
the capabilities for scientists to discover and interpret relevant geoscience
data and knowledge. The end product, GEOLink, will lower barriers to cross-
repository data discovery and access, while respecting and preserving repository
autonomy and heterogeneity. They will demonstrate the approach through a portal
that allows searching and browsing of integrated content from multiple
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge for EarthCube is to enable
data discovery, access, and integration in a sustainable way. Existing data
repositories and networks must be linked, while retaining their independent
missions and services to existing disciplinary communities. Cultural,
conceptual, and infrastructural heterogeneities must be respected in order to
maintain different perspectives and differing priorities and thus foster
inclusivity in the EarthCube endeavor. In particular, individual choices made by
providers of data or repositories will need to be respected in an inclusive
manner, and approaches to integration must reflect this. At the same time,
however, the diversity and heterogeneity of geoscience data presents a
significant barrier to its discovery. In this project, the researchers involved
will develop a demonstration called GEOLink based on: 1) digital publication of
geoscience data and knowledge as "Linked Open Data"; combined with 2) semantic
integration using design patterns and vocabularies shared among federated
repositories; and 3) an underlying cyberinfrastructure extendable in both depth
and breadth, that can become a central building block for EarthCube data
harmonization. The cyberinfrastructure underlying the approach is extendable,
sustainable, and affordable - leveraging state of the art developments in Linked
Open Data and formal semantics, grounded through shared Ontology Design
Patterns. GEOLink-enabled repositories will support discovery of related
resources, including Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R), the Biological and
Chemical Oceanographic Data Management Office (BCO-DMO), Integrated Earth Data
Applications (IEDA), the Long-Term Ecological Research Network (LTER), DataONE,
and the International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP), as well content from other
EarthCube Building Block projects and collaborators.