* 1440425
* RUI Ramifications of Ethanol Usage as a Biofuel: Quantifying Sources and Impacts on the Light Absorbing Properties of Rainwater
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Joan Willey, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 02/28/2019
* USD 313,872.00

This project seeks to investigate the atmospheric chemistry of ethanol and the
impacts of increasing levels ethanol production centered on its use as a
gasoline fuel additive. Colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM) is another
potential environmental source having impact on the concentration of ethanol in
rainwater. Preliminary data suggests that ethanol can be produced by photolysis
of rainwater after short (~4 hour) exposure to simulated sunlight.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institution) PIs have
previously shown that there is a measurable concentration difference of ethanol
in precipitation samples collected in sites from Wilmington NC and in Sao Paulo
Brazil. The concentrations of ethanol in rainwater vary significantly between
rain events, with higher concentrations occurring during storms associated with
continental air masses. High concentrations of ethanol in precipitation are said
to influence the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere and may have indirect
effects on solar radiative transfer and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to answer three related questions: &lt;br/&gt;1)What are the
relative proportions of biofuel and naturally derived ethanol in ambient
rainwater? &lt;br/&gt;2)What are the impacts of photolysed ethanol on the
chromophoric properties of rainwater? &lt;br/&gt;3) What are the reaction
pathways and molecular level compositional changes responsible for changes in
CDOM abundance and photochemical lability upon ethanol production?