* 1440728
* CC*IIE IAM: Secure Access for Everyone (SAFE)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Multi-institutional distributed scientific research collaborations involving the
sharing of resources are challenging and fraught with a lot of effort in
obtaining and managing multiple identities. Secure Access for Everyone (SAFE)
creates an Identity and Access Management (IAM) infrastructure that facilitates
easy access to campus Cyberinfrastructure (CI) resources for local, state,
regional and national researchers. SAFE will achieve this by implementing the
following three-part strategy: (1) Integrating CI resources with opensource IAM
software; (2) Facilitating collaboration and coordination of multi-institutional
resources; and (3) Leveraging custom gateways using InCommon for federated
access. The gateways to these resources are enhanced to include multiple access
methods, including web and command line and integrate the use of HPC schedulers
and access from the Open Science Grid. The SAFE architecture initially provides
federated access to library databases, High Performance Computing resources,
Virtual Computing Lab (a cloud based compute reservation environment), and the
Sunshine State Educational and Research Computing Alliance?s (SSERCA)
collaborative storage ecosystem. CI resources such as these perform a key role
in supporting scientific collaborations across campuses, regional, national,
international and virtual organizations, and spanning scientific communities.
These multi-institutional science research collaborations involving the sharing
of resources are challenging and fraught with a lot of effort in obtaining and
managing multiple identities. SAFE solves this by allowing researchers to login
to CI resources with their local institutions credentials for trusted access.

Secure Access for Everyone (SAFE) is a well coordinated usable federated
identity and access management system that leverages and enhances campus CI in
order to support trusted collaboration and sharing of compute and data resources
that is now essential to facilitate multi-institutional scientific research
collaborations.