* 1440095
* Collaborative Proposal:   ATREX - integrated open source data analysis software for mineral and environmental sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Lars Ehm, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 128,804.00

Synchrotron radiation user facilities are critical resourcces which enable
state-of-the-art research and training in mineralogy, mineral physics and
environmental science. Access to these facilties is very competitive and time
allocated for experiments is constrained. The most popular and fundamental type
of experiment is X-ray diffraction, which produces information on crystal
structure, symmetry, chemical bonding, composition and density of minerals and
other crystalline solids. Modern synchrotron-based diffraction experiments are
typically conducted with the use of area detectors, in which case the data is
recorded as digital diffraction images. Technology used in synchrotron
experiments evolves rapidly increasing the speed of the data collection and
producing massive volumes of experimental data, posing new serious challenges
for data analysis. The experiments are often decision-driven, and require at
least partial real time data interpretation to guide the experimenter. Software
offering such real time analysis capabilities is currently not available. This
proposal is a collaborative effort to provide this scientific community with
easily accessible tools and training opportunities for using these
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a combination of novel tools
for diffraction-based synchrotron research in Earth and environmental sciences
including: (IM1) New capabilities for structure determination of unknown phases
and identification of known phases in natural and synthetic samples; (IM2)
Opening new possibilities for real time analysis in studies of solid state
dynamic processes; (IM3) Robust Bayesian analysis of outliers, uncertainties and
missing data; and (IM4) Creation of new free advanced tools for utilizing the
available mineralogical database in synchrotron research. Utilizing a
combination of existing, well-tested and widely used software components
developed in the Interactive Data Language , Python, the project creates a new
integrated multiplatform, open-source Python software package ATREX (Advanced
Tools for Research in Extreme Xtallography), with unique capabilities to process
diffraction image data from samples in all forms from glasses and melts, bulk
powders, though coarse multi grains, to single crystals, which will support new
data types produced by novel ultrafast X-ray imaging detectors, offer extensive
automated serial processing capabilities for massive data sets and will allow
real time data analysis for time-constrained decision-driven synchrotron
experiments. ATREX will include database access capabilities utilizing the free
American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database.