* 1440129
* Spherical VPH Gratings for Enhanced Spectrograph Design
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* James Clemens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 132,140.00

Diffraction gratings are a fundamental component at the heart of many
astronomical instruments that measure the distribution of light at different
wavelengths. Such measurements carry tremendous diagnostic information about the
chemical composition of astronomical objects, and the dynamics of their motion.
A more efficient kind of grating, called the Volume Phase Holographic (VPH)
grating, has recently been under development, and offers great promise for
practical applications. Particularly compact and light-efficient optical designs
are made possible if VPH gratings can be made on spherical surfaces. The
proposal for which this award was made is a pathfinding attempt to perfect the
techniques for fabricating VPH gratings on spherical
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current spectrographs typically accomplish
spectral dispersion on planar wavefronts, and this drives the optical design to
large and hence expensive instruments. The VPH technology promises high-quality
diffraction gratings on concave or convex spherical surfaces, enabling
alternative and more compact spectrograph designs such as those utilizing the
well-known Offner relay. The designs enabled by VPH gratings can have fewer as
well as smaller components, and in some cases less exotic material while
delivering higher efficiency. With this award, a pathfinder concept spectrograph
using commercial off-the-shelf optical components will be built with resolving
power R~1000 over the wavelength range 380-790 nm, feeding a 2k detector. This
pilot project will pave the way for more advanced spectrograph designs in the
future, exploiting the power of VPH gratings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has substantial broader impacts in that it could enable dramatically reduced
size and cost while maintaining high performance, for a wide variety of
astronomical instrumentation. Students will be involved in most aspects of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by NSF's
Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.