* 1440864
* BPEC: Collaborative Research: Creating Personalized Learning Pathways by Managing Cognitive Load
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Paul Freiling, St Louis Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 53,461.00

Washington University, in collaboration with the St. Louis Science Center will
develop and evaluate a computer programing environment that uses personalized
learning pathways to better engage and support young learners. In both formal
and informal education settings, examples of solved problems are an important
learning resource, enabling self-teaching, and supporting the inherent
heterogeneity found in classrooms. Recent studies of programmers at varying
experience levels revealed that selecting and adapting example code shared on
the web is often used to support just in time learning and to access
infrequently used techniques. However, while examples can be powerful learning
tools, they must be well-matched to the learner?s experience level and learning
preferences. The project staff will develop computer algorithms that predict
what future problems and examples will maximize learning for a specific
learner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on learning via examples has demonstrated
that by controlling the cognitive load for a given learner through the selection
and presentation of examples and their related practice problems, it is possible
to improve learner?s success on near and far transfer tasks. This proposal
hypothesizes that by carefully controlling the cognitive load, it will be
possible to construct personalized learning pathways that help a learner to
efficiently move from a novice understanding to mastery of a concept.
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) Is
it possible to predict the perceived cognitive load for a future problem, given
a learner?s history and use this to select an appropriate next problem for that
learner? &lt;br/&gt;2) What are the factors of a learner?s history that are most
predictive of the perceived cognitive load for a future problem?&lt;br/&gt;3) Is
it possible to effectively use the predicted cognitive load to construct
personalized learning pathways for an individual learner? &lt;br/&gt;