* 1440673
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: CHARMED -- Campus High-Availability Scientific Research Environment and DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2017
* John Klinck, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 348,181.00

The project builds a full featured "scienceDMZ" that leverages the Old Dominion
University's investment in operational high availability resources in the
existing data centers routing and switching fabric, incorporates an enhanced and
scalable High Performance Computing (HPC) model, and facilitates data intensive
research while precluding the need for science projects to create their own
stand alone environments. This high performance and high availability computing
and networking environment accelerates scientific discovery by increasing the
rate at which data can be transferred between collaborators, and by facilitating
the creation of communities focused on the data. This project represents a
significant shift in promoting and facilitating greater scientific research
through collaboration by accommodating the needs of data driven discovery in
Physics, Oceanography, Computer Science and Engineering, along with researchers
from across campus. Three scientific domains are selected as first users to show
the impact of the developed enhanced scientific research environment. The
developed environment will have a broad impact on scientific discovery by being
a common reliable infrastructure for scientists to host collaboration
environments in support of their works. It is envisioned that this
infrastructure could be more broadly utilized to accommodate further "Big Data"
science in social sciences, biomedical research and public health. This project
provides opportunities for enriching the undergraduate and graduate curricula
and for exposing students to cutting-edge research in different science domains.
Moreover, all of the designs, documentation, and developed tools are made
available for other institutions.