* 1440332
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: GeoSoft: Collaborative Open Source Software Sharing for Geosciences
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Scott Peckham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Geosciences software embodies crucial scientific knowledge, and as such it
should be explicitly captured, curated, managed, and disseminated. The goal of
this project is to create a system for software stewardship in geosciences that
will empower scientists to manage their software as valuable scientific assets.
Scientific software stewardship requires a combination of cyberinfrastructure,
social infrastructure, and professional development infrastructure. The
framework will result in an open transparent and broader access to scientific
software to other scientists, software professionals, students, and decision
makers. It will significantly improve the adoption of open data and open
software initiatives, improve reproducibility, and advance scientific
scholarship.

The proposed research will advance knowledge and understanding of scientific
software as a valuable community asset that is worth sharing, curating,
cataloging, validating, reusing, and maintaining. 1) Facilitating software
publication through TurboSoft, a personal assistant (analogous to TurboTax) that
guides a user through best practices. Users will choose the degree of investment
they are willing to make in componentizing, describing, licensing, and
maintaining their software. The system will encourage open source publication,
the formation of communities around the software, and set up mechanisms for
software citation and credit. 2) Enabling broad software dissemination through
GeoSoft, a "software commons" for geosciences that will support software
contributions (prepared through TurboSoft or otherwise), software discovery
through multi-faceted search, and foster social interactions through dynamic
formation of communities of interest. GeoSoft will interoperate with existing
software repositories and modeling frameworks in geosciences. 3) Providing just-
in-time training materials through GeoCamp, an annotated collection of
educational units ranging from basic education to professional training on all
aspects of software stewardship. GeoCamp will be seamlessly integrated with
TurboSoft and GeoSoft, and present a wide range of options for learning in the
context of a user?s context of interaction with the framework or independently.