* 1440988
* Sustaining Responsive and Rigorous Teaching Based on Carbon: Transformations in Matter and Energy
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Samuel Spiegel, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 08/31/2021
* USD 6,968,640.00

Successful science teachers need high quality teaching materials, sustained
professional development opportunities, and a school structure that aligns local
goals and policies, and supports sustained teacher networks. This project
addresses all three of these essential elements in the context of a key topic in
the sciences: the role of carbon in the flow of materials and energy through
living systems, human engineered systems, and Earth systems at multiple scales.
The project builds on previously funded projects that have developed student
learning progressions for these topics, and it will develop and test a new
professional development model for teachers that is based on a teacher learning
progression framework. The framework is based on four core teaching and learning
practices advocated by the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS): formative
assessment, inquiry, explanations, and decision making. Online and in-person
teacher networks will also be developed and studied for their effects on teacher
knowledge and practices, and on student learning.

The project engages the University of Michigan, the National Geographic Society,
the Seattle Public Schools, the Institute for Learning at the University of
Pittsburgh, and others in a partnership spanning schools in four states, in
diverse sociocultural settings, and located in urban, suburban, and rural
environments. Case-study methods will be used to develop the teacher learning
progression, including analyses of written assessments, online data capture
techniques, interviews, and classroom videotaping. Collected data and analyses
will be used to develop a professional development model with blended online and
face-to-face experiences. A design-based implementation research approach will
be used to develop and test teacher implementation networks. Longitudinal and
online network data will be used to identify the conditions under which teachers
are influenced by others in their networks, and how those influences affect
student outcomes. Findings from this project are expected to provide new
knowledge on how to sustain responsive and rigorous science teaching that is
anchored in the NGSS and situated in the culture of typical middle schools and
high schools.