* 1440105
* USNC-URSI:  Engaging U.S. Radio Scientists in the International Union of Radio Science
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2018
* USD 385,063.00

This award provides three years of support and related administrative expenses
for engaging U.S. radio scientists, including the U.S. National Committee
(USNC), in the International Union of Radio Science (URSI). This includes
affecting and guiding URSI scientific programs, helping to develop U.S.
candidates for URSI leadership through involvement with commissions, and meeting
the nation's responsibility to support URSI by paying dues. URSI is a non-
governmental, non-profit scientific union devoted to scientific and
technological developments across radio science disciplines. It has 46 member
countries, and is one of the scientific unions that adhere to the International
Council for Science. URSI covers numerous areas of interest within the radio
science discipline, including radio astronomy, materials science, physics,
remote sensing, geosciences, and space sciences. It stimulates and coordinates
studies in the fields of radio, telecommunications, and electronic sciences,
fostering international communications and collaborations through its ten
commissions. The USNC organizes a yearly conference in the U.S., and oversees
the U.S. participation in international URSI activities. URSI activities support
the development and training of students and postdocs in numerous radio science
activities, in both science and engineering, and help to develop the future
leaders in the field. They promote better U.S. understanding of international
perspectives, policy and culture, linking the U.S. radio science community and
U.S. research to a wider international context. These activities are essential
for effective U.S. international programs and policy-making.