* 1440013
* A Punishing Look: Skin Tone, Facial Features, and Criminal Sentencing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Ryan King, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 12/31/2014
* USD 69,271.00

Research on crime and punishment has long been concerned with racial and ethnic
disparities in criminal sentencing, and indeed many studies have found what
theories of court processing generally predict: blacks and Hispanics are on
average sentenced more harshly than whites, even when taking into account the
offender's criminal history and crime severity. Yet prior work in this area
rarely considers the substantial heterogeneity that exists within and between
racial groups. For instance, President Barack Obama, Justice Clarence Thomas and
Presidential Advisor Valerie Jarrett each identify as African American, but they
differ markedly in their skin tone. The present research investigates whether
such differences in skin color are consequential for decisions made in American
criminal courts. In addition, the research examines whether facial
characteristics of defendants, such as Afrocentric features, facial tattoos, or
other indicators of non-conformity influence punishment outcomes, as well as the
extent that these factors might be contingent on the race of the judge.

These and related questions motivate this research, which systematically
investigates the effects of offender skin tone and physical appearance on
criminal sentencing outcomes. Booking photos from a large sample of male
offenders in two Minnesota counties are coded on several criteria, thus allowing
for an analysis of color and appearance effects. These data are combined with
sentencing information from the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission for a
sample of approximately 1,000 males convicted of felonies in 2009. In addition
to random samples of white and black defendants, Hispanic, Asian, and Native
Americans are oversampled to enable analyses of these understudied groups. This
study contributes unique knowledge to ongoing debates over racial equality in
society and significantly advances extant research and theorizing on decision
making processes and outcomes involving unwarranted disparities in the American
criminal justice system. The findings also inform policy debates concerning
sentencing guidelines and may push the study of race and punishment in a new
direction by determining whether skin hue, and not merely categorical race,
matters in the halls of justice.