* 1440446
* Teachers and Engineers Collaborating in STEM Elementary Teacher Preparation
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Adah Leshem, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 4,206,018.00

Through the STEM-C Partnerships: MSP program, the Teachers and Engineers
Collaborating in STEM Elementary Teacher Preparation (TEC-STEM-ETP) project will
design a new model of teacher preparation at Iowa State University which infuses
engineering design concepts into the elementary teacher preparation program, as
well as emphasizes the knowledge and skills associated with scientific concepts
appropriate for elementary school students. This project addresses the critical
need for well-prepared elementary teachers to have confidence in and a
commitment to engaging their students in experiential learning of essential
scientific and engineering concepts in the early grades. The TEC-STEM-ETP is a
Partnership among Des Moines Public Schools, the largest school district in the
State of Iowa, and Iowa State University, with the School of Education, the
College of Engineering, the Engineering and Research Center for Biorenewable
Chemicals (CBiRC), and the Center for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and
Engineering Education (CESMEE) working in
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designed to make lasting changes to the
elementary teacher education program at Iowa State University (ISU), this
project will: 1) align ISU elementary teacher education STEM curricula with
state and national standards, and incorporate engineering design into the
elementary teacher education program; 2) create a program for pre-service and
in-service teachers to work in partnership with ISU Master's level engineering
graduate students (TEC-STEM Fellows) on a regular weekly basis during the
student teaching semester; 3) infuse engineering concepts into the elementary
school curriculum in the Des Moines Public Schools; and 4) create a dual-listed
undergraduate/graduate course, Engineering and Public Outreach, for engineering
students. TEC-STEM-ETP utilizes a novel triad approach, consisting of a pre-
service teacher, an in-service teacher and a Master's level engineering student
to work collaboratively in a 3rd through 5th grade classroom to teach science
well, and implement engineering concepts, mathematics and technology as
recommended by the Next Generation Science Standards and required by the Iowa
Core Curriculum. The involvement of engineering students in working with
elementary pre- and in-service teachers, their students, schools and the
community, as well as the Master's level Engineering and Public Outreach course
addresses a secondary but important intent of this project to develop
communication and public engagement skills of fledgling engineers. The research
agenda of TEC-STEM-ETP will determine the effectiveness of this approach to
improve elementary teachers' STEM practice and efficacy and to determine
reciprocal effects on the engineers. Thus this project stands to make a
contribution at the local level, in that there will be an innovative elementary
teacher preparation program involving engineering as a legacy. It will also make
a national contribution to educational/organizational research as the evidence
of the impact of this work, which engages STEM disciplinary faculty members
(Environment Physiology, Agriculture and Biological Engineering, Physics,
Chemical Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering) working with education faculty
and school district personnel, is studied during its development and
implementation.