* 1440834
* HOx Radical Chemistry in Forest Environments: Measurements and Characterization of Instrument Interferences
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Philip Stevens, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 718,562.00

This research focuses on the measurement of several of the most important
chemical compounds in the atmosphere, the hydroxyl (OH) and hydroperoxy (HO2)
radicals. These compounds are important in atmospheric chemistry because they
control the lifetimes of many trace gases important to issue of climate change
and they can greatly influence air quality. Scientists have found many
disagreements between the measurements of these compounds by a variety of
methods and by the models that predict their concentrations. This work will
investigate the nature of these disagreements and focus on improving the
measurement of these compounds, thereby improving the ability of models to
better predict climate and air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there has
been reasonable agreement between measured and modeled HOx (OH + HO2)
concentrations in urban areas, measurements in forested environments
characterized by high mixing ratios of biogenic volatile organic compounds have
shown major discrepancies with modeling results. This research includes
optimization of the LP/LIF-FAGE instrument, laboratory kinetics experiments,
informal instrument intercomparison studies, and investigations of instrument
performance in a variety of forest environments under changing environmental
conditions. The forest measurements will take place at several locations
including the Indiana University Research and Teaching Preserve field lab near
the Bloomington campus, the PROPHET (Program for Research on Oxidants:
PHotochemistry, Emissions and Transport) site in northern Michigan, as well as
at the nearby Forest Accelerated Succession Experiment site. This work will
support several graduate students and minority student will be especially
encouraged to participate in the research.