* 1440083
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Simulations of Core-Collapse Supernovae and Hypermassive Neutron Stars
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 17,682.00

Core-collapse supernova explosions from massive stars and collisions of neutron
star mergers are among the most energetic phenomena in the universe. In these
explosions and collisions, the key chemical elements of live (oxygen, carbon,
iron etc.) and all heavy elements, including the rare earths metals, are
synthesized and expelled into the interstellar medium. The goal of this PRAC
project is to simulate core-collapse supernovae and the remnants of neutron star
collisions at unprecedented physical detail. The investigators will use high-
resolution three-dimensional simulations that include general relativity, fluid
dynamics, radiation transport of neutrinos, magnetic fields, and a sophisticated
description of the properties of the ultra-high density matter present in the
cores of supernovae and neutron star collision remnants. The simulations will
yield a deeper understanding of the processes occurring as a star turns from
collapse to explosion and will elucidate the role of magnetic fields in both
core-collapse supernovae and in the evolution of collision remnants. This will,
in turn, yield better predictions for signals (in gravitational waves,
neutrinos, and electromagnetic waves, and synthesized elements) from these
phenomena. Astronomical observations can then be used to test theoretical models
and constrain present uncertainties in nuclear physics and astrophysics.