* 1440918
* Collaborative Research: BPEC: YO-GUTC: YOung Women Growing Up Thinking Computationally
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Irene Lee, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 05/31/2017
* USD 144,054.00

Young Women Growing Up Thinking Computationally (YO-GUTC) is the joint evolution
of two successful broadening participation in computing programs: the Young
Women in Computing program at New Mexico State University and the GUTS y Girls
program at Santa Fe Institute. YO-GUTC is a 3-year program, targeting at least
120 high school women, and composed of a series of intensive summer workshops
and community celebrations of young women in computing in the Las Cruces and the
Santa Fe areas of New Mexico. YO-GUTC explores why some young Hispanic females
who are interested in computer science majors or careers decide to leave the
pipeline in high school while others persist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;YO-GUTC will
design, implement and evaluate instructional materials for summer workshops,
develop an online community and social network, and study whether addressing the
preparation gap, building community and online support systems, and aligning
computing with Hispanic cultural values, can sustain young women's participation
and interest in computing. Through longitudinal (over 3 years) interviews and
surveys, students will be asked to share narratives about their developing
computer science identities, computer science participation, and aspirations.
YO-GUTC will pose research questions related to the underrepresentation of
Hispanic women in computing, and investigate interventions to increase and
sustain their interest and participation.