* 1440015
* Collaborative Research: USG Support for the Past Global Changes Project International Program Office
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Loutre Marie-France, Past Global Changes
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,833,884.00

The Past Global Changes Program, is an open and international organization that
coordinates global change science internationally, prioritizes key topics,
facilitates cross-disciplinary research, promotes syntheses of results, and
ensures dissemination of data, results, and knowledge. PAGES fills a unique
niche and adds value to individual and national research. Over the next four
years, PAGES will organize interdisciplinary working groups and cross-cutting
activities that address relevant community-driven science issues, via open and
international workshops, and synthesize knowledge and data. Its objectives are
to link data products with Earth system modeling, translate regional knowledge
of climatic and environmental changes into actionable information useful for
decision-makers, and build capacity among young scientists and in nations less
established in science. PAGES' activities all center around four themes: the
Climate theme will inform climate projection efforts, and combined with modern
and historical observational evidence will contribute to climate services. The
Environment theme will address research topics central to Future Earth and
inform environmental management efforts such as landscape conservation,
ecosystem management, and fire control. The Humans theme will inform adaptation
strategies and contribute to specific solutions for policy makers and resource
managers; there is transformative potential to develop novel approaches
involving social scientists or economists within this theme. Results from the
cross-topical integrated activities on tipping points, extreme events, and
warmer worlds, are targeted to inform risk assessments and natural disaster
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PAGES will exist under the new Future Earth
program and intensify its partnership with the World Climate Research Program.
The community-built scientific structure proposed here will align with these
programs' agendas. PAGES' new structure will encourage integrative activities
related to the sustainability issues prioritized by Future Earth and the World
Climate Research Program. In addition to the research output generated by
scientific activities, PAGES will ensure broad impact by: identifying key
science issues that can only be addressed through a transnational community
approach; advocating for the incorporation of scientific evidence into wider
Earth system science and international assessments; communicating scientific
results to Global Environmental Change scientists, the media and public;
contributing to data management in collaboration with NSF-EarthCube and NOAA;
and building capacity among developing country and young scientists through
active involvement, educational meetings, mentorships, and by organizing the
Open Science and Young Scientists Meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PAGES has a
record of producing scientific output, including over 300 publications since
2010, with numerous major syntheses. Many publications obtained wide attention
in the broader scientific community and contributed substantially to the latest
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment. Long-lived value
was created by coherent data compilations that increased the number of available
data by ~5 times. PAGES intends to support transnational working groups, to
provide vehicles for data-model integration, and to facilitate community data
syntheses that add expertise and value to individual results and contribute to
international assessments such as the IPCC and Intergovernmental Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Under the new structure the Climate theme
will address climate dynamics at the regional to global scales to obtain
improved records of climate forcing, sensitivity and Earth system feedback. It
will also assess model skills and provide insight into non-linearities,
thresholds and the predictability of climate over long time intervals. The
Environment theme will address the components of the biosphere that interact
with climate change and introduce long-term feedback into the Earth system
including biogeochemical cycling, ecosystem dynamics and ecosystem services. The
Humans theme will address long-term environmental changes where humans are a
major agent and where environmental changes have an effect on the functioning
and well-being of ecosystem services and societies. In addition, cross-topical
integrated activities such as thresholds and tipping points, extreme events,
warmer worlds and data management, will encourage an interdisciplinary,
synthesizing approach among the scientific community and other stakeholders.