* 1440539
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure:  UCScienceNet (UCSN) - A High Bandwidth Science DMZ to Enable STEM Discovery, Collaboration, and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Richard Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2016
* USD 499,741.00

The University of Cincinnati's existing network architecture design requires
researchers to share a 1Gb network connection with the general university
community, resulting in a bottleneck for high speed data transfers. This project
builds a new high performance dedicated research network called UCScienceNet
(UCSN) to link five science and engineering research facilities across campus to
the 100Gb Internet2 network. The new network and upgraded bandwidth capacity
enables investigators to accelerate and extend existing research programs which
require fast transfer of very large data sets for real time visualization or
analysis. It also facilitates the formation of a research ecosystem to address
complex Grand Challenge problems in high-energy physics research, multi-scale
computational fluid dynamics, public health, renewable energy, advanced
aerospace research and global climate change monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCSN is a high bandwidth, friction free Science DMZ
modeled after ESnet, incorporating perfSONAR for monitoring and tuning network
performance, enabling software defined networking (SDN), and OpenFlow
capabilities. This 100Gb Layer-3 distributed internal network connects UC
researchers to the 100Gb Ohio Academic Research Network (OARnet), and from there
to other high bandwidth networks. Peering of these "Big Data" networks opens new
opportunities for research partnerships between university and industry, and
promotes commercialization and job growth. UCScienceNet provides scalable 40Gb
access from five research intensive locations to a 100Gb OARnet Internet2
portal. Eliminating campus and building-level network infrastructure constraints
enables multiple, disparate high-speed big data transfers across a
comprehensive, integrated cyberinfrastructure with robust access to state,
national, and international networks.