* 1440506
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support: Center for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs)
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2019
* John Selker, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,292,071.00

1440506 Selker

This grant provides operational facility support for a collaborative effort
between Oregon State University (PI: Selker) and the University of Nevada Reno
(PI: Tyler) to allow for continued operations over the next four year of the
Center for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs). CTEMPs
offers community support for planning, training, equipment loan and field
implementation using distributed fiber optic Raman backscatter Distributed
Temperature Sensing (DTS) to allow for unprecedented observation of the spatial
and temporal distribution of temperature for geoscience and environmental
applications including but not limited to, snow, groundwater and watershed
hydrology, aquatic and terrestrial ecology, karst geology, soil science
(including permafrost studies), physical limnology and oceanography,
micrometeorology and glaciology. High resolution DTS systems allow for high
spatial (<= 0.25 m) and high accuracy (within 0.1 - 0.3 deg C) observations of
river bottom, lake, or estuary bottom, snow pack, soil horizon or atmospheric
temperatures over length scales from 0.25 ? 2500 m. at high temporal frequency
(1 Hz). Temperature precision of +/ 0.01 deg C can be achieved when observation
are sampled hourly. When placed in a stream or river, fiber optic DTS allows for
observation of the location, temperature, and flux of each groundwater inflow,
calculation of an exact heat budget to determine hyporheic exchange, and
observation of micro-thermal habitats critical to successful larval fish
recruitment. DTS systems were originally developed for applications in the oil
and electrical power transmission industries and for fire detection in high rise
buildings. Support under this grant will allow for: 1) continued provision of
high resolution temperature sensing equipment to the geosciences community using
a recently expanded DTS instrument pool; 2) develop and promote the use of
actively heated optical fiber sensing for the measurement of soil moisture and
fluid flux, and 3) to incorporate the rapidly emerging, but logistically
challenging, unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) technology to hydrologic and earth
surface monitoring. The CTEMPs facility will offer hands-on training and
knowledge dissemination, through its formal designation as a CUAHSI Hydrologic
Measurement Facility (HMF) Node and formal agreements with CUAHSI to promote two
hands-on workshops per year as well as training on both the OSU and UNR
campuses. Outreach to K-8 will also be tested at the T.L. Wells Discovery Museum
in Reno through incorporation of DTS in an interactive river display.

***