* 1440695
* Collaborative Research: Biomechanical significance of bone material variation in the locomotor skeleton
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Daniel Schmitt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 61,780.00

While it is recognized that bone health is influenced by physical activity, it
remains unclear whether it is the intensity, duration, or frequency of activity
that has the most positive impact on skeletal integrity. This research
investigates how the skeleton of primates (such as humans) adapts to physical
activity through examination of the differential impact of diverse forms of
locomotor behavior on multiple measures of bone anatomy. The integrated approach
requires a study population for which the requisite behavioral, biomechanical,
and bone structure data are accessible; the bone samples examined therefore come
from a population of seven African primate species for which locomotor behavior
and activity patterns have been under study for over 15 years, providing a
unique and broad spectrum of behavioral variation from which to investigate how
bones respond to different activity regimens. Through examination of these
interrelationships, the research will improve understanding of the influence of
physiological activity (e.g., intensity and frequency of running) on bone
structure and adaptation, and thereby identify the types of activity that
influence the integrity of limb bones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study combines
consideration of bone quantity (size) with quality (stiffness) to calculate
measures of bone structural integrity. Bone quality is determined through the
technique of microindentation, a method that measures small-scale variation in
bone stiffness throughout bones to permit detailed understanding of bone
strength, including fracture risk. In addition, how different types of locomotor
activity (walking, running, jumping) and activity levels (amount of time spent
per day in locomotion) influence bone adaptation is assessed through the
different perspectives of kinetics (the measurement of forces on the skeleton)
and remodeling (the process by which bone repairs itself). Through this
comparative and multifaceted approach, this research seeks to establish what
aspects of physical activity are influential in either positively or negatively
affecting bone strength. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching intellectual
merit of this study is that in determining the association between bone anatomy
and locomotor behavior, the kinds of activity that can positively influence bone
adaptation may be identified. Such results should find application to clinical
contexts for human populations in establishing more definitive links between
behavior and anatomy, and through refined assessments of bone quality that can
be used as an index of bone health and function. In addition, several impacts of
societal importance emerge from this research activity. These include
interdisciplinary training in anthropology, engineering, and the health sciences
for both undergraduate and graduate US students; inclusion of underrepresented
groups in engineering and anthropological research; contributions to the
conservation of threatened primate populations; and improvement of educational
infrastructure at the university level across three US institutions.