* 1440878
* Collaborative Research: CS 10K: AccessCS10K: Including Students with Disabilities in Computing Education for the Twenty-First Century
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andreas Stefik, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2018
* USD 617,143.00

The University of Washington, in collaboration with the University of Las Vegas
Nevada, proposes a project - AccessCS10K - to increase the successful
participation of students with disabilities in the new Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) and Computer Science Principles (CSP) courses. Both courses are
designed to introduce the big ideas in computer science and to inspire students
from diverse backgrounds to consider computational competence as part of their
career plans. This project focuses on the inclusion of students with
disabilities. It has two objectives. The first is to build the capacity of ECS
and CSP teachers to serve those students with professional development aimed at
the CS 10K PD trainers, curricular units, online tutorials, virtual communities
of practice for teachers, and real-time, individual teacher support. The second
objective is to create accessible materials, both tools (including iterative
refinement and deployment of the Quorum language) and curricular units that ECS
and CSP teachers and students can use in their classrooms. The work will be led
by teams at the University of Washington and the University of Nevada, Las
Vegas, building on the prior work of the Principal Investigators and experienced
partners. Further, the project leaders will work in partnership with many of the
current and future CS10K grantees and with developers of accessible tools and
curricula to maximize the impact of their work. All students in ECS and CSP
classes, regardless of disability, will benefit from more inclusive teaching
strategies practiced by their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the need to prepare computing educators for diverse students,
including those with disabilities, and the need to create tools and curricula
that meet the needs of diverse students including those with disabilities. An
external evaluator, with the help on an internal evaluator, will track project
activities, outputs, and early outcomes as part of the formative evaluation, and
will help establish the impact of the interventions as part of the summative
evaluation. The evaluation will assess how well CS 10K trainers able to learn
and use the AccessCS10K professional development modules and whether CS 10K
teachers able to use teaching strategies, individualized support, curricular
units, and accessible technologies in their classrooms.