* 1440025
* 3-D Simulations of i-Process Nucleosynthesis in the Early Universe
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,385.00

Astronomical observations are now probing the early stages of the universe, in
which galaxies&lt;br/&gt;developed and merged, and the formation of the
structures in the universe at the present era&lt;br/&gt;was set in motion. An
important part of this story is the chemical evolution of galaxies.
The&lt;br/&gt;formation of the elements in the first stars and their subsequent
dispersal are powerful tracers&lt;br/&gt;of structure formation and evolution in
the early universe. This project involves the simulation&lt;br/&gt;of processes
deep inside stars of the early universe that experience hydrogen
ingestion&lt;br/&gt;events caused by mixing of material across the boundaries of
convection zones. In 1-D stellar&lt;br/&gt;evolution simulations, these give
rise to rapid hydrogen burning, with enormous energy release&lt;br/&gt;and
causing nucleosynthesis by neutron capture from neutron fluxes intermediate
between the&lt;br/&gt;slow (s) and rapid (r) processes. This is the
intermediate, or i-process nucleosynthesis that&lt;br/&gt;is targeted in this
study. Accurate treatment of the convective boundary mixing that
drives&lt;br/&gt;this i-process requires full 3-D simulation. The rapid hydrogen
burning that ensues, together&lt;br/&gt;with the very large luminosities
involved make 3-D simulation affordable on NSF?s powerful&lt;br/&gt;new
supercomputing platform, Blue Waters, at NCSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new and
powerful capability will be built in this project to simulate these events by
coupling&lt;br/&gt;together 3-D simulations that cover brief time intervals with
1-D simulations spanning much&lt;br/&gt;longer times. In some cases that will be
addressed, it is possible to simulate the entire event&lt;br/&gt;in 3-D. In
others, 3-D simulations performed at intervals as part of a coupled 1-D and
3-D&lt;br/&gt;stellar evolution calculation will serve to recalibrate the
coefficients in approximate 1-D models&lt;br/&gt;for dynamic mixing processes.
Such coupled calculations will use these periodic model&lt;br/&gt;recalibrations
to validate the use of the models as the calculation progresses. When
unacceptably&lt;br/&gt;large revisions of model "constants" are indicated, a
recomputation with 3-D recalibrations&lt;br/&gt;taken at shorter time intervals
will result. This new process is called autocorrecting modeling.&lt;br/&gt;It
involves periodic generation of large amounts of 3-D data from simulation codes.
This data&lt;br/&gt;generation is followed by a detailed analysis of the data in
terms of 1-D models. The results&lt;br/&gt;of this analysis are then fed back
into the 1-D stellar evolution computation. Pioneering this&lt;br/&gt;new
approach is a major challenge of the project; the database of condensed
simulation results&lt;br/&gt;that will be built in the process will be a
significant outcome of the project. This data will be&lt;br/&gt;made available
first to collaborators and ultimately to the broad community. It will be
possible&lt;br/&gt;to use this data to formulate, validate, and refine
simplified models of the convective boundary&lt;br/&gt;mixing processes that are
a major focus of this study. It will also be possible for
others,&lt;br/&gt;potentially using quite different simulation software, to use
this data to adopt an autocorrecting&lt;br/&gt;modeling approach in studies of
related problems. In the first year of this project, a continuation&lt;br/&gt;of
present work with the well observed case of Sakurai's object is planned along
with application&lt;br/&gt;of the new techniques to simulations of low-mass,
low-metallicity AGB stars.