* 1440070
* 2014 SAT/SMT Summer School
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Clark Barrett, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

Formal methods have made significant advances during the last decade, and now
form the backbone of formal assurance across hardware and software industries.
Underlying many of these techniques is the capability to effectively reason
about system properties, often by describing the properties as constraint
satisfaction problems and delegating the reasoning to a constraint solver. The
most common constraint reasoning engines in use today are satisfiability (modulo
theories) solvers (SAT and SMT). As a rapidly developing field, there is a lack
of highly trained users and researchers that will sustain and further advance
the field. The SAT/SMT summer school addresses this issue by familiarizing young
researchers with cutting-edge solver technologies and their applications.

The SAT/SMT summer school addresses this issue by familiarizing young
researchers with cutting-edge solver technologies and their applications. The
lecturers at the school are world-renown experts, and the three day gathering
gives the students the opportunity to discuss the lecture topics, their own
research, and the challenges and future directions with these experts. The
material is covered rigorously, with depth and breadth, but at a pace
appropriate for a student audience, making the school a unique place for
disseminating new research to the future users and researchers.