* 1440074
* Understanding Decisions About Foreign Policy Interventions to Save Lives
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 49,996.00

The workshop examines, in a direct and intense way, issues of valuation,
judgment, preference, and choice that have engaged humanity for centuries and,
today, are at the heart of the modern intellectual enterprise known as
"Behavioral Decision Theory." Two primary intellectual debates lie at the heart
of this proposal. The first, involving economists, philosophers, and other
students of choice, concerns the influence on decisions of expressed or stated
values as compared to values that are revealed through choices. Previous
research has shown that the values indicated by these two modes of assessment
often differ. One explanation for such inconsistency has centered around the
weighting of the various attributes or objectives of decision options and the
evidence for systematic discrepancies in weighting associated with expressed and
revealed preferences. In particular, we shall examine the hypothesis that
objectives such as national security and economic security get relatively
greater weight compared to humanitarian objectives when values are revealed
through decisions as opposed to being explicitly stated. A second intellectual
debate addressed by the workshop concerns how tradeoffs involving multiple
dimensions of value "including such disparate concerns as lives, costs, national
security, uncertainty, politics, and reputation" should be evaluated as part of
difficult national policy choices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hard to imagine
an issue that has broader significance than understanding the place of
humanitarian objectives in national security decisions. Millions of lives and
global security depend on these decisions. Do the political, social, economic,
cultural, and humanitarian values that we assume should guide rational decision
making actually exist in some coherent and consistent form? If so, what are
these considered values and how do we ensure that our decisions, at the end of
the day, are in accord with these values? This project addresses these vital
questions within the framework of a workshop designed to clarify and address an
apparent disconnect between stated humanitarian aspirations and values and
subsequent lack of commensurate actions. Questions are asked of public and
expert participants in a workshop setting to better understand the underlying
reasons why expressed humanitarian values may collapse in the decision-making
process. A second objective is to understand the thinking of decision makers
with hands-on experience in decisions about whether to intervene in other
countries for humanitarian reasons.