* 1440811
* SI2-SSE: Development and Implementation of Software Elements using State-of-the-Art Computational Methodology to Advance Modeling Heterogeneities and Mixing in Earth's Mantle
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Elbridge Puckett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 502,715.00

This project involves the development and implementation of scientific software
elements (SSEs), based on modern, high-resolution numerical methods for modeling
steep gradients and sharp interfaces of material properties in viscous fluids in
the presence of thermal convection. The goal of this project is to address a
compelling need in geodynamics, in which continuum mechanics is applied to the
study of geophysical processes, such as convection in the Earth?s mantle. A
primary tool of geodynamics research is computational models of the flow of the
extremely viscous interior of the Earth over hundreds of millions to billions of
years. A long-standing challenge for these models is the need to accurately
model sharp interfaces in temperature, viscosity, and other properties. These
arise when, for example, modeling subduction (in which a cold tectonic plate
plunges into the hot interior) or rising plumes (in which a hot boundary layer
instability rises through the mantle and encounters the cold boundary layer of
the tectonic plates). The project will foster interdisciplinary communication
and the application of state-of-the-art applied and computational mathematics to
fundamental problems in geophysics. It involves early-career mathematical
scientists in the application of state-of-the-art numerical algorithms to
geodynamics and, in particular, will provide an opportunity to increase the
participation of women in mathematics and geodynamics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the design and
implementation of state-of-the-art SSEs for computing the evolution of
significant processes in the Earth's mantle in which an essential feature of the
problem is the presence of one or more moving boundaries, interfaces, or steep
gradients in temperature, composition, or viscosity. The SSEs will address two
critical issues that currently limit modern mantle convection simulations. All
computational models of mantle convection currently in use produce significant
overshoot and undershoot in the neighborhood of sharp gradients in temperature
and viscosity. The cause of these overshoots and undershoots is a numerical
artifact, which is well-known and well-understood in other fields, such as the
computational shock physics community. Over the past thirty years researchers in
computational shock physics have developed a variety of high-order accurate,
monotone numerical methods, which preserve the physically correct maximum and
minimum values of the computed quantities, while producing a high-order accurate
numerical approximation of these quantities. Another compelling need in
computational geodynamics is the ability to track discontinuous jumps in
quantities such as material composition. Here high-order accurate interface
tracking algorithms are required, since these fields undergo large-scale
deformation, yet quantities such as the viscosity must be accurately
approximated at the interface between two materials.