* 1440715
* CC*IIE Integration: RADII: Resource Aware DatacentrIc CollaboratIon Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Ilya Baldin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 853,658.00

Science collaborations today are multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary,
requiring processing of large datasets that are distributed among their
participants. They also require advanced computing and networking infrastructure
to process the data and arrive at results. A fundamental problem with the way
these collaborations operate today lies in the fact that they are structured
around the ownership of data or necessary pieces of infrastructure, rather than
around the talents and capabilities of participating organizations. This project
is developing mechanisms for mapping collaborations onto the new type of
dynamically configurable, deeply networked institutional cloud infrastructure,
where data is a first-class resource. By integrating data and resource
management into a single system RADII aims at improving the productivity of
research scientists and reducing time to discovery and operating
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RADII leverages two previous NSF investments:
dynamic infrastructure technologies developed for NSF GENI initiative and the
iRODS data grid system for maintaining large distributed datasets. The project
is developing software tools to represent science collaborations using formal
modeling mechanisms, map data processes, computations and storage onto physical
infrastructure and flexibly manage the underlying infrastructure to optimize its
utilization across multiple collaborations. The project uses several examples of
collaborations from genomics to demonstrate how such collaborations can map onto
infrastructure in a more flexible and cost effective way compared to today.