* 1440464
* Building Capacity for Computer Science Teaching in a Rural State
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Thomas Keller, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 02/28/2019
* USD 562,966.00

Developing computer science teachers who can support high school students in
being successful in rigorous, academic computer science courses is a national
need, particularly in rural communities. This project aims to permanently
increase the capacity of the state of Maine to offer high quality computer
science instruction. The STEM-C (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics, including Computing) Partnerships program supports research-driven
partnerships between STEM experts and K-12 school systems to bring about
institutional change for better STEM education at the K-12 level. This STEM-C
Partnerships Computer Science Expansion project builds on a previously
successful Partnership and now works to infuse high quality computer science
curriculum and teaching into high schools across Maine. Over a three-year
period, this Partnership will support seventy-five current teachers of
mathematics in becoming computer science teachers. The Partnership supporting
this project is comprised of the Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance, the
University of Maine at Augusta, and Regional School Unit RSU #26 (Orono, Maine),
with support from the Maine Department of Education, the University of
California Los Angeles Exploring Computer Science project, the Computer Science
Teachers' Association, the IEEE K-12 STEM Literacy Committee, and industry
partners.

Curriculum will be developed to train mostly current teachers of mathematics so
that they will be able to offer the Exploring Computer Science (ECS) course to
high school level students. This ECS course will be developed around Maine
employers and the ways in which computer science is used across sectors in the
state of Maine, including Axiom Technologies, Mount Desert Island Biological
Laboratory, Jackson Laboratory, Kepware Technologies, and L.L.Bean. A Computer
Science Teaching Methods course will be developed and made available online
through the University of Maine at Augusta. The project will build knowledge
through its research effort related to the following question: How can industry
examples of computer science principles support teachers' ability to apply these
principles to relevant contexts? Moreover, the work of the Partnership will
result in the development of a model for rural states to sustainably provide
computer science professional development, as well as give rise to
institutionalization of a rigorous in-service training course for prospective
computer science teachers. The project evaluation contains formative and
summative evaluation of teacher impact and partnership growth. Major
contributions of this project include: a) informing the statewide process of
examining technology and mathematics curricula and considering ways to
incorporate computer science in those curricula; b) significantly increasing the
capacity of the state to offer computer science statewide; and c) potentially
inspiring new models for workplace-based curriculum.