* 1440059
* Unveiling allosteric pathways in ion channels
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Michael Klein, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,204.00

Ion channels are ubiquitous proteins--one of Nature?s exquisite nano-scale
molecular machines--that reside in membranes of excitable cells. Their role is
to convert chemical and electrical stimuli into ionic currents. Conformational
changes in the part of the protein responsible for sensing a stimulus
(transducer domain) trigger the gate (effector domain), which can open and
close, thereby controlling the flux of ions across the cell membrane. Details of
this so-called allosteric communication are of broad relevance to physiology:
several drug molecules target ion channels, including neurotoxins and
anesthetics, and work by interfering with the coupling between the transducer
and effector domains. Thus, a molecular-level description of allosteric signal
propagation in such voltage-gated-like ion channels will likely inform the
design of selective allosteric drugs. Importantly, quantitative allosteric
models can be crucial to shed light on the mechanisms of modulation of
electrical activity in neurons, an endeavor that is made particularly timely by
the recent funding of independent large-scale scientific initiatives (e.g., the
US Brain and the EU Human Brain projects), which are aimed at achieving
unprecedented understanding of neuronal circuits.

Despite its broad relevance, the macroscopic thermodynamic concept of allostery
is difficult to characterize using only experiment. This project aims to use
molecular dynamics (MD) based fully atomistic simulations to bridge the gap
between thermodynamic observables and the underlying microscopic dynamics
involved in the functioning of ion channels. The ultimate goal is to disentangle
the intricate circuitry of energetic and statistical coupling among a
functioning channel?s constituent amino acids in order to highlight the network
of residue-residue interactions sustaining the mechanical coupling between
distinct protein domains. To this end, the petascale capabilities of Blue Waters
will be harnessed to generate long time-scales MD trajectories. Data generated
will involve either the canonical ensemble or, by using enhanced sampling
techniques such as metadyamics, appropriately biased probability distributions.
Crucial milestones are the characterization of the free-energy landscape for
channel activation/opening and its reshaping upon binding of modulating drugs.
Knowledge of the free-energy landscape will inform the final milestone of the
project, which takes advantage of a novel coarse-grained analysis of the
generated MD trajectories to highlight residue-residue interactions crucial for
allosteric signal propagation. The study focuses on three families of voltage-
gated-like ion channels that are activated by different stimuli: transient
receptor potential channels, voltage gated cation channels, and
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-binding channels.