* 1440830
* GRC Granular and Granular-Fluid Flow: Fundamental Challenges and Applications of Particulate Systems, July 20-25, 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2015
* USD 17,400.00

NSF funds will be used to support the registration and travel costs for junior
and early career scientists and engineers at the 2014 Gordon Research Conference
on Granular and Granular-Fluid Flows. We will also use these funds to support
participation by members of underrepresented groups. Such support will fill a
crucial, national need to continue to train the future work force in the science
of particle technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are ubiquitous
in a range of industrial and natural systems, yet a quantitative understanding
of many phenomena remains elusive and predictive capabilities remain limited.
Advances in this field require the participation of multiple scientific and
engineering disciplines, each of which has its own goals and techniques. As an
example of the interdisciplinary nature of this subject, the proposed conference
will highlight connections to the pharmaceutical industry and to the bulk
materials processing industry and will focus on the basic and applied aspects of
shear-induced transitions in granular media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC
provides a unique forum for the exchange of fresh scientific ideas between
disciplines, as well as between junior and senior researchers. The guiding
principles of the conference include the presentation of new, unpublished work
followed by free, unhampered discussion among participants from disciplines that
normally do not intersect. The structure GRC accomplishes this by providing
formal discussion periods after every talk (guided by a discussion leader), time
for small-group discussions, daily poster sessions, and shared meals with on-
site housing. Each discussion leader will prepare a short presentation to
provide context and provoke good discussions. This format provides an
environment in which new collaborations can be forged to help tackle
longstanding problems.&lt;br/&gt;