* 1440409
* Long-Term Ecological Research at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest (LTER7)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2022
* Julia Jones, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2022
* USD 6,891,952.00

Climate change forecasts for the Pacific Northwest portend drought, decreased
snow packs, and increased wildfire. Predictions for how Pacific Northwest
ecosystems will respond to climate change face both scientific and social
challenges. First, observed rates of climate change in this region vary in both
space and time. Second, forest governance systems face conflicting pressures to
provide timber, restore ecological processes, maintain biodiversity, and
facilitate adaptation of forests to climate change. The goal of this long-term
project is to identify the mechanisms that determine how forested mountain
ecosystems respond to changes in climate, land-use, and their interactions. Over
the next six years, research will focus on determining how intermittent,
spatially variable flows of air, water, nutrients, organisms, and information
may reduce or accentuate the effects of regional and global climate change and
land use in mountain ecosystems. Simultaneously, researchers will examine how
humans and institutions make decisions that affect forest governance. These
approaches in combination will engage the public, resource managers, and
policymakers in studies of changing social networks influencing forest
landscapes and conservation ethics analyses of arguments used in forest
governance. Collaborations with arts and humanities will enhance public literacy
about science, demonstrate the value of long-term ecological research, and
convey the strong sense of place necessary to improve the well being of
individuals in society. The project will continue education, outreach and STEM
development for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students and teachers as well
as the public, with explicit emphasis on enhancing participation of women,
people with disabilities, and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the central question of
how climate, natural disturbance, and land use as controlled by forest
governance interact with biodiversity, hydrology, and carbon and nutrient
dynamics in a forested ecosystem. Research will use the lens of "connectivity"
to evaluate and characterize spatial and temporal patterns and processes in the
old-growth temperate forests, streams, and montane meadows of the mountain
landscape of the Andrews Forest. Analyses of long-term climate and hydrology
records and short-term mechanistic studies will investigate patterns and drivers
of air and water flow in the landscape to assess how temperature, moisture, and
associated fluxes of carbon and nutrients in forested mountain ecosystems are
connected to or decoupled from regional and global climate. Analyses of long-
term vegetation records combined with short-term studies of phenology and
organism movement will examine the implications of timing of trophic connections
and landscape connectivity for community structure and function in forests and
montane meadows. Long-term studies of stream ecosystems and short-term
experiments will test how stream community structure and function depend on
network-level connectivity. Researchers will study how perceptions of the
landscape influence societal expectations, social networks, and social
movements, and examine the relationship between the arguments underpinning
forest policy and the validity and soundness of those arguments. Research on the
changing history of relations between Andrews Forest science, federal forest
policymaking, and federal forest management along with the implications of that
change for ecosystem function will contribute to theories regarding the role of
social networks in governance and landscape transformation, and the functioning
of social-ecological systems.