* 1440869
* Curriculum and Community Enterprise for New York Harbor Restoration in New York City Public Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Robert Newton, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 09/30/2018
* USD 5,374,972.00

Research consistently shows that children who have opportunities to actively
investigate natural settings and engage in problem-based learning greatly
benefit from the experiences. They gain skills, interests, knowledge,
aspirations, and motivation to learn more. But how can we provide these rich
opportunities in densely populated urban areas where resources and access to
natural areas are limited? This project will develop and test a model of
curriculum and community enterprise to address that issue within the nation's
largest urban school system. Middle school students will study New York harbor
and the extensive watershed that empties into it, and they will conduct field
research in support of restoring native oyster habitats. The project builds on
the existing Billion Oyster Project, and will be implemented by a broad
partnership of institutions and community resources, including Pace University,
the New York City Department of Education, the Columbia University Lamont-
Doherty Earth Observatory, the New York Academy of Sciences, the New York Harbor
Foundation, the New York Aquarium, and others.

The project focuses on an important concept in the geological, environmental,
and biological sciences that typically receives inadequate attention in schools:
watersheds. This project builds on and extends the Billion Oyster Project of the
New York Harbor School. The project model includes five interrelated components:
A teacher education curriculum, a student learning curriculum, a digital
platform for project resources, an aquarium exhibit, and an afterschool STEM
mentoring program. The project targets middle-school students in low-income
neighborhoods with high populations of English language learners and students
from groups underrepresented in STEM fields and education pathways. The project
will directly involve over forthy schools, eighty teachers, and 8,640 students
over a period of three years. A quasi-experimental, mixed-methods research plan
will be used to assess the individual and collective effectiveness of the five
project components. Regression analyses will be used to identify effective
program aspects and assess the individual effectiveness of participation in
various combinations of the five program components. Social network mapping will
be used to further asses the overall "curriculum plus community" model.