* 1440646
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Accelerating Science,Translational Research, and Collaboration at the University of Pittsburgh through the Implementation of Network Upgrades.
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Mahmud Barmada, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,437.00

The "CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Accelerating Science, Translational
Research, and Collaboration at the University of Pittsburgh Through the
Implementation of Network Upgrades" project adds new capacity and capabilities
to the University's cyberinfrastructure enabling research and e-science using
high performance computing (HPC) and big-data resources. This project upgrades
the campus network connection to the regional gateway, increases network
capacity to the University data center, and provides improved utility to
collaborators engaged in local, regional, and international science projects.
The foundation provided by this new capacity enables enhancement of Pitt's
cyberinfrastructure to meet rapidly expanding needs in collaborative and multi-
disciplinary data-driven research. Using the ScienceDMZ design pattern improves
the movement of scientific data flows and allows new modes of sharing and
collaboration. Research projects benefiting from this include scalable
approaches for use of extremely large-scale genomics data sets for research in
personalized medicine, interdisciplinary collaborations expanding the state-of-
the-art in high-fidelity predictions of turbulent reacting flows, and
contributions to the ATLAS project involving discoveries in high-energy particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving researchers' ability to exploit capacity
and knowledge brings broader impacts within and beyond domain science areas such
as high energy physics. Numerous sponsored projects benefit from the improved
capacity to local, regional and international scientific resources. New network
capacity and capabilities spur new collaboration and education opportunities for
undergraduate research, teaching, training, and sharing of data with a larger
community of research scientists and network engineers. Project communications
include on-campus workshops, meetings, presentations and regular e-based
communications to communities of faculty, students, and researchers.