* 1440624
* Collaborative Research: Skeletal muscle constraint on relative brain size
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Magdalena Muchlinski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2017
* USD 191,666.00

The growth and maintenance of the brain require substantial investments of
energy, most especially for organisms which have evolved very large and complex
brains. One of the most defining characteristics for the human species and the
other primates is large brain size relative to body size. Yet, despite having
larger brains than most other mammals, human and nonhuman primates do not show
an increase in their basal metabolic rate (a measure of energy utilization by
the body) compared to other mammals, raising the question of how the high
energetic cost of such large brains is met. This trend suggests that there is an
energetic trade-off with another energy-demanding tissue in the body when brain
size increases; if we are not using more energy overall, then energy that could
be invested in another part of our body is instead likely being utilized to fuel
our large brains. Preliminary research shows that primates have low muscle mass
when compared to other animals, and humans, who have the most notable increase
in brain size, show a 50% reduction in overall muscle mass when compared with
other mammals. This research therefore tests the hypothesis that skeletal muscle
is in direct competition with the brain for glucose and oxygen, such that the
high energetic demands of large brain size are met through constraining muscle
mass, constituting an energetic tradeoff between skeletal muscle growth and
maintenance, and brain growth and maintenance.

If the brain does constrain muscle mass, then 1)larger brains should be
associated with decreased skeletal muscle mass; 2)the percentage of type I
muscle fibers (a type of muscle cell that uses energy [glucose, a type of sugar]
in a similar fashion to brain cells) should show a relative decrease in relation
to larger brain size; and 3)muscle mass development should be suppressed until
brain growth is complete, and once complete, there should be an increase in
muscle mass development. To test these predictions, muscle tissue samples will
be collected from a diverse array of primate specimens, comprising a range of
brain sizes and representing all developmental stages. The generated muscle
energy use profiles for each species will then be analyzed in relation to
variation in brain size, with the results applied to understanding the
interaction between brain size and evolved metabolic strategies.

Reducing muscle mass may have predisposed primates such as humans to certain
metabolic disorders (e.g., type 2 diabetes); thus, understanding if there is
such a constraint has important health implications. Ultimately, the data
collected can be incorporated into studies of growth and development, as well as
biomechanics, and the results may encourage development of biomedical gene
therapies. The research also will provide a rich database for scientists in
other disciplines focusing on animal anatomy and physiology, facilitating and
expanding future research. The collaborative project brings together
international researchers, and will support the training of multiple
undergraduate and graduate students from three US universities. As two of these
universities are in EPSCoR states, and one is a historically minority-serving
institution, the project will foster research advancement for underserved and
underrepresented populations.