* 1440564
* Early environments, epigenetics, and inflammation during pregnancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Kobor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 284,153.00

Environments early in life, during critical periods of development, have lasting
effects on human biology. It is well established that nutritional and microbial
environments in infancy shape the development and function of the human immune
system, but the long term effects of early environments on the regulation of
inflammation are not known. Inflammation is important because acute inflammatory
responses provide protection against infection, but chronic or dysregulated
inflammatory responses contribute to diseases that represent major public health
burdens in the US, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and adverse
pregnancy outcomes like low birth weight and preterm delivery. Scientists also
have discovered that epigenetic processes - chemical modifications to genes that
have enduring effects on their activity - are important biological mechanisms
through which adults 'remember' the environments they experienced early in life.
By taking advantage of a unique longitudinal birth cohort study in the
Philippines, with more than 30 years of prospective data, this project will
contribute to scientific understandings of how environments in infancy can
influence the regulation of inflammation in adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on pregnant women, since inflammation is activated as part of
normal pregnancy, but dysregulated inflammation contributes to preterm labor and
delivery and fetal growth restriction. The research tests the hypothesis that
undernutrition in infancy (prenatally and postnatally), and low levels of
exposure to common microbes (e.g., bacteria in soil, untreated water),
contribute to elevated levels of inflammation during pregnancy. It also tests
the hypothesis that elevated inflammation during pregnancy leads to adverse
birth outcomes (preterm delivery, lower birth weight). Lastly, the project
investigates methylation of inflammatory genes - an epigenetic process that
modifies gene expression - as a biological mechanism linking early environments,
inflammation, and birth outcomes. Data and samples come from an ongoing birth
cohort study in the Philippines that has followed the same individuals since
their mothers were pregnant with them in 1983-84. The dataset is unique in
having the time depth, range of measures, and environmental variation necessary
to test the project's hypotheses. Results will shed new light on the
developmental processes that contribute to chronic inflammation, with potential
implications for well-being of the next generation. In addition, the focus on
epigenetics in relation to the social and physical contexts of development will
encourage a reconceptualization of the human genome as a dynamic substrate that
incorporates information from the environment to alter its structure and
function.