* 1440045
* Core-Collapse Supernovae Through Cosmic Time
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephen Bruenn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 22,680.00

When massive stars (those with at least 8 times the Sun's mass) reach the end of
their existence they can explode releasing large quantities of heavy elements
that enrich the next generation of stars. Modeling these core-collapse
supernovae and their ejecta requires complex and well resolved three-dimensional
numerical simulations running on large computers. The abundances of heavy
elements (known as 'metals' to astronomers) has increased from none in the very
first stars formed after the Big Bang to the Solar-like composition found in
recently formed stars in the nearby universe. Supernovae are dependent on the
pre-explosion structure of the star, which is dependent on both the stellar mass
and the amount of 'metals' in the star. To cover the variation through cosmic
time in the stars that explode as supernovae we will compute three well-resolved
3D supernova simulations for low, medium, and high mass exploding stars at each
of three 'metallicities' representing the build-up of heavy elements from the
primordial zero metallicity to solar metallicity. From these simulations the
investigators will extract the properties of the explosions and their ejecta to
get a better understanding of the nature of the supernova mechanism and its
contributions to the evolution of galaxies through cosmic
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use their multi-physics
Chimera code, which includes neutrino radiation hydrodynamics with modern
neutrino-matter interactions, general relativistic corrections to multi-pole
self-gravity, a dense matter nuclear equation of state, and built-in nuclear
networks to compute evolving abundances in the non-equilibrium layers outside
the iron-core and in the ejecta. The three simulations of 1-degree resolution
will be computed at each metallicity from low (about 10 solar mass), medium (15
solar mass), and high (about 25 solar mass) progenitors found to explode in
similar 2D (axisymmetric) simulations. Simulations will be computed at zero,
solar, and low metallicities and both direct and post-processed nucleosynthesis
will be computed for the ejecta. Additional analyses will produce gravitational
wave and neutrino signals that directly probe the central supernova engine.