* 1440294
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  CyberConnector:  Bridging the Earth Observations and Earth Science Modeling for Supporting Model Validation, Verification, and Inter-comparison
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Liping Di, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

The project will 1) significantly increase research productivity in the Earth
science modeling community, 2) enable the effective use of the existing Sensor
Web data and Earth Observations through open Web interfaces and metadata
standards, 3) foster collaborations among Earth system modelers, geospatial
information scientists, and information technologists, and 4) enhance
infrastructure for Earth science research and education. CyberConnector will
free scientists from the laborious preparation of model inputs and release of
model outputs. It will automatically process the Earth Observation data into the
right products in the right form needed for Earth Systems Model initialization,
validation, and inter-comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project developes an
EarthCube building block, called CyberConnector, for facilitating the automatic
preparation and feeding of both historic and near-real time Earth Observation
customized data and on-demand derived products into Earth science models. will
automatically process the EO data into the right products in the right form
needed for ESM initialization, validation, and inter-comparison. It can support
many different ESMs through its standard interfaces under a unified framework.
CyberConnector can also automatically serve the model outputs in interoperable
forms through standard data services to facilitate rapid inter-model comparison
and support the societal applications of the model outputs. Recent EarthCube
end-user workshops indicate the proposed capabilities of the CyberConnector are
at the top of the wish lists of multiple Earth science communities. To achieve
these capabilities, this project leverages the online availability of huge
volume of EO data at EO cyberinfrastructure of NSF (e.g., Unidata, NEON), other
federal agencies (NASA, NOAA, USGS), and international EO organizations (e.g.,
CEOS members), advancements in standard-based geospatial web service and sensor
web technologies, and successful cyber-systems built by the investigators of
this proposal and others (e.g., GeoBrain, SEPS, GEOSS, and CWIC). The proposed
project will closely collaborate with other EarthCube building block teams and
end-user communities. The ISO geospatial data and metadata standards and
standard-based geospatial web service, workflows, and sensor web technologies
are the foundation for this project.The Cloud-Resolving Model (CRM), the
Community Multi-scale Air Quality Model (CMAQ), the Finite Volume Coastal Ocean
Model (FVCOM), and the Grassland and Agroecosystem Dynamics Model (CENTURY) will
be used as examples in this project to test, validate, and demonstrate the
capabilities and functionality of CyberConnector.The CyberConnector approach is
a general one that can support many different Earth system models through the
standard interfaces and the geospatial processing model (GPM) mechanism