* 1440545
* Collaborative Research: Integrative analysis of ingestive biomechanics and dental microwear in evolutionary and ecological context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Barth Wright, KANSAS CITY UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 69,922.00

Modern humans exhibit small teeth, lightly built jaws and weak chewing muscles -
anatomical features which have been shaped by evolutionary processes related to
dietary intake and the processing of foods. The fossil record demonstrates that
our morphology stands in contrast to that of our ancestors, who evolved to have
large, strong teeth, massive jaws and powerful chewing muscles. Evolutionary
explanations for this change include competing hypotheses as to how natural
selection on diet drove adaptation over the course of human evolution. These
hypotheses suggest that the presence or absence of either very hard or very
tough foods may have been a critical factor influencing the evolution of our
ancestors. Alternatively, the hardness or toughness of foods may have been less
important than the behaviors (i.e., biting, puncturing, crushing, twisting,
grinding) used to process foods of various shape and size with the jaws and
teeth. This project will provide evidence to differentiate between these
selective scenarios, thereby contributing to a fuller understanding of the
evolutionary processes that have shaped this important aspect of modern human
anatomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will require focus on a primate
model, South American capuchins, which exhibit the relevant diversity in
musculoskeletal anatomy and diet requisite to testing hypotheses regarding how
food properties (i.e., hardness, toughness) or feeding behaviors influence the
evolution of feeding adaptations. The study integrates observations of capuchin
feeding behavior in the wild with laboratory experiments, advanced computer
modeling using engineering methods, examination of the microscopic damage done
to teeth by food and other items (i.e., dental microwear), the determination of
the material properties (i.e., hardness, toughness) of food resources in the
wild, and the collection and analysis of abrasive particles adhering to those
foods (that might be influencing microwear patterns). Collectively, these data
in capuchins will allow us to evaluate the assumptions underlying our
interpretations of the interrelationships between dietary behavior, food
resources, and the biology of our human ancestors, thereby transforming our
understanding of human evolutionary history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are considerable. In relation to the public
understanding of science, the research provides information that will address a
topic of great public interest; namely, our own evolutionary history. As a
related benefit, the project illustrates how ecological factors affecting other
animals may be equally relevant and impactful for our own species. In terms of
STEM training, research training opportunities are provided for high school
students, undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, many of
whom are expected (based on past history at the collaborating institutions) to
be young female scientists. The project also contributes to environmental
awareness by collecting basic ecological data relevant to rainforest
conservation. In the process of doing so, it further develops collaborative ties
with international counterparts and institutions. Lastly, the project
illustrates to the engineering community how their methods can be used to answer
evolutionary questions.