* 1440396
* SI2-SSE: Dynamic Adaptive Runtime Systems for Advanced Multipole Method-based Science Achievement
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Bo Zhang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2017
* USD 522,676.00

Multipole methods, including the fast multipole method and the Barnes-Hut
algorithm, contribute to a broad range of end-user science applications
extending from molecular dynamics to galaxy formation. Multipole methods are
widely applied to N-body like problems where the individual interactions of a
large number of distant objects can be treated as a single interaction under the
appropriate conditions. This simplification eliminates the need for computing
individual pairwise interactions and results in a drastic speed-up of
computation. However, conventional parallel multipole methods are facing serious
challenges to remain competitive as computational resources approach Exascale.
Many applications employing multipole methods describe very dynamic physical
processes, both in their time dependence and in their range of relevant spatial
scales, while conventional implementations of multipole methods are essentially
static in nature leading to computational inefficiencies. &lt;br/&gt;This
project provides a fine-grained data-driven approach for multipole methods in
order to address the limitations of conventional practices and improve
scalability and efficiency. The software library employs dynamic adaptive
execution methods with multipole-specific strategies for fault tolerance and
exception handling while simplifying the implementation of the fast multipole
method and the Barnes-Hut algorithm for end-users. The project software library
immediately impacts science applications based on multipole methods by improving
application scalability and efficiency and providing fault tolerance, a global
address space, and an Exascale-ready execution model which integrates the entire
system stack. The software library provides a portable and easy-to-use interface
that allows scientists to work more efficiently and take advantage of high
performance computing resources more effectively. The software library also
serves to inform the evolution and development of other languages and
programming models aiming to improve performance by shifting to message-driven
techniques.