* 1440485
* LTER: The Interacting Effects of Hydroclimate Variability and Human Landscape Modification in the Southern Appalachian Mountains
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Theodore Gragson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2018
* USD 2,593,333.00

The southern Appalachian Mountains are a biodiversity hotspot undergoing rapid
development. They harbor unique species and assemblages, and are the source of
freshwater as well as a recreational destination for human populations in nearby
metropolitan areas. The total rural and urban population of the southern
Appalachian region is expected to continue growing at double-digit rates for the
foreseeable future, accompanied by conversion of forested land to developed
areas. Forests such as those in southern Appalachia have developed under
moisture-rich climates, and may be particularly susceptible to the increased
droughts predicted as human demand for water increases and as climate changes.
This long-term research addresses the complexity of organismal responses to
increasing variability in moisture regimes, linking results of basic research to
their practical implications. The Coweeta Listening Project and the Coweeta
Scholyard Program translate and communicate community-relevant research results
to engage society with science in the southern Appalachian Mountains.
Educational activities include field-based environmental education and in-
classroom support for middle school teachers and students, as well as outreach
programs to land owners on the importance of riparian corridor
integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue to examine how
hydroclimate variability and the human-modified landscape separately and
interactively alter southern Appalachian Mountain ecosystem processes and biotic
communities that, in turn, affect the vulnerabilities of regional socio-
ecological systems. The research builds on long-term studies across numerous
permanent plots within and beyond the Coweeta Basin that include over 20 years
of tree demographic data representing more than 350,000 tree-years. Performance
and abundance of a suite of herbaceous, invertebrate, and vertebrate species
will be measured within and beyond the Coweeta Basin. A large-scale experiment
will be used to assess the post-rhododendron removal rates of recovery for
vegetation dynamics, soil microbial communities, soil extracellular enzyme
activity, and nutrient pools and fluxes. Treatments will examine processes at
the interface between terrestrial and stream ecosystems based on intensive plot-
scale and extensive reach-scale measurements. Modeling of past and present
hydroclimate variability will be used to establish ecosystem function and risks
from local to regional geographies. Understanding the relationships between
ecosystems, organisms, and their responses to the forces of hydroclimate
variability and human activities on the land are essential if ecological science
is to anticipate, respond to, and mitigate these changes and the associated
vulnerabilities.