* 1440032
* Three Dimensional Modeling of Core-Collapse Supernovae
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Joshua Dolence, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,430.00

Core-collapse supernovae dramatically announce the death of massive
stars&lt;br/&gt;and the birth of neutron stars, pulsars, and black holes. They
are the&lt;br/&gt;sites where most of the heavy elements of Nature are created.
Viewed as a&lt;br/&gt;nuclear physics laboratory, core-collapse supernovae
produce some of the&lt;br/&gt;highest densities and energies in the Universe,
and during this violent&lt;br/&gt;process a combination of nuclear physics,
turbulent hydrodynamics,&lt;br/&gt;radiation transport, and neutrino physics
determines whether and how the&lt;br/&gt;star explodes. However, to date the
puzzle of the precise mechanism of&lt;br/&gt;explosion has not been cracked. A
thesis of this team is that a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental impediment to progress over
the last few decades may have been&lt;br/&gt;the lack of access to codes,
computers, and resources with which to&lt;br/&gt;properly simulate the collapse
phenomenon. This could explain the&lt;br/&gt;agonizingly slow march since the
1960's towards demonstrating a robust&lt;br/&gt;mechanism of explosion. However,
with the state-of-the-art computer code&lt;br/&gt;this team has recently
developed, the time may now be ripe to make a final&lt;br/&gt;assault on this
central problem in astrophysics. Going to fully&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional
neutrino radiation-hydrodynamics and employing the best&lt;br/&gt;neutrino and
nuclear physics may together be the keys to demonstrating
and&lt;br/&gt;understanding the generic core-collapse supernova explosion
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;Since these supernova simulations lend themselves easily to
public and&lt;br/&gt;school outreach, the team plans to generate video products
for public&lt;br/&gt;talks and web-based
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core-collapse supernovae probe the nuclear
and particle physics of matter&lt;br/&gt;at super-nuclear density, high
temperature, and at extremes of isospin.&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the
experimental nuclear physics program of the NSF&lt;br/&gt;by exploring
nucleosynthesis in astrophysical explosions, the properties&lt;br/&gt;of the
neutrino, and the equation of state of nuclear matter. The &lt;br/&gt;numerical
simulations connect directly with the lower-energy programs of&lt;br/&gt;FRIB
and FAIR, the high-energy experiments carried out at RHIC and the&lt;br/&gt;LHC,
and the hyperon-hyperon and hyperon-nucleon programs of JPARC,
GSI,&lt;br/&gt;JLAB, and NICA. In addition, a solution to the core-collapse
supernova&lt;br/&gt;problem will benefit ongoing efforts of observers and
instrument&lt;br/&gt;designers in the U.S. and around the world engaged in
projects to&lt;br/&gt;determine the origin of the elements, measure
gravitational waves (LIGO),&lt;br/&gt;and interpret laboratory nuclear reaction
rate measurements in light of&lt;br/&gt;stellar nucleosynthesis.