* 1440361
* Computing with Biomolecules: From Network Motifs to Complex and Adaptive Systems: ALife14 Workshop
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

The purpose of the Computing with Biomolecules: From Network Motifs to Complex
and Adaptive Systems workshop (http://bit.ly/Alife14BiomoleculesWorkshop),
organized in conjunction with the 14th International Conference on the Synthesis
and Simulation of Living Systems, is to bring together researchers, postdocs,
and students working in the area of computing with biomolecules. Student
involvement in the workshop is key in order to educate and train a new workforce
for this cutting-edge field of research, which has many biomedical applications.
New discoveries and technologies in biomedical technology have the potential for
a major beneficial impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing today faces
new challenges in the form of increase in design complexity and serious
manufacturing issues. Simultaneously, new applications areas, such as medicine
and biotechnology, cry out for both more computing resources and novel ways of
coupling computation to the physical world. The challenges to the conventional
way in which computer hardware and software have been built for the past half-
century inspire a quest for novel and unconventional computing machines, going
beyond standard approaches - Boolean logic gates and von Neumann computer
architectures. Applications in biotechnology suggest one should seek
biocompatible computing substrates for the new computing machines. This requires
new paradigms and engineering methods to organize, interact with, and program
such machines in order to meet real-world challenges of tomorrow and to
guarantee continuing progress in computer science. Biomolecular components are
promising building blocks for next-generation computing machines. They have
unique properties, such as biocompatibility, adaptability, and manifest ability
to self-organize. A systematic understanding of how to build system-level
complexity with molecular networks, in the form of engineering principles and
abstractions, is called for, if general-purpose large-scale molecular circuits
are to be implemented, within the constraints imposed by the chemical kinetics
and interfering side reactions. The purpose of this workshop is to bring
together researchers, postdocs, and students working in the area of computing
with biomolecules. The workshop will be a forum for exchange of cutting-edge
research, with an emphasis on exchanges among the students and postdocs. A
special focus of the workshop will be directed toward large-scale biomolecular
automata that adapt and learn. Such systems typically require the coupling of
hundreds to thousands of molecules into complex interactive networks. The
workshop will foster discussion of new approaches and visions, and critical
reflection on current approaches. In addition to regular presentations, one
invited talk given by a luminary in the field is planned. Last but not least,
the forum will allow participants to probe the fundamental similarities and
differences between information processing in biochemical ("living") systems and
digital/electronic ("computer") systems.