* 1440478
* LTER V: Long Term Pulse Dynamics in an Aridland Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,038,609.00

Arid-land ecosystems cover more than 40% of continental land area of the Earth.
They support local economies comprised of ranchers, farmers, and pastoralists
around the world. Transitions from grass- to shrub-dominated communities are
increasing in frequency, threatening human well-being and these economies in
both developed and developing countries. This long-term project explores the
diverse mechanisms responsible for these changes in an effort to predict the
future of arid-land habitats. Clear understanding of underlying mechanisms is
necessary to maintain arable land and ecosystem services necessary for human
well being. The project engages hundreds of middle and high school students and
teachers who sample along the Middle Rio Grande, a highly visible and highly
disturbed ecosystem. The resulting data are used by local conservancy groups,
the US Army Corps of Engineers, the US Bureau of Reclamation, and the US Fish
and Wildlife Service, to name a few among many agencies, in management of an
economically and culturally important region. Participants in the Bosque
Ecosystem Monitoring Program blend Hispanic, Native American, and Anglo cultures
and integrate participants from inner-city, suburban, and rural areas. By
connecting K-12 and university students in scientific research, the project
enhances education in STEM fields. Undergraduate training is also extensive,
involving national efforts to recruit under-served groups into science and
participation from the Southwest Indian Polytechnic Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the Sevilleta Long Term Ecological Research
site seeks to understand how abiotic drivers and constraints affect the pulse
dynamics and stability of arid-land populations, communities, and ecosystems.
This award will extend previous research on short-term, local-scale processes to
understand pulse-driven regional-scale transitions and transfer of materials
between landscape units. An experiment at the grassland-shrubland transition
will be initiated to understand the roles of shallow versus deep soil moisture
in plant and microbial exchanges and associated ecosystem processes. A rain
manipulation will impose large monsoons to assess the impact of rainfall pulses,
and manipulations of fragile bio-crusts will document exchanges and biotic
interactions underlying a novel loop by which fungi integrate ecosystem
functions by transforming, translocating, and storing C and nutrients. New
research in pinon-juniper woodlands will examine plant function across this
transition and assess microbial community responses to water manipulations. This
research will compare the role that fungi play in woodlands with the roles that
microbes play in grasslands. High resolution measurements of daily and seasonal
changes in water quality and quantity will be used to document how disturbances
such as fire interact with pulses of rain to transfer nutrients and organic
matter into tributaries that feed the Rio Grande River. Results from these
diverse activities will be integrated, using simulation models, to document the
effects that precipitation pulses have on plant recruitment, growth, and
mortality of different species at the plant to patch scale, and how these drive
long-term patterns in dominance and composition across landscapes.