* 1440737
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: FLowell: Accelerating Data-Driven Scientific Research at the University of Massachusetts Lowell
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Vinod Vokkarane, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 512,000.00

The FLowell project accelerates a set of data-driven science projects at the
University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML) by enhancing campus cyberinfrastructure
(CI) with a software defined 10Gbps science network, deploying an advanced and
fully network (SDN) integrated computing/storage rack at the Massachusetts Green
High Performance Computing Center (MGHPCC), and connecting researchers labs at
10Gbps rate to the MGHPCC as well as external collaborators for highly efficient
data sharing and transfer. The UML campus has seen a tremendous growth of data
intensive research in many disciplines such as atmospheric science, network
science, biomedical science and data management. To fulfill the data transfer
needs from these projects, there is a strong call to address the slow network
access speed, constraints on network management policies, and inefficient
connectivity to MGHPCC and other external computing/storage resources. The UML
campus network embraces software defined network technologies and the dedicated
science Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) concept, which remove the bottlenecks for
transferring large datasets. Layer 2 software defined control, perfSONAR
(PERFormance Service Oriented Network monitoring ARchitecture) based
measurement, and data transfer nodes are leveraged to enable state-of-the-art
network control and operations. FLowell is an excellent network environment for
PIs to evaluate and take advantage of novel networking technologies and welcomes
a broader participation from other researchers. Based on the ongoing
collaboration between the PI and campus IT and the pilot deployment of OpenFlow
switches, the science teams, IT department, vendors, and MGHPCC personnel form a
strong partnership to establish the advanced infrastructure and accelerate data
centric knowledge discovery in a global context.