* 1440704
* CC*IIE Campus Design: Building a Next-Generation Research Network for Vassar College
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Emily Harris, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 332,724.00

This project provides a Science Research Network utilizing next-generation
technologies to dramatically reduce and remove barriers to the free flow of
scientific research data at Vassar College. The enhanced network better supports
the transfer of large data sets with dramatically increased network capacity and
reduced latency, positioning science researchers to utilize distributed data
collection, remote sensor networks and pursue other network-enhanced
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project upgrades the current network core to
a fully meshed 10Gbps backbone to facilitate high-capacity science research data
transmission across the Vassar network. A dedicated science research network, a
Science DMZ, is designed and implemented to enable the unfettered flow of
science data across and between researchers, data collection, analysis and
storage resources. Researchers are provided direct access from the Science DMZ
to Research and Education (R&amp;E) Networks including the New York State
Education &amp; Research Network and Internet2, with access to distributed
computing resources including the New York State High Performance Computing
Consortium (HPC2), as well as the commodity Internet in support of scientific
research. Additionally fiber connections to the local Point of Presence (POP)
are reconfigured to enable dramatically greater network throughput.