* 1440033
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Inference by social sampling
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Anand Sarwate, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2017
* USD 182,262.00

Learning and inference in distributed settings is an important from both a
scientific and engineering perspective. A typical instance of the problem is a
network of individual sensors or agents attempting to infer a global
distribution that governs their local observations. By passing messages the
agents can individually make inference about a global phenomenon. This research
investigates communication and networking paradigms that can enable a network of
individual agents to collaboratively estimate distributions over high
dimensional spaces, even when individual observations are severely limited in
accuracy, space, or time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the investigators
study how individual decision makers can integrate two kinds of information:
local observations and messages from their neighbors in the network. Both
observation and messaging can be thought of as sampling : individuals sample
their own environment and sample the opinions of their neighbors. Central to the
approach is that the agents generate simple messages at random from an internal
estimate of the global distribution of interest. The first major goal of this
project is to develop a mathematical framework and analysis techniques to
understand if and when this limited form of learning and communication is
sufficient for an individual to estimate and learn distributions and/or global
parameters governing the observations of all nodes. The technical approach is a
blend of analysis techniques ranging from stochastic approximation, randomized
algorithms, and statistical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications for this
work range from mathematical modeling of messages and opinion formation in
social networks, communication protocols for distributed optimization, and
estimation of parameters in data networks. The work will cover several related
problems : estimating high-dimensional histograms of data held in the network,
parametric estimation using a mix of Bayesian and non-Bayesian techniques, and
estimation of more complex generative models. The final part of the work is to
apply these methods to peer-peer networks and social network modeling. The
broader impact of this work is to further develop the interdisciplinary field of
network science, which impacts both quantitative social sciences and
engineering. The PIs will develop educational materials and organize research
activities to help bring together different research communities interested in
networks and social learning.