* 1440667
* CC*IIE Integration: Development and Integration of perfSONAR for End-to End Network Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This project enhances the perfSONAR network measurement system to improve the
application impact and utility of network performance information. The perfSONAR
system monitors and measures the network cyberinfrastructure that connects
scientists with resources and ever-increasing data. This project increases the
impact of this network telemetry on the performance of large-scale data
applications by calibrating network data and making it
actionable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it can be determined when the network is
behaving correctly and when it is lightly or heavily loaded, scientific
workflows have yet to be provided the same level of performance estimation that
car drivers can get from a navigation system in a car. This project calibrates
and quantifies data from scientific data networks and applications in order to
provide reasonable predictions for the logistics of moving scientific data. This
includes controlled experiments under repeatable conditions as well as
longitudinal studies with high performance networks and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, efforts are made to scale the
perfSONAR ecosystem by orders of magnitude, and to move toward a more scalable
service model for subscribing components and developing autonomic configuration
and management of measurement activities. As the perfSONAR system moves outside
the network operations community, many aspects of scalability will need to be
addressed.