* 1440681
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Science DMZ for Campus Bridging and Computationally Assisted Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Cheryl Tiahrt, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 498,813.00

The University of South Dakota's CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Science DMZ
for Campus Bridging and Computationally Assisted Research project aims to
improve scientific data movement by isolating research network traffic from the
friction of the traditional campus network. Traditional enterprise networks are
designed to support applications serving a variety of organizational missions as
well as security measures to protect the organization's financial and other
sensitive data. The result is a network that is neither designed for nor capable
of serving the mission of data intensive research. The dedicated research
network (Science DMZ) supports the following objectives: (1) Provide friction-
free access to wide area networks; (2) Support streamlined end-to-end data flows
from experimental data acquisition through analysis and post analysis; and (3)
Ensure secure performance of data transfer
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Science DMZ enables a multidisciplinary
collaborative research campus, supporting campus bridging in several disciplines
including: particle physics, neuroscience, materials science, biomedical
research, biology, and renewable energy. Laid out in the wider context of the
USD's Campus Cyberinfrastructure plan, the project incorporates national best
practices in network implementation and measurement as well as federated
authentication. The implementation plan includes a dedicated Data Transfer Node,
specifically configured to enable data transfers across wide area networks.
These goals are being realized through network optimization with tools such as
perfSONAR for monitoring network performance. The project accelerates the
adoption of national best practices in big data movement and contributes to
South Dakota's continued competitiveness as an EPSCoR state.