* 1440087
* Structural and Dynamical Determinants of Influenza Pathogenicity and Virulence
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Rommie Amaro, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 10,500.00

As illustrated most recently during the 2009 "swine flu" pandemic, novel strains
of influenza A may emerge from animal reservoirs and spread globally among
humans well before a vaccine against them can be developed. Thus, there is keen
interest in identifying and evaluating the threat posed by potential pandemic
strains before they emerge. However, given the large diversity of influenza A
viruses found in nature, it is not clear which potentially pre-pandemic strains
to focus on, nor how safe studies of their potential for transmissibility and
pathogenicity in humans can be performed. Recent highly controversial approaches
to this problem have used genetic engineering and artificial selection of highly
pathogenic H5N1 ?bird flu? viruses to obtain mutants capable of respiratory
transmission among ferrets, the preferred animal model for human influenza.
There has been great concern over the possibility of these viruses escaping from
the lab. A virtual, in silico "laboratory" in which to study fundamental
properties of host-pathogen interaction without risk to public health will be
developed with this work. The techniques are applicable to study of a wide range
of mutations and genetic backgrounds due to the wealth of sequence and
structural information available for the influenza virus. Furthermore, the
creation of a virtual lab will expand the number of researchers who are able to
investigate such phenomena, as researchers who do not have access to expensive,
specially designed experimental laboratories for high risk research will be
empowered by these approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work addresses a
fundamental question in influenza biology: What is the mechanism by which
virulence is enhanced by deletions in the stalk of the influenza neuraminidase
(NA) surface protein? MD simulations of the individual influenza membrane
glycoproteins hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), carried out previously
in the Amaro Lab, have identified experimentally validated antiviral compounds
that bind to new glycoprotein pockets never before captured by experimental
techniques. This work has been remarkable in its ability to rationalize
experimental data and drive experimental design in a prospective fashion.
However, influenza glycoproteins are components of a much larger virion surface
that collectively participates in host recognition and infection processes. To
study this, atomic level model systems were built based on cryo-electron
tomographic data of full viral particles; these full virus particle simulations
will be the largest atomistic simulations performed to date and allow
researchers to explore the surface glycoprotein distributions in realistic
context. Additionally, the functional balance of HA, which binds to host-cell
receptors, and NA, which abrogates receptor binding via cleavage of terminal
sialic-acid residues, has not yet been fully characterized.  One hypothesis is
that variable HA/NA distribution patterns and mutations produce unique
electrostatic properties that alter the binding kinetics of both pharmacological
and endogenous ligands, thereby contributing to virulence. This hypothesis will
be tested in state-of-the-art MD simulations of entire viral constructs over a
one-year period.