* 1440546
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: A High-Speed Scalable Research Core (HSSRC) at Washington State University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Brian Lamb, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 498,066.00

Washington State University (WSU) is embracing scientific computing in research
and education by implementing an overarching strategy to build capacity and
capabilities in computational and data science and to better respond to the
emerging, diverse, and rapidly evolving needs of the university's research
community across several disciplines. To catalyze new multi-disciplinary
research applications, accelerate data-driven scientific discovery, and enable
transformative training activities, WSU is improving its high-speed network
infrastructure by establishing a High Speed Scalable Research Core (HSSRC) to
access wide-area science services and software-defined networking environments.
The deployment of the HSSRC at WSU advances the state-of-knowledge within the
participating scientific disciplines by enabling the data resulting from
simulations and instruments to be analyzed more rapidly and efficiently. For
example, access to the HSSRC allows materials scientists to apply predictive
theory and simulation capabilities to efficiently explore the structure-
properties-performance parameter space and design new materials with optimized
and tailored properties; enables nuclear theorists to unlock the unsolved
mysteries of our cosmos; allows energy grid engineers to analyze in real-time
the large number of power grids scenarios; and opens the possibility for
researchers in genomics, genetics, and bioinformatics to dissect the genomic
basis of diversity and answer questions that range from disentangling the
evolutionary history of organisms to linking genomic changes to phenotypic
changes. Moreover, the deployment of a HSSRC at WSU enables the training of the
next generation of scientific leaders with knowledge and experience in a broad
range of modeling and simulation disciplines and "big data" science.