* 1440163
* GOALI: Lateral-Mode MEMS Filter Arrays on Ultrananocrystalline Diamond for Multi-Band Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Reza Abdolvand, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 04/30/2017
* USD 130,190.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to significantly
advance the field of MEMS filters by putting forward innovative solutions that
tackle the issues hindering widespread deployment of MEMS filters such as high
insertion loss, low power handling, and limited bandwidth. Our approach is to
exploit high-coupling-factor thin-film piezoelectric materials in combination
with novel impedance matching techniques to improve the performance of
acoustically-coupled monolithic filters, which are fabricated on ultra-
nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD) substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to overcome current limitations of
MEMS filters and establish lateral-mode MEMS filters as a viable candidate for
emerging multi-band transceivers. Specifically, the significance of the proposed
activities is as follows: &lt;br/&gt; Finite element models are developed that
can fully capture the frequency response of a piezoelectric MEMS filter.
&lt;br/&gt; UNCD is utilized to scale up the frequency and improve the power
handling of MEMS filters. &lt;br/&gt; Impedance matching networks are integrated
with thin-film piezoelectric-on-UNCD filters.&lt;br/&gt; Novel processes for
direct deposition of high-coupling-factor piezoelectric films on UNCD are
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The successful
demonstration of low-loss thin-film piezoelectric-on-UNCD filters proposed in
this work will have a significant impact on how future RF transceiver
architectures will be designed. This proposal will provide opportunities for OSU
graduate and undergraduate students (with priority given to students from under-
represented groups) to work with industrial scientists and gain experience in an
industrial setting at Advanced Diamond Technologies Inc. Results from the
project will be disseminated through presentation in prestigious conferences and
publication in high-impact journals.