* 1440548
* CC-IIE Networking Infrastructure: KGEN: Next-generation networking environments for biological and agricultural data-driven research at Kansas State University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Stephen Welch, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 231,500.00

This project enhances the internal networking capabilities at Kansas State
University to support high-end applications in science and engineering,
particularly bioinformatics. Current research is moving towards large datasets,
where typical desktop network connectivity of one gigabit or less bottlenecks
productivity. This project eliminates the gigabit bottleneck by providing an
order of magnitude faster networking than currently available, which is
preventing researchers at Kansas State from fully and effectively collaborating
with both local and distant partners. This project also provides a testbed for
research and educational outreach to K-12, community-college, and Kansas-wide
academics to explore bioinformatics, genomics, high-throughput phenotyping, and
high performance computing.

Kansas State University is installing enterprise-grade routers with a 40GbE core
and plentiful 10GbE ports to provide a foundation for upgrading KSU's
bioinformatics researchers' network capacity to their major research labs,
including end-to-end connectivity for KSU's campus supercomputer cluster, the
Arthropod Genomics Center, and the Integrated Genomics Facility. This impacts
researchers across 16 locations, hundreds of graduate students, and millions of
dollars in funded research.

The improved connectivity allows scientists to look deeper when modeling
genomes, enabling new algorithms to be developed for phenotyping and
bioinformatics. These advancements in turn help protect the nation's food supply
through developing better understanding of threats to key agricultural products
like the Hessian fly, which attacks wheat crops, or determining genes which
improve drought resistance.