* 1440212
* RAPID: Surviving the Flood: Vulnerability, Risk Management, and Resilience after a Natural Disaster
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Michael Gurven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2015
* USD 126,000.00

Natural disasters impact all populations but poorer, rural populations are
particularly vulnerable. We know from research in large-scale modern societies
that wealthier, healthier, and more educated individuals have greater resilience
to adverse events. However, in much of United States as well as in the world at
large, there remain people living at or near the poverty line. Natural disasters
can push people over that line into "poverty traps" from which they may never
recover. Therefore, understanding factors that promote resilience in populations
with limited schooling, material wealth, and access to good healthcare is
critical for developing programs and policies that will protect all Americans
from the long-term effects of disasters.

The research will be conducted in lowland Bolivia where there was catastrophic
flooding in early 2014. This is a particularly apt research setting because the
investigators have done research in this site since 2002. Therefore, they have
detailed, individual-level baseline data with which to make comparisons. They
also can leverage existing infrastructure and support, which allows a small
amount of funding now to produce significant research impact. The researchers
will focus on the Tsimane Amerindians who practice a subsistence lifestyle based
on horticulture, fishing, and hunting. The 2014 floods destroyed crops and
possessions in over sixty Tsimane villages; widespread food insecurity and
disease are expected to follow. Due to the extent of the losses, wealth
inequality has likely been substantially reduced across households and villages.
The investigators will assess whether involvement in the local market economy,
schooling, and social connections helped protect families against the losses
from the floods and whether these factors will help buffer families during the
period of recovery. Investigators will also assess whether wealth inequalities
that existed prior to the flood re-emerge one year after the flood.
Investigators will visit affected villages, conduct surveys, collect information
on health, nutritional status and activities, and assay stress hormones from
salivary samples. Findings from this research will provide insight into the
factors that promote and perpetuate poverty traps by examining the extent to
which social subordination, low human capital and lack of psychological
resilience impact recovery efforts and restoration of well-being and economic
productivity.