* 1440552
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: SciNet: A ScienceDMZ for Science and Engineering Research at University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Manuel Rodriguez-Martinez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 498,604.00

The SciNet Project at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez (UPRM) seeks to
build an advanced networking infrastructure to support science and engineering
research. SciNet is a high-speed, frictionless Science DMZ network, designed to
interconnect computer clusters, storage systems, gene sequencers, oceanographic
sensors, and other scientific instruments available at UPRM. Modern research
efforts depend upon readily access to computers and scientific instruments to
help scientists analyze data resulting from their experiments. The computer
network has emerged as the system bottleneck in this infrastructure due to
current bandwidth limitations. The Science DMZ model has emerged as a solution
to this problem by providing a secure, high-speed, frictionless, separate
network segment that is dedicated exclusively to science traffic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SciNet consists of six points of access (PoAs)
strategically located at the buildings housing researchers performing data
intensive work in gene sequencing, high-energy physics, computational chemistry,
fluid mechanics, oceanography, bioinformatics, networking, and big data
analytics. Each PoA consists of a networking switch, high-speed storage
equipment, and monitoring tools to ensure proper operation. SciNet is designed
to accept additional PoAs and be peered with the Science DMZ of another
institution. Thus, it enables collaborators from other institutions to access
the infrastructure available at UPRM. Therefore, SciNet is a key enabler to help
faculty and students at UPRM, which is a Hispanic-serving institution, become
involved in national research initiatives, particularly in fields of high
societal impacts such as genetics, energy, environmental sciences, and computer
technology.