* 1440444
* Student Travel Support for the 22nd IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Chuan Yue, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society, the 22nd IEEE International Conference
on Network Protocols (and associated events) will be held in the Research
Triangle area of North Carolina, during the week of October 21-24, 2014. This
grant from the National Science Foundation funds approximately 20 US-based
graduate students to attend ICNP. The goal of this funding is to broaden the
audience attending the premier network protocol conference, the IEEE
International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP), and as a result, raise the
level of interaction and the potential for new collaborations, new
investigations, and higher quality research.

By supporting graduate students to attend ICNP 2014, this award increases the
dissemination of the conference research results to a larger and a more diverse
audience, which otherwise would not have been able to attend. This in turn will
contribute to the strength and inclusiveness of the research community, and will
lead to the long term health and vitalization of ICNP. In addition, giving
preference in grant awards to women and underrepresented students hopefully will
increase the participation among these groups. By advertising to a wide range of
colleges and universities, participants from a more diverse set of institutions
should be able to attend and benefit from the conference. A broad, as well as
diverse population is key to the health of the research community and the
discipline.

Conference attendance is a crucial part of the life of a researcher. By creating
new opportunities for students - especially those from underrepresented groups -
to attend a high quality conference, this project will benefit the research
community in several ways. The students themselves benefit from the opportunity
to meet and interact with many other researchers in a favorable setting, and
from seeing research presented that may be related to what they are working on,
or may inspire them to try a new direction. The research community benefits from
the improvement of the students in the pipeline, and the introduction of new
researcher perspectives. Additionally, everyone benefits from increased
diversity of participants attending the conference.