* 1440342
* Earthcube RCN:  Coral REef Science &amp; CYberinfrastructure NeTwork (CReSCyNT)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,845.00

This project develops the the Coral Reef Science &amp; Cyberinfrastructure
Network (CReSCyNT). As ecosystem engineers, corals provide the nutritional,
economic, and structural basis of ecosystems worth billions of dollars annually.
The broader impacts that CReSCyNT encompasses include: (i) integration and
exchange with professional societies, (ii) development of visualization products
in collaboration with educators and resource managers, (iii) connecting place-
based collaborative networks, (iv) building a collaborative community in the
coral reef discipline, (v) training of two graduate students, (vi) broad
transfer of disciplinary expertise among geoscientists, cybertechnologists,
medical scientists and graphic artists (media), (vii) raises visibility and
awareness of coral reef data in the geosciences, and (viii) user-friendly web-
based visualization tools accessible to the public that serve to showcase the
value of coral reef science and the innovative approaches employed by the
EarthCube program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coral reef community has
exceptionally diverse data structures and analysis requirements necessary to
forward integrative science. It is therefore an exemplar for
cyberinfrastructure-enabled advances to other geosciences communities. CReSCyNT
will grow a multi-tiered and multidisciplinary network of coral reef
researchers, cyberinfrastructure specialists, and computer scientists with the
end goal of facilitating integrative and interactive research. This network will
match the data sources, data structures, and analysis needs of the coral reef
community with the current advances in data management, visualization, and image
processing from ocean sciences, biomedical research, and graphic arts to advance
coral reef research and meet the increasing challenges of coastal conservation.
The network will assemble and communicate to coordinate, plan, and prioritize
cyberinfrastructure needs within the coral reef community and with the broader
geosciences. Our objectives are to collectively identify needs, best practices,
bottlenecks, and avenues or approaches to advance the design and ultimately the
development of data management, visualization, and image processing capacity for
the coral reef domain that is directly and immediately translatable to the
broader geoscience community.The five-member CReSCyNT Facilitating Committee
will shepherd the growth of a network around 12 coral reef disciplinary nodes
and 5 technology nodes, where each node represents a sub field or discipline of
coral reef science (or computer science) that is led by a recognized member of
that sub discipline in advocating sharing, transparency, open dialog,
creativity, and the integration of data across the geosciences. Facilitated by
CReSCyNT meetings, social media, and a presence at professional society
conferences, the leader of each node will invite broad participation in CReSCyNT
activities from members of their sub discipline. These nodes will be allowed to
expand, coalesce, or divide to meet the needs and interests of the
subdisciplinary communities, while maintaining a connection to CReSCyNT through
the node coordinators and ongoing network activities.