* 1440797
* CC*IIE Integration: Collaborative Research: EPSON: Embracing Parallel Networks and Storage for Predictable End-to-End Data Movement
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Michael Papka, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 279,928.00

Geographically distributed scientific communities require increasingly
sophisticated data transfer mechanisms that can handle the challenges of sharing
large datasets over heterogeneous networks. These challenges include
optimization of networks with different configurations and protocols, I/O
mechanisms to efficiently read and write to parallel storage, and the varying
demands of widely different data transfer workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these challenges, the EPSON project is developing, implementing, and
evaluating application programming interfaces and tools that facilitate end-to-
end parallel data transfers. EPSON researchers focus on three areas: (1)
enabling parallel network data movement, by taking into account the diversity of
parallel network characteristics of both shared networks and infrastructures
with dedicated circuits and paths and effectively balancing the flows among
paths for more predictable performance; (2) developing a GridFTP data storage
interface, enabling scalable I/O to and from parallel filesystems -- critical
for campus infrastructures to deal with large-scale datasets; and (3) devising
mechanisms that overlap network transfers with storage I/O and incorporate data-
staging heuristics, matching the impedance between storage and networking
capabilities to improve end-to-end data transfers. The project involves close
collaboration with application scientists, with the objective of providing
advanced networking tools to support the requirements of the applications
deployed at the University of Chicago and Northern Illinois University campuses.