* 1440023
* Introducing a Means to Characterize Location-Specific Space Weather Hazards  of Societal Significance in the Near-Earth Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Jamesina Simpson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 12/31/2015
* USD 9,999.00

The goal of the proposed work is to greatly improve our ability to understand
and predict space weather hazards on society in the near-Earth environment. 
Specifically, models of the impact of a coronal mass ejection originating from
the sun as it interacts with the Earth's ionosphere and atmosphere and
lithosphere will be generated.  Applications of this work include:  (1)
protecting the electric power grid from blackouts caused by space weather; and
(2) maintaining communication capabilities during space weather events. A 2008
National Academies report indicated that extreme space weather events, "though
rare, are likely to occur again some time in the future."  However, it is clear
that the re-occurrence of an 1859-magnitude space weather-driven geomagnetic
storm could disrupt modern society to a much greater degree than in 1859 due to
the proliferation of vital but vulnerable electrotechnologies (such as power
grids and wireless communications).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology of the
proposed work involves the application of detailed, high-resolution Maxwell's
equations finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) models of the Earth-ionosphere
waveguide developed by the PI over the past decade.  These three-dimensional
(3-D) models will include such details as the Earth's topography, oceans,
lithosphere composition, and ionosphere plasma (both small and large-scale
structures).  Output data will be location-specific electromagnetic field data
that will be used to improve our ability to maintain power grid operations and
communications during space weather events.