* 1440218
* Fuel Cells GRC and GRS - Technological Progress and New Scientific Insights
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Peter Pintauro, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 05/31/2015
* USD 23,000.00

Principal Investigator: Peter N Pintauro&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1440218
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Fuel Cells GRC and GRS - Technological Progress and New
Scientific&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fuel cell is a device which converts fuel
directly into electricity for use in portable power systems or electric cars.
The fuels can be obtained from renewable resources or from non-renewable
resources such as natural gas. This award provides travel and registration funds
for graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and junior researchers to attend
the Fuel Cells Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS) at Bryant University in Smithfield, Rhode Island. The GRC will be held
August 3-8, 2014 with a preceding GRS on August 2-3, 2014. Gordon Conferences
and Seminars provide a setting where researchers from around the world can
present their most recent results. The conferences foster informal discussions
and networking that occur within outside of the organized lecture sessions.
Presentations and formal discussions between the speakers and audience provide
valuable feedback on current research efforts and clarification of technical
issues. Informal one-on-one interactions help seed new ideas and new
collaborations that will assist in moving fuel cell research and development
forward. This format is particularly appropriate for the fuel cell field, which
has enjoyed a development and commercialization pathway that is grounded in
scientific advances and understanding of fundamental
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel cell researchers have made
significant advances leading to commercial devices. Several automakers plan to
introduce fuel cell powered cars to the general public in the near future. The
first generation proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell designs are relatively
mature. Cost and long-term component durability, however, are still important
technical and commercialization issues. So there continues to be a need to
investigate new fuel cell component materials and system designs for
transportation (autos, trucks, and buses), portable power, grid storage and load
leveling, residential power, and military use. Today, there is an active fuel
cell R&amp;D community involving industry, national laboratories, and academia.
These scientists and engineers are making major breakthroughs that will further
improve the durability and performance of fuel cells, while dropping system and
operating costs. In this context, the speaker and poster programs for the GRC
and GRS have been developed to consider what comes next for fuel cells and
related technologies. Presenters will focus on the limits of present-day
technologies, asking and answering how and what science might circumvent those
limits. Topical sessions at the GRC will focus on catalysts, new electrode
architectures, multi-scale modeling, membranes, and MEA durability. Related
technical areas will also be explored, where achievements and progress on proton
exchange membrane fuel cells over the years have been optimally leveraged. These
emerging technical areas include regenerative fuel cells and flow batteries,
alkaline fuel cells, and fuel cells on a silicon microchip. Above all, the
meeting organizers seek to maintain the predominantly scientific flavor of the
GRC and GRS that is the hallmark of this conference venue.