* 1440769
* SI2-SSE:  AMASS - An Automated Monitoring AnalySis Service for Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shava Smallen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 515,205.00

A science gateway is a community-developed set of tools, applications, and data
collections that are integrated via a portal or a suite of applications. It
provides easy, typically browser-based, access to supercomputers, software
tools, and data repositories to allow researchers to focus on their scientific
goals and less on the cyberinfrastructure. These gateways are fostering
collaboration and exchange of ideas among thousands of researchers from multiple
communities ranging from atmospheric science, astrophysics, chemistry,
biophysics, biochemistry, earthquake engineering, geophysics, to neuroscience,
and biology. However due to limited development and administrative personnel
resources, science gateways often leverage only a small subset of the NSF-funded
CI to mitigate the complexities involved with using multiple resource and
services at scale in part due to software and hardware failures. Since many
successful science gateways have had unprecedented growth in their user base and
ever increasing datasets, increasing their usage of CI resources without
introducing additional complexity would help them meet this
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to this need, an Automated Monitoring
AnalySis Service (AMASS) will be built to provide a flexible and extensible
service for automated analysis of monitoring data initially focused on science
gateways. AMASS will be based on data mining and machine learning techniques and
emerging big data technologies to analyze monitoring data for improving the
reliability and operational efficiency of CI as well as progress on fundamental
questions in systematic and population biology, computational neuroscience, and
biophysics communities. Along with AMASS, a simulation framework will be built
for testing automated analysis algorithms and adaptive execution techniques. An
intuitive query API will be provided for science gateway software to use and
will be integrated into the following three target science gateways that will
drive the project's research and development: the Cyberinfrastructure for
Phylogenetic Research (CIPRES), the Neuroscience Gateway (NSG), and UltraScan.
The proposed approach does not require any changes to the end user applications,
and the software developments will significantly enhance the science
productivity and user satisfaction of science gateways by integrating monitoring
data into their infrastructure to enable adaptive execution of their
applications, allowing scientists to answer more sophisticated questions without
having to understand the complexities of a large-scale distributed environment.
The developed software products will be available as open source products under
an Apache License and will be integrated into the NSF-funded SciGap project in
order to impact a broader range of science gateways.