* 1440106
* Travel support for students and young researchers to attend "Flowing Soft Matter: Bridging the Gap Between Statistical Physics and Fluid Mechanics," Udine, Italy, 6/30/14 - 7/4/14
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2014
* David Saintillan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2014
* USD 20,000.00

CBET-1440106&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, which is funded jointly by the
Particulate and Multiphase Processes program and the International Science and
Engineering section, will provide travel support for US students and junior
researchers to attend a summer institute in Udine, Italy from June 30 to July 4,
2014. The summer school is titled: Flowing Soft Matter: Bridging the Gap between
Statistical Physics and Fluid Mechanics. The theme of the summer school is to
understand how the complimentary tools of statistical physics and fluid
mechanics can lead to new insights into the physics of flowing soft matter. The
materials under consideration at the summer school will include polymer
solutions, colloidal suspensions, gels, and emulsions, which are found in many
important products. Improving our ability to process these materials effectively
and efficiently will benefit a variety of industries. By participating in the
institute, US students and young researchers will gain unique opportunities to
learn from international experts, meet key international leaders in their
research fields, and exchange ideas and experiences with international peers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer school will provide participants with an
overview of the field of flowing soft matter and will examine methods that use
statistical physics and fluid mechanics to improve our ability to predict
quantitatively the behavior of rheologically challenging materials. The
instructors and participants in the institute will be from the US, UK, France,
Italy, and other European countries. The institute is supported by the National
Research Council of Italy (CNR) and UNESCO. European participants are supported
by their home countries. This award will provide similar support for US
participants.