* 1440477
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Enabling Big Computing and Data Intensive Cyberinfrastructure (EBCDIC)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* John Suess, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The Enabling Big Computing for Data Intensive Computing (EBCDIC) project
upgrades the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) research Internet
connectivity to 100 Gb and allow the redesign of the campus network to better
support data-intensive computing. As a first step, UMBC is upgrading its
Internet2 connection to MidAtlantic Crossroads (MAX) Gigapop so that it can
connect to the Internet2 Innovation Platform at the fastest speeds possible.
Through the implementation of the science-DMZ, UMBC improves capacity and
productivity in its collaboration with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the
sharing of data for climate change investigation and weather prediction. In
addition, the EBCDIC project greatly benefits the ECOSYNTH project, which is
designed to support the use of 3D and spectral imagery data from a variety of
low-altitude sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once UMBC completes its 100 Gb
connection to the Internet2 Innovation Platform, the investigators can focus on
the deployment of software-defined-networks (SDN) on campus. Through the use of
SDN, UMBC seeks substantially improved connections of big-data projects that
require extremely low latency times, including a neuroscience project that
involves real-time processing and the monitoring of EEG data between users at
the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and UMBC. As the UMBC
Cybersecurity Center prepares for increased participation in the Global
Environment of Network Innovation (GENI) campus deployment of SDN also enables
UMBC's recently-acquired ExoGeni infrastructure to advance cybersecurity
efforts.