* 1440638
* SI2-SSE: GEM3D: Open-Source Cartesian Adaptive Complex Terrain Atmospheric Flow Solver for GPU Clusters
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Grady Wright, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The U.S. Government invests in leadership supercomputing facilities through
several agencies to advance scientific discovery in many fronts. This project is
motivated by this national commitment to supercomputing research and the
increasing availability of many-core computing hardware from workstations to
supercomputers. Today scientists and engineers have access to extreme-scale
computing resources. However, many legacy codes do not take advantage of recent
innovations in computing hardware, and there is a lack of open-source simulation
science software that can effectively leverage the many-core computing paradigm.
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solvers have advanced many fields such as
aerospace engineering and atmospheric sciences. Many current open-source CFD
models and numerical weather prediction models do not take full advantage of the
superior compute performance of graphics processing units (GPUs). By creating an
open-source community model that can execute on multi-GPU workstations and large
GPU clusters, the project team expects to broaden the use of high-performance
computing in fluid dynamics applications. The immediate target application is
wind modeling over complex terrain, to support research and development in wind
resource assessment, power forecasting, atmospheric research, and air pollution.
Through this project, the PIs will continue to transfer and expand the knowledge
bases in GPU computing, computational mathematics, and software engineering to
new students. Skill sets that transcend traditional disciplines are highly
prized by national laboratories as there is a critical shortage of workforce who
can conduct scientific research using supercomputers. Students and postdoctoral
researchers who are involved in this project will contribute toward this
critical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
engineers, applied mathematicians, and computer scientists. The entire suite of
software elements will be designed for GPU clusters with an MPI-CUDA
implementation that overlaps computation with communications using a three-
dimensional decomposition for enhanced scalability. The implementation will
balance performance and further development and ownership by a broader community
of academic researchers. The team will follow modern software engineering
practices for concurrent applications. An adaptive mesh refinement strategy that
can scale on GPU clusters will be developed. A novel projection method based on
radial basis functions will impose the divergence-free constraint on a hierarchy
of adaptively refined grids. Software elements will be tested using unit testing
and verification techniques for concurrent programs, and against data available
from benchmark numerical problems. The flow solver will include modules for the
immersed boundary approach for arbitrarily complex terrain and the dynamic
large-eddy simulation technique. The software implementation and syntax will be
intuitive to allow contributions from a larger community. The project team
expects the proposed software to help reduce modeling errors with very high
resolution simulations and contribute toward a fundamental understanding of
turbulent winds over complex terrain. The PIs of this project will continue
their teaching efforts in Parallel Scientific Computing, Computational
Mathematics, and Software Engineering. The results will be disseminated through
conference presentations and via a wiki site for the open-source project.
Software elements will be released under an open-source GNU General Public
License.