* 1440356
* Mechanism of Distant Communication in Chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 06/30/2013,06/30/2015
* Vasily Studitsky, Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 06/30/2015
* USD 196,256.00

Intellectual merit: The first step in gene expression (RNA synthesis, or
transcription) of the vast majority of eukaryotic genes is regulated by
enhancers, which are DNA sequences that bind specific proteins and activate
transcription over large distances. Enhancer-target communication (ETC) leads to
direct interaction of enhancers with the target promoters, the sites of
transcription initiation, via formation of a DNA loop. ETC can be prevented by
insulators, which are DNA elements that form alternative DNA loops and can
isolate enhancers from the targets. Thus, gene regulation in human cells
involves formation of DNA loops of variable sizes. The mechanisms of efficient
communication between enhancers and promoters and the mechanisms by which such
communication is prevented by insulators remain unknown. In particular, neither
structural nor dynamic aspects of DNA looping have been rationalized. Recently,
it has been shown that DNA loops bound to histone proteins are a highly
efficient communication device. These observations indicate that ETC could
constitute a critical step in gene regulation and raise the following important
questions: What elements of the DNA-histone complexes mediate efficient ETC, and
how can ETC be inhibited or facilitated by various factors? In this project, a
highly purified and functionally active experimental system has been established
that allows quantitative analysis of the rate of ETC in the DNA-histone
complexes. This system will be used as a tool to analyze structural and dynamic
properties of the DNA-histone complexes that dictate the rate of ETC. The
objectives of this research are to evaluate the mechanisms of efficient distant
communication and inhibition of communication by insulators and to identify
factors affecting distant communication and evaluate their effect on the
dynamics of the DNA-histone complexes. Broader impacts: This project will
provide an enhanced learning experience for several undergraduate and two
graduate students involved in the project. They will participate weekly in four
different meetings; namely (1) laboratory meetings in which they will have the
opportunity to present their own research every 2-3 months, (2) laboratory
discussion of recent publications on chromatin structure/dynamics/function, (3)
problem solving sessions with a small group of students and senior researchers
that focuses on technical challenges, and (4) Departmental Progress Reports
where all Departmental students present their research annually. This project is
well suited for student participation, as it provides a solid conceptual
foundation and utilizes methodologies applicable to many areas of research, and
at the same time is paradigm-driven, providing an intuitive transition from the
classroom to the bench. The laboratory regularly trains underrepresented
minority undergraduates (within the UMDNJ Summer Research Program). New
technologies/strategies for analysis of structure/dynamics of the DNA-histone
complexes will be developed. Some of them will be of general use in the field of
biology. The project is a multi- disciplinary study to examine a complex
biological question, and incorporates recent advances in computational science
and structural biology at the interface between chemistry, physics and biology.