* 1440785
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: A Performant and Reliable Science DMZ for National and International Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Robert Grossman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Chicago (UChicago) has built a high-speed Science DMZ network
that includes a 100Gbps uplink to Research and Education networks. This network
provides researchers with the bandwidth required to collaborate both nationally
and internationally at extremely high speeds. The initial experimental build was
completed in a non-redundant fashion, which means that a single failure or
disruption has the potential to impact every project dependent on the Science
DMZ. Further, multiple projects have demonstrated high-bandwidth needs that will
quickly congest the singular 100Gbps uplink available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these risks and concerns, UChicago is building a redundant Dense Wave
Division Multiplexing (DWDM) System between its main Hyde Park campus and a
location in downtown Chicago. This system includes a second 100Gbps capable
router that provides UChicago?s Science DMZ network with additional capacity and
resiliency. Upon completion, the system will provide researchers with a highly
available, extremely high-capacity network foundation that enables them to
maximize their scientific productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amongst science
projects that will benefit are: &lt;br/&gt;- ATLAS collaboration at the CERN
Large Hadron Collider (LHC)&lt;br/&gt;- Bionimbus - Open Science Data Cloud
Project designed for managing and analyzing genomic data&lt;br/&gt;- The Kavli
Institute for Cosmological Physics (KICP) advancing research on the nature of
dark matter and dark energy&lt;br/&gt;- The South Pole Telescope (SPT)
collaboration ? a survey of cosmic microwave background (CMB)
radiation&lt;br/&gt;- The Urban Center for Computation and Data (UrbanCCD)
partnering with the City of Chicago to design and implementation its next
generation data analytics platform.