* 1440031
* PRAC - Ensembles of molecular dynamics engines for assessing force fields, conformational change, and free energies of proteins and nucleic acids
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Darrin York, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,006.00

This project uses computer simulation methods within the AMBER suite of programs
to simulate the atomic motions of proteins and nucleic acids in their native
environment to better understand the structure, dynamics and interactions among
various bio-molecules. Through analysis of the resulting data, the simulations
provide insight into biomolecular function and how to modulate function.
Critical to success is adequate sampling of the complex conformational
distributions of the biomolecules and also use of an accurate representation of
the underlying atomic interactions or "force field". To facilitate sampling, the
project couples together ensembles of independent simulations, optimized in
parallel on CPU and GPU resources, that exchange information to increase
sampling efficiency. Preliminary work on the Blue Waters Supercomputer has
demonstrated reproducible and complete sampling of the conformational
distributions of RNA tetranucleotides, tetraloop RNA structures, and also the
internal portion of a B-DNA helix. With complete sampling, it is now possible to
reliably assess, validate, and improve the applied force fields. Broader impacts
center on the improvements in both the simulation methods and force fields, in
wide use by a broad community of researchers in applications ranging from drug
design to deciphering structure-function
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increases in the efficiency of
conformational sampling are realized by developing, optimizing and applying
multi-dimensional replica exchange methods in temperature and Hamiltonian space.
The AMBER molecular dynamics simulation codes are extremely well optimized and
suited to the GPU resources on Blue Waters. Preliminary simulations on Blue
Waters, reducing times to solution from months-years to days-weeks, show that
although it is possible to converge the conformational distributions of nucleic
acids like RNA tetranucleotides and tetraloops, one does not find conformational
distributions that completely agree with experiments. In other words, there are
still serious deficiencies in the force fields for nucleic acids that are being
uncovered and overcome to improve the models. To further the exploration of
nucleic acid and protein structures beyond solution conditions, simulations are
additionally being performed on room temperature crystals which provide an
additional means to assess and validate the simulation approaches. Larger and
more representative protein and nucleic acid structures are also being
investigated.