* 1440729
* CC*IIE Campus Design: Upgrading the Juniata Collaborative Science Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jill Keeney, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,924.00

This project upgrades the campus network for Juniata College to 10Gbps and
establishes a connection to Internet2 via 3ROX. Juniata College hosts a high
capacity compute cluster for a consortium of undergraduate institutions working
in genomics research. The Genome Consortium for Active Teaching, using high
throughput Next Generating Sequencing (GCAT-SEEK), provides sequencing
technologies and genomic analysis training to faculty and students to support
on-going research projects at 132 partnering institutions. Campus networking
improvements enable greater end-to-end performance and reliability for students
and research users of the compute cluster, and improves network-based access to
central resources for computational biology required for research projects
involving analysis and comparison of whole genome data sets. The expanded
network is an essential advancement as it allows teams of faculty and students
to participate in cutting-edge genomics research projects and provide authentic
research experiences to undergraduates at the partnering institutions. The
increased network capacity enhances undergraduate classroom teaching, enabling
students from multiple institutions to simultaneously access the software and
computational resources of the compute cluster. The cyber infrastructure
improvements include the expansion of the internal local area network (LAN), an
increase in Internet2 connectivity, and connections to resources within larger
frameworks at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center. This strategy presents a
financially-feasible model for increased Internet2 connectivity that may be
adopted by other small institutions. Design, manuals and tutorials are made
available to partnering institutions. GCAT-SEEK activities also include studies
of the broader ethical, legal and social implications of advances in the field
of genomics. Addressing these topics is critical for training the next
generation of scientists, physicians and healthcare policy experts.