* 1440543
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: University of California Riverside's Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Michael Pazzani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,893.00

At the University of California, Riverside (UCR), scientists are using a high-
speed network known as a "science demilitarized zone" or DMZ to keep their
massive science data flowing between collaborators on and off campus. Funded by
the NSF, the UCR-DMZ is a ?private? high-bandwidth network that enables (i) new
ways of collaborating; (ii) collection of data at much higher resolution; (iii)
entirely new data-intensive projects; (iv) a much larger number of Big Data
projects, including student research. The UCR-DMZ uses Air Blown Fiber (ABF)
optical fiber -- high-bandwidth strands literally blown through conduits -- that
allow low-cost addition of future capacity. The network prepares UCR?s
Cyberinfrastructure for an anticipated 40% growth in faculty in the next five
years, along with growth in data-per-faculty-member. The UCR-DMZ supports data-
intensive research that includes underground cameras to monitor soil biological
activity in real time, insect identification based on wing-beat data,
dissemination of gravitational models of the Universe, video bioinformatics,
next generation DNA sequencing, Internet performance prediction, and sustainable
energy projects. Research data is being archived by UCR?s libraries.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Terabyte datasets are increasingly routine for many UCR labs. UCR-DMZ
offers a 1) a "friction free" network path devoted to research, not competing
with day-to-day business and enterprise computing; 2) high-performance Data
Transfer Nodes (DTNs) with instrumentation, hardware and operating system
optimized end-to-end for data transfer; and 3) performance monitoring using
measurement/test nodes in a PERFormance Service Oriented Network monitoring
Architecture (perfSONAR).