* 1440665
* SI2-SSE: High-Performance Software for Large-Scale Modeling of Binding Equilibria
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Emilio Gallicchio, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 141,135.00

Living organisms are regulated by specific interactions among proteins and other
macromolecules. Cancer and genetic diseases are due to altered interactions
caused by mutations. Cellular organelles and viruses spontaneously build
themselves from the ordered assembly of component molecules. While a complete
understanding remains elusive, these and many other phenomena fundamentally rest
on the ability of molecules to recognize and bind specifically to other
molecules. The general principles of molecular recognition are being employed to
design new drugs, chemical catalysts, and advanced materials. Computer models
offer an important mean to disentangle and analyze molecular interactions and to
produce quantitative predictions. The main objective of the project is to
develop novel algorithms to model molecular recognition processes at atomic
resolution on modern parallel computer architectures. This research seeks to
increase the speed of the calculations and expand hardware support to enable the
screening of larger sets of drug candidates and the study of multiple protein
mutations under various conditions. The increased accuracy and availability of
modeling software technologies by a larger community will lead to new ideas and
research approaches, and ultimately to new discoveries in medicine, chemistry
and material science. This effort will contribute to the establishment of in
silico means to evaluate environmental and clinical claims. For example
computational evidences on toxicity of substances can inform public policy in
the same way that, for instance, atmospheric models are currently used for
global climate projections.

The project targets the Binding Energy Distribution Analysis Method (BEDAM, for
short), an accurate model of molecular binding, currently limited by
computational performance. Outcomes of this research include deployment the
BEDAM model for the first time on General Purpose Graphical Processing Units
(GPGPU) and Many Integrated Core (MIC) massively parallel architectures. To this
end, the mathematical formulation of the model will be tuned to best utilize the
features of these modern computing architectures. Specialized recursive
computational geometry algorithms will be developed to extract from the parallel
hardware near optimal performance. Robust automated tools for the processing of
molecular models and their analysis will be put in place for large scale
applications. Accessible user interfaces will be implemented to ensure wide
applicability and adoption of the software. These software applications will be
distributed under an open source license to promote sharing and community
contributions. Student research assistants form an integral part of the research
team. While contributing meaningfully to scientific research, students from
challenging socioeconomic backgrounds will acquire computer programming and
software maintenance skills useful to enter the high tech job market.