* 1440969
* Collaborative Research: RIPS Type 2: Strategic Analysis and Design of Robust and Resilient Interdependent Power and Communications Networks
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Srinivas Shakkottai, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

Power and communication networks, arguably the two most critical infrastructures
of the nation, are highly interdependent in that communication networks
transport measurement and control data of power network elements, and in turn
require reliable power supplies to operate successfully. Hence, an initial
failure in the power network can trigger failures in the communication network,
which can then trigger further failures in the power network, thus resulting in
a cascading failure. Existing models and analytical methods oversimplify the
complex inter-relationships between power and communications networks, and hence
are ineffective in dealing with cascading network stresses. The goal of this
project is to develop and validate a fundamentally new paradigm for capturing
the complexity of interdependency between networks in a tractable yet accurate
manner, and to utilize its predictive power to determine outcomes of network
stresses and to provide prescriptive solutions to mitigate cascading failures by
strengthening critical network elements. While doing so, the project uses game
theoretical methods to account for the socio-economic motivations that drive
provisioning decisions in networks that are owned and operated by competing
market entities that also have to cooperate with each other for the well-being
of the entire power-communication network system. The project aims at both
graduate and undergraduate curriculum development activities at the
participating institutions, particularly at bringing together students from
economics and social sciences disciplines that may not otherwise be exposed to
the energy and communications domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project takes an important step towards the principled understanding of the
interdependent power and communication networks, and the development of
practical solutions that can be used to enhance their robustness. The research
is organized into three interdependent thrust areas:&lt;br/&gt;1) Macro-level
Analysis and Design: This thrust area establishes the analytical foundations of
an innovative methodology based on Boolean logic based implicative
interdependency relations to characterize interdependency between different
network entities in large scale power and communication networks spanning the
entire country, and its impact on overall network resilience. A key novelty of
this approach is to distill complex interdependencies into analytically
tractable logical relationships that can be used to make failure recovery
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;2) Micro-level Analysis and Design: This thrust area delves
deep into individual entities of the power and communication systems, such as
system controllers and power generators, to understand how the health of each is
affected by prevailing conditions. Constructing realistic graphs across
different system entities and observing the cascade of events across the network
through detailed simulations yield insights on the dependability of each
constituent entity.&lt;br/&gt;3) Socio Economic Analysis: Given that the
network/utility operators have different motivations, this thrust transforms
technical insights into applicable policy decisions based on game theory and
surveys/interviews conducted with the stakeholders for socio-economic analysis.
Identifying value of the entities associated with each operator on overall
system resilience, incentivizing them to harden crucial ones, and creation of an
exchange to trade in resources form the key aspects of this
part.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direct impact of this project is on providing
recommendations on the critical issue of how best to enhance the resilience of
power and communication infrastructure. The analytical methodology developed is
also relevant to other heterogeneous interdependent networks. The educational
aspect of the project is based around creating synergies between ideas drawn
from engineering and the social sciences and making these available to a broad-
spectrum of students. A special focus on providing learning opportunities to
female and minority students is a further strength.