* 1440299
* EAGER-Collaborative: Exploring the feasibility of TIRF-based sensors for oceanographic research applications.
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Michael Lochhead, MBio Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2016
* USD 75,554.00

The PIs propose to address the difficulty of developing a small, low power,
highly sensitive molecular biology tool for oceanographic work with the novel
implementation of a sensor technology known as Total Internal Reflection
Fluorescence (TIRF). The TIRF provides rapid, sensitive, simultaneous, and cost-
effective detection of multiple biochemical targets with minimal sample
preparation. This EAGER proposal seeks funding to explore the feasibility of
modifying an existing technology developed by MBio Diagnostics, Inc., consisting
of a cartridge and reader system in order to achieve either a smaller form
factor, an increased sample capacity, or both. This modified TIRF technology
will be designed for integration with an AUV-based sample acquisition/processing
module that will provide for underway generation of biological data in support
of oceanographic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TIRF-based sensor is one of several emerging
technologies that promise to transform ocean science by providing the ability to
carry out interactive experiments and test hypotheses remotely at the molecular
level. It has the potential for providing real or near-real time data revealing
not only species? presence and abundance, but also the metabolic and
physiological status of those organisms at the biochemical and molecular levels,
can provide new insights into how populations are responding in situ to their
environment over time as conditions change. This project will continue to build
international collaborations with the UK and Ireland. It will include 4
undergraduate and 3 graduate student participation in both the US and Ireland. A
workshop will be organized in Belfast as well as using these development
experiences as part of an on-line module for a Masters in Diagnostics
(University Arizona).