* 1440116
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: Cloud-Hosted Real-time Data Services for the Geosciences (CHORDS)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Branko Kerkez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 40,000.00

The importance of real-time scientific data is ever increasing, particularly in
mission critical scenarios, where informed decisions must be made rapidly.
Furthermore, advances in the distribution of real-time data are leading many new
transient phenomena in space-time to be observed. Presently however, realtime
decision-making is infeasible in many cases that require streaming scientific
data to be coupled with complex models. While EarthCube will provide an
unprecedented framework for disseminating data sources, the use of real-time
data raises an additional set of complex challenges that must be considered.
This project is a pilot to demonstrate the importance of coodinating the
geosciences around their real-time data gathering and use. The work will
demonstrate a Cloud-Hosted Real-time Data Services for the Geosciences
(CHORDS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision behind CHORDS is to provide a real-time
data management infrastructure that will: a)Provide a system to archive,
navigate and distribute real-time data streams via the Internet; b)Be easily
deployed and configured; c)Run on cloud infrastructure; d)Use transactions built
on RESTful protocols (i.e. via URLs); e)Employ data and metadata formats that
adhere to standards, which simplify the user experience; f)Be free and open
source.Science derived from observing platform data is the result of years of
planning before a deployment, for example, and millions of dollars are spent on
the deployment itself in hopes of obtaining the desired dataset. Many geo-
scientific experiments are often resource constrained. In such cases it is vital
to guarantee the optimal allocation of resources to ensure that important events
do not go unobserved. In geo-scientific domains it is not uncommon to analyze
data after a field campaigns, only to detect sensor faults, calibration offsets
or anomalous behaviors when it is already too late. Real-time data will enable
the optimal allocation of constrained experimental resources by automating the
detection of faults and anomalies. CHORDS will provide a framework to enable
adaptive sampling, discovery and fusion of various real-time geoscientific data
sources, thus facilitating a new means by which geoscience experiments are
carried out. The use cases will illustrate this by showing traditional
experiments would have missed events of interest due to lack of access to real-
time data. Focus on the initial work of defining requirements, design and
specifications. Begin to ingest a small subset of geosciences data streams into
a prototype CHORDS structure built in the cloud. Participate in activities that
strengthen the integration of real-time data being ingested via CHORDS into
other EarthCube Building Block systems that are under development. They will
focus on some initial test cases, in hydrology sensor data, radar data streams,
the NCAR Lower Atmosphere Observing Facilities, and outreach to earth and oceans
communities.