* 1440581
* Collaborative: SI2-SSE - A Plug-and-Play Software Platform of Robotics-Inspired Algorithms for Modeling Biomolecular Structures and Motions
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Amarda Shehu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2019
* USD 217,288.00

This project aims to develop a novel plug-and-play platform of open-source
software elements to advance algorithmic research in molecular biology. The
focus is on addressing the algorithmic impasse faced by computational chemists
and biophysicists in structure-function related problems involving dynamic
biomolecules central to our biology. The software platform resulting from this
project provides the critical software infrastructure to support transformative
research in molecular biology and computer science that benefits society at
large by advancing our modeling capabilities and in turn our understanding of
the role of biomolecules in critical mechanisms in a living and diseased
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the current impasse on the
length and time scales that can be afforded in biomolecular modeling and
simulation. It does so by integrating cutting-edge knowledge from two different
research communities, computational chemists and biophysicists focused on
detailed physics-based simulations, and AI researchers focused on efficient
search and optimization algorithms. The software elements integrate
sophisticated energetic models and molecular representations with powerful
search and optimization algorithms for complex modular systems inspired from
robot motion planning. The plug-and-play feature of the software platform
supports putting together novel algorithms, such as wrapping Molecular Dynamics
or Monte Carlo as local search operators within larger robotics-inspired
exploration frameworks, and adding emerging biomolecular representations,
models, and search techniques even beyond the timeline of this project.