* 1440756
* SI2-SSE: An Active File System for Processing and Sharing Petascale Multi-Dimentional Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Arthur Wetzel, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Data sets in diverse areas such as biology, engineering, or astronomy routinely
reach terabyte scales and are expected to grow to petabytes within the next few
years. Typical examples include time series measurement or multidimensional
volumetric data sets. Due to their rapidly increasing size, these data present
severe limitations for data storage, transmission, and processing, and will thus
become serious bottlenecks for analysis pipelines and collaborative data
analysis. New approaches and frameworks are needed to enable the timely and cost
effictive analyses at next generation data scales. The Active Data Processing
and Transformation File System (ADAPT FS) combines efficient storage of original
data with on-the-fly processing to enable collaborative processing and sharing
of scientific datasets at the largest scales with minimal data duplication and
latency. The remote access will leverage PSC's SLASH2 distributed filesystem and
be extended to provide visualization. ADAPT-FS processing will enable easy
access to leading-edge scientific datasets for teaching and training at
institutions of all sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADAPT-FS provides a FUSE based
file system interface allowing seamless use from programs or web servers. The
guiding principles behind ADAPT-FS are to: 1) eliminate unwanted data
duplication; 2) minimize data transfer by working directly from original data
when possible; 3) minimize delays between data capture and end-user analyses;
and 4) provide a flexible workflow which incorporates active computation. The
latter aspect enables improved parallel I/O performance by exploiting untapped
CPU and GPU power on the nodes of large data servers. We will provide ADAPT-FS
as open source, including a flexible and well-documented API and a plug-in
framework enabling users to insert their own GPU and CPU codes into the data
pipeline to extend and customize its data processing capabilities. Thus, ADAPT-
FS will provide a critical technology to tackle the next generation of massive
data intensive processing, allowing efficient and rapid analysis of petabytes
size data sets with minimal data duplication in a collaborative multi-site
framework.