* 1440254
* The Event Horizon Telescope Experiment
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Sheperd Doeleman, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2021
* USD 7,764,690.00

The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) project will use a global network of radio
telescopes employing the sophisticated technique of Very Long Baseline
Interferometry (VLBI) to resolve and image the regions near two nearby
supermassive black holes. One in the center of our own Milky Way Galaxy
("SgrA*", pronounced "Sagittarius-A star") has a mass four million times that of
our own Sun; the other, in the center of a massive galaxy 50 million light years
away (known as "M87"), has a measured mass several billion times that of the
Sun. These regions will be imaged at radio wavelengths, showing detail on the
scale of the apparent black-hole diameter ("Event Horizon"). The study of
massive black holes has many applications in astrophysics and is of great
popular interest; such objects are thought to fuel the most powerful activity
seen in far-distant galaxies. Supermassive black holes are extreme examples of
Einstein's theory of General Relativity, but the actual mechanism by which they
form remains uncertain. Because of the popularity of black holes, the numerous
public outreach efforts of this project will enthrall thousands of members of
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Event Horizon Telescope includes
using the recently completed, NSF-funded Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array (ALMA), as well as other large, high-precision radio telescopes worldwide.
This project will support assembly of a wideband VLBI correlator to process the
torrent (5 Petabytes per session) of EHT data, construction of a VLBI system at
the Large Millimeter Telescope (LMT) in Mexico, and development of a robust data
processing pipeline. Through these developments, the EHT will track time-
variable structure at the Event Horizon of SgrA*, and search for periodic
signatures of orbiting inhomogeneities in the innermost accretion flow.
Observations of M87 will target study of the jet-launching region of a radio-
loud AGN, to cleanly distinguish between models of jet genesis whose predictions
differ markedly close to the black hole. New polarimetric EHT data will reveal
Schwarzschild scale magnetic structures, providing unique constraints on
accretion models, as well as General Relativistic magneto-hydrodynamical (MHD)
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Event Horizon Telescope will test General
Relativity (GR) in the strong gravity limit, and as its ultimate and most
fundamental prize, the EHT aims at detecting the signature of the photon orbit
(and enclosed "shadow") predicted by GR. In addition, while only a few sources
can potentially be imaged in the innermost regions, the array has the ability to
provide unique and vital time domain information with high angular resolution on
the structure and magnetic fields for many other active galactic nuclei (AGN),
probing a spatial region of the jet outflow which is very poorly studied with
current instrumentation. These topics are all at the forefront of work in AGN
physics, and the anticipated data have the potential to revolutionize our
understanding of black holes and their environments and to greatly enhance our
understanding of the formation and evolution of jetted
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the work include hands-on
training of students and early career scientists in radio astronomy
instrumentation and mm/submm interferometry, and those mentored within this
project will emerge with unique observational and hardware skills that will be
invaluable in the era of ALMA. All EHT data will be made available to the
astronomy community, which will maximize its broad astronomical impact across
many fields and disciplines, both nationally and internationally. The project
includes a public outreach effort through a Scientific American blog, a possible
partnership with the Smithsonian Channel, and Center for Astrophysics' traveling
exhibition.