* 1440579
* Implementation of the Next Generation Science Standards at the State Level: A Conference to Determine the Role of the Earth and Space Sciences Community
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Susan Sullivan, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 12/31/2015
* USD 29,841.00

The American Geosciences Institute (AGI) and the National Association of
Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) propose to host a fall 2014 summit on implementation
of standards for college and career readiness at the state level. The summit
brings together key members of the Earth and Space Sciences (ESS) community to
identify and devise ways in which they can work together to help states and
school districts implement college and career readiness standards. A needs
assessment is conducted before the summit to determine the top concerns of the
stakeholders and a collaborative website is created. At the conference, a
collection of standards-congruent ESS educational resources are identified and
assembled. The conference report describes concrete guidelines for disseminating
these resources to translate the vision and structure of the standards into
teaching and learning practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 2.5 day working meeting
for 30 experts and stakeholders consists of short plenaries to establish the
context for each set of working group sessions. The proposed plenary speakers
are Steven Pruitt from Achieve, Michael Wysession, one of the lead writers of
the ESS portion of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), and panels of
science supervisors from states that have and have not adopted the standards. In
the working group sessions, conferees identify products and services that the
geoscience and geoscience education community can develop to help states
implement the ESS portion of the standards. A key component of the Summit is
action items to move the agenda of the conference forward in the states, and
commitment of the participants to follow through on the various findings of the
conference is emphasized. As part of the selection process individuals will be
asked for a commitment from the organizations they represent to participate in
follow-up actions from the Summit. The conference and its impacts will be
measured by an external evaluator&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is to
develop a strategy for increasing the import of teaching Earth and Space
Sciences in schools to make students ready for college and careers.