* 1440772
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Cyberinfrastructure - Creation of Science DMZ at UL Lafayette
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Joseph Neigel, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 491,513.00

The University of Louisiana at Lafayette is creating a dedicated high-speed
science DMZ network infrastructure to support science and engineering faculty on
campus. Various current and future research projects within the university have
computational and data transfer needs that dramatically exceed beyond what
existing infrastructure can support. The science DMZ delivers a next-generation
packet transport service with better traffic identification, security, and
application controls, and offers a 40Gbps data transfer capacity that connects
all major research laboratories on campus. The infrastructure also links this
campus wide connectivity to the statewide Louisiana Optical Network Initiative
(LONI), and Internet2. This infrastructure addresses major bottlenecks to
scientific discovery, and provides researchers with better access to
visualization venues at Louisiana Immersive Technology Enterprise (LITE), and
High Performance Computing (HPC) systems available on both LONI and XSEDE.

This upgraded next-generation network infrastructure also provides increased
capacity for remote visualization, telepresence, and bandwidth-intensive data
transfers between computational clusters. This will be of great benefit to
multiple science and engineering programs across campus in the areas of
computational biology, bioinformatics, computer vision, cybersecurity, and data
science. The infrastructure also supports research areas such as coastal wetland
loss, epidemiology, alternative energy, and medicine that have high economic and
societal impact. The project also creates exposure for students at the
University of Louisiana at Lafayette to leverage this network infrastructure.