* 1440642
* Collaborative Research:  CC*IIE Region:  Rocky Mountain Cyberinfrastructure Mentoring and Outreach Alliance (RMCMOA)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Marla Meehl, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 135,822.00

High Performance Networking (HPN) and other components of advanced
cyberinfrastructure (CI) are key enabling technologies vital to a college's
ability to prosper in a rapidly evolving scientific and technical environment.
All components of CI, especially advanced network infrastructure, are swiftly
changing, making it challenging to maintain currency, agility, and
competitiveness. Smaller institutions are at a severe disadvantage, lacking in
capital and personnel who know how to deploy, optimize, maintain, and sustain
such technologies.

Colorado State University, the Idaho Regional Optical Network, the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research, the University of Colorado Boulder, and
the University of Utah have partnered proactively to train and mentor faculty
and staff from smaller institutions in the region to enhance their use of
advanced technologies, emphasize their advantages, and highlight their critical
role as campus, regional, and national scientific infrastructure. This project
educates in an effort to drive adoption and expansion of advanced networking and
CI technologies to smaller colleges and universities in Colorado, New Mexico,
Idaho, Utah, and Wyoming. The project conducts four regional workshops, as well
as site visits to smaller institutions to support network engineering activities
and sharing knowledge and best practices in deploying and applying network-based
cyberinfrastructure.