* 1440705
* CC*IIE IAM: Enhancing Vassar Research and Collaboration through Identity and Access Management
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Steven Taylor, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project enhances research collaboration at Vassar College through the
implementation of an Identity and Access Management (IAM) system. The IAM
supports access to and security of distributed scientific research efforts and
other applications with broader impacts. Vassar researchers are actively engaged
in collaborative intra- and extramural multidisciplinary research, and these
projects regularly collect and exchange data with research collaborators and
teams at other institutions in Virtual Organizations (VOs). Vassar College
researchers were previously challenged to create and manage the identities,
groups and permissions crucial to these VOs, and the largely manual nature of
the processes required to create and administer a research project was becoming
an impediment to the actual research itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
IAM 1) provides an automated system that provides centralized management of
science research VOs in support of distributed science research; 2) enhances
inter-institutional research collaboration allowing researchers to use their
campus login to access resources at partner institutions; 3) positions
researchers to leverage external resources for greater science research
collaboration such as Internet2 and other Research and Education (R&amp;E)
Networks and 4) enables wider use of existing directory services by an array of
science research tools.