* 1440420
* SI2-SSE: Scalable Big Data Clustering by Random Projection Hashing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Philip Wilsey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 498,127.00

This project plans to develop a distributed algorithm for secure clustering of
high dimensional data sets. Fields in health and biology are significantly
benefited by data clustering scalability. Bioinformatic problems such as Micro
Array clustering, Protein-Protein interaction clustering, medical resource
decision making, medical image processing, and clustering of epidemiological
events all serve to benefit from larger dataset sizes. The algorithm under
development, called Random Projection Hash or RPHash, utilizes aspects of
locality sensitive hashing (LSH) and multi-probe random projection for
computational scalability and linear achievable gains from parallel speed.
Furthermore, RPHash provides data anonymization through destructive manipulation
of the data preventing de-anonymization attacks beyond standard best practices
database security methods. RPHash will be deployable on commercially available
cloud resources running the Hadoop (MRv2) implementation of MapReduce. The
exploitation of general purpose cloud processing solutions allows researchers to
scale their processing needs using virtually limitless commercial processing
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RPHash algorithm uses various recent
techniques in data mining along with a new approach toward achieving algorithmic
scalability on distributed systems. The basic intuition of RPHash is to combine
multi-probe random projection with discrete space quantization. Regions of high
density are then regarded as centroid candidates. To follow common
parameterized, k-means methods, the top k regions will be selected. The focus on
a randomized, and thus non-deterministic, clustering algorithm is somewhat
uncommon in computing, but common for ill-posed, combinatorially restrictive
problems such as clustering and partitioning. Despite theoretical results
showing that k-means has an exponential worst case complexity, many real world
problems tend to fair much better under k-means and other similar algorithms.