* 1440745
* CC*IIE Integration: Dynamically Optimizing Research Data Workflow with a Software Defined Science Network
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Yang Yang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 788,605.00

Intelligent management of campus research networks has become a major challenge
for many institutions, as their networks grow rapidly in size and complexity in
order to meet the demands of on-campus scientists who are conducting research,
collaborating with peers, and fulfilling their mission of scientific education.
Traditional, static network management approaches are no longer adequate, since
they often result in low efficiency, poor usability, and unpredictable network
application performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
design and deploy a novel intelligent network cyberinfrastructure that greatly
expands the ability of scientists to rapidly and efficiently move the large
quantities of data required for computation- and data-intensive scientific
workflows. To ensure a broad impact, the project includes specific focus on a
range of science drivers in diverse fields such as astronomy, climatology, and
genomics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project achieves its goal by leveraging and
validating several prior networking research and development efforts. These
include Maple, a novel Software Defined Networking (SDN) programming framework
developed at Yale, and an Application Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) protocol
and framework pioneered at Yale and now incorporated in a proposed standard for
the Internet by the Internet Engineering Task Force. Maple simplifies network
programming for end-to-end, complex, dynamically constructed network services,
while ALTO enables network applications to adapt dynamically, according to
network states, to deliver network efficiency and application quality of
service. In addition, the project builds on prior Yale and NSF investments in
high-speed physical network cyberinfrastructure, the widely-adopted InCommon
authentication framework, and IPv6 technology.