* 1440794
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Campus Networking for Transformative Exascale Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jianzhong Su, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Texas at Arlington is a comprehensive research institution
serving over 33,000 students in the heart of the Dallas-Ft. Worth Metroplex.
Many scientific research projects carried out at the university require high
bandwidth network connections. While regional and national networks provide such
connections to the Metroplex, the campus infrastructure cannot currently support
these higher rates. Modern networking technologies like Science DMZ's and
Software Defined Networks also require changes to the core campus network
design. This project improves and modernizes the UT-Arlington network
infrastructure by deploying high performance routing equipment in order to
support research on the university campus at the Exabyte
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists at UT-Arlington are studying data from
the Large Hadron Collider to measure the properties of the newly discovered
Higgs boson, and to search for new laws of physics. Researchers are studying
data to advance the fields of genomics and bioinformatics, and to prepare a
foundation for developing individualized approaches to medicine and the
treatment of illnesses. Research in earth plate movements, brain research, and
mathematical modeling of bioengineering, global environments, data mining and
chemical structures provide crucial quantitative assessments on many issues
ranging from local to global environmental concerns, healthcare, and advance our
scientific understanding and engineering expertise. Water management research is
crucial to environment stewardship in the Southwest region. In supporting these
and other research areas, improved campus networking provides benefit to the
region, advances scientific knowledge, and helps train the diverse student
population at UT-Arlington.