* 1440312
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: Digital Crust - A 4D Exploratory Environment for Earth Science Research and Learning
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Shanan Peters, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 246,997.00

This project develops the Digital Crust, an online workspace where the
geosciences community can contribute data and knowledge, visualize, explore,
synthesize and test multiple hypotheses across space-time and themes, and derive
4D data product from multiple data.The platform can serve as a resource to bring
together geoscientists working on separate aspects of the Earth system, by
bringing their data/ideas together and by providing an environment to view the
Earth from different perspectives. It will also be a "one-stop shop" for Earth
science educators to expose the growing minds to the multi-faceted nature of
Earth science problems and to see data and knowledge gaps which are powerful
motivators for the young (not all problems have been solved ? there is a place
for me to contribute). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Digital Crust platform
prototype will demonstrate technology that has the potential to transform the
way geoscientists conduct research and learning, by (1) linking existing data
repositories on all aspects of the Earth?s crust created by all disciplines of
geosciences, communities as well as individuals, (2) creating a multi-context
environment (e.g., tectonics, structural geology, stratigraphy, sedimentology,
geomorphology, paleontology, archeology, mineralogy, geochemistry, soil science,
hydrology, terrestrial ecology) at any given space (xyz) and time (t) for
synthesis-type explorations, hypothesis-testing or learning, (3) allowing for
multi-scale (e.g., outcrop to continent) data extractions and downloads for all
research and learning applications, and (4) exposing data-knowledge gaps to
identify the most rewarding future investments. Hosting multiple data types and
sometimes conflicting interpretations and hypotheses of Earth processes will
promote community discussion and debate on Earth processes that will foster
interaction, collaboration, and data/idea sharing among scientists who might
otherwise never have met. From the CI perspective, Digital Crust leverages and
links with existing Building Blocks, explores the application of "loose-schema",
noSQL databases to allow the flexibility necessary in a geoscience research
database, and utilizes a modular software design to facilitate long-term
maintenance and evolution of the platform.