* 1440600
* CC*IIE Engineer: Campus Cyberinfrastructure Engineer for Arizona State University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jay Steed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 398,237.00

This project supports a large and diverse set of discipline specific researchers
at Arizona State University (ASU) with data-intensive research programs. Example
data-intensive use cases such as femtosecond nanocrystallography, biomass
renewable energy, combustion for energy efficiency, the national EarthScope
project, astrophysics, desert water flows, and genomics share a common need for
low-latency transfer of ever-larger data sets with collaborators across ASU,
Arizona, the Nation, and the world. This project leverages existing ASU
investments in campus level dynamic network services to more efficiently enable
a larger range of diverse and distributed research and educational data sets.
ASU has significant network capability and a Science DMZ, but research groups
often need specific assistance overcoming the challenges of optimally using this
advanced infrastructure for their research. The campus infrastructure engineer
supported by this two-year project bridges this gap by helping campus
researchers make the best use of the advanced networking resources, advocating
for the differing needs of research cyberinfrastructure within ASU, and engages
national and international resources and organizations such as XSEDE and OSG.
The campus infrastructure engineer thus strengthens network engineering and
data-intensive discipline specific research across the University.