* 1440341
* ZWICKY TRANSIENT FACILITY
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Thomas Prince, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2020
* USD 10,775,925.00

This award will support construction, operation, and data
management/distribution for the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF), a camera
upgrade and renovation for the 48-inch Oschin Schmidt telescope on Mt Palomar.
The telescope will conduct wide-area sky surveys with a goal of identifying new
types of rare, rapidly varying astronomical sources at locations ranging from
inside our own Solar System to significant fractions of the distance "across"
the universe. Broader impacts of the work include hands-on training of students
and early career scientists developing instrumentation for large area sky
surveys. Expertise will be developed in STEM fields and will lead to skills
important for NSF's major new project, the LSST. The ZTF will conduct an annual
time-domain summer school open to students throughout the US, and will share the
excitement of the Dynamic Sky with the public via an outreach program at the
Palomar Observatory Visitors' Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility will
conduct a synoptic survey for high-cadence time-domain astronomy with the goal
of identifying rare, fast-varying sources. These sources will include
supernovae, exotic explosive transients, unusual stellar variables, compact
binaries, active galactic nuclei, and asteroids. The ZTF survey will cover the
entire Northern Sky, revisiting fields on timescales of a few hours and
providing hundreds of visits per field each year. This shallow-wide-fast cadence
is well suited to detecting fast transients and probing rapid variability. The
single-visit depth of 20.4mag is well-matched to current spectrographs on 4-m
class telescopes, while the final co-added images will provide wide sky coverage
that is about two magnitudes deeper than that of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
The new camera will have a 47 square degree field of view, larger than the
original Palomar Sky Survey which was recorded on glass plates using this same
telescope almost 60 years ago. The proposing team has substantial experience in
this field, having run the similar but less powerful Palomar Transient Factory
for a number of years previous to this. The project is leveraged by
contributions from a number of partner institutions, including Caltech (lead),
the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center (IPAC), Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory, the Weizmann Institute of Science (Israel), the Oskar Klein Centre
(Sweden), DESY (High Energy Astronomy, Germany), Los Alamos National Laboratory,
TANGO (Taiwan), the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, the Intra-University
Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (India), and Pomona College.