* 1440755
* Brain evolution in the context of efficient resource extraction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Margaret Crofoot, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 323,474.00

The increasing of brain size is a defining feature of human evolutionary
history. Because brain tissue is metabolically expensive, a central question
about human origins is how our ancestors acquired the additional energy
necessary to grow and maintain large brains. Current hypotheses focus on
relatively recent behavioral changes, suggesting that meat-eating, food
processing, or cooking may have increased diet quality and led to higher net
energy gain. Brain expansion, however, is not restricted to the human lineage;
it is an older and more general pattern across the primates. This suggests that
a more fundamental process is responsible for the early stages of this
energetically expensive brain expansion. One recent suggestion is that primates
possess a sophisticated 'mental tool-kit' that enables them to extract resources
from their habitat more efficiently than other species. It has been impossible
to adequately evaluate this hypothesis, however, because we lack the critical
comparative ecological data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is
to test if primates forage 'smarter' or 'better' than other fruit-eating
species, both facilitated by, and energetically supporting, their larger brains.
The movements of six frugivorous mammals will be recorded using GPS tracking
during an ecologically 'simple' time of year when a single, major fruit source
(Dipteryx oleifera) is available that is shared by these species. By comparing
how distantly related, but ecologically similar, species living in the same
habitat find food, this project will test if 1) patterns of movement and food
exploitation are consistent with species-level differences in what animals know
about their habitat, and 2) if complex foraging strategies lead to more
efficient resource acquisition. If these are supported, the research will
provide evidence to support a 'positive feedback loop model' for primate
cognitive evolution: Increased brain-size (arising from social and/or ecological
pressures) leads to enhanced cognitive abilities that improve food-gathering
efficiency, while this, in turn, generates an energetic surplus that potentiates
the growth of a bigger brain. If cognitive abilities and foraging success do not
differ among species, then alternatively, these results will challenge
widespread assumptions about the relative sophistication of primate foraging
behavior, and force a reexamination of how the early stages of primate brain
expansion were energetically financed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To broaden the
impact of these results, researchers will create online videos about how this
study contributes to our understanding of evolution of the human brain. In
addition, live web-cast updates from the field will be presented to museum
visitors through collaboration with the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences, fostering understanding of science and the research process. Outreach
activities also will include creation of opportunities for Panamanian school
children to attend training seminars, gain hands-on experience with scientific
research, and meet and interact with both Panamanian and US scientists,
fostering science education and appreciation. Finally, the project will enhance
education of future scientists through training of both US and Panamanian
undergraduate students from backgrounds that have traditionally been
underrepresented in the field of biological anthropology.