* 1440495
* Provision of Log Data Reduction and Database Services for Scientific Ocean Drilling
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,067,983.00

Provision of Log Data Reduction and Database Services for Scientific Ocean
Drilling&lt;br/&gt;The results and discoveries of scientific ocean drilling have
broad relevance to a wide range of societal, educational, and public interests.
One of the most important aspects of scientific ocean drilling is storing and
making accessible well log data obtained during expeditions. The Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory (LDEO) has been involved in scientific ocean drilling with the
NSF from the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) through the current International
Ocean Discovery Program (IODP). To date, more than 570 scientific drilling holes
have been uploaded into the database, LogDB, including data for more than 33 km
of drilled intervals, with more than 37,000 website visits for 2013 for data
download. For the proposed work, LDEO will continue to provide scientists with
quality-controlled well log data sets from future scientific expeditions and
will also maintain historic well log data access. In addition, LDEO will
collaborate with key database groups to enable LogDB and its associated
scientific product to be broadly disseminated. This will broaden the use and
impact of scientific ocean drilling data by connecting LogDB to other NSF-
supported databases and facilities, increasing the accessibility of IODP log
data to the broader scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The goals of this proposal are to provide scientists with quality-
controlled well log data sets from future scientific expeditions and to maintain
historic log data access. To accomplish this, log data will be transferred from
the U.S. drillship, JOIDES Resolution, to shore for data reduction and QA/QC,
with the resulting standard and image files transferred back to the ship for use
during each expedition. At the end of each cruise, this dataset will be uploaded
to the database, LogDB, for post-cruise, password-protected access for specific
the scientific community. LDEO will continue to maintain LogDB, which provides a
web-enabled database to safely store, search, and retrieve log data collected by
DSDP, ODP, and IODP. LogDB has four components: secure storage of original and
reduced log data files in a secure file system; a relational database containing
log metadata for indexing and data queries; a web interface providing data
search and retrieval, as well as access to documentation on data reduction and
QA/QC steps; and a set of ReST-based web services, which provide an interface
for third party data tools to interact directly with the database. The LDEO
Borehole Research Group (BRG) will collaborate with logging operation groups in
Europe and Japan to insure that log data collected and distributed by IODP are
consistent across all platforms. In this effort, BRG will provide high quality
log data access in as seamless a manner as possible for scientists onboard the
JOIDES Resolution and to the international community. LDEO procedures have been
designed to be operationally efficient and cost effective for the U.S. ship
operator, Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU), and to enhance LogDB user experiences
with state-of-the-art database technology.