* 1440700
* SI2-SSE: Enhancing the PReconditioned Iterative MultiMethod Eigensolver Software with New Methods and Functionality for Eigenvalue and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) Problems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andreas Stathopoulos, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 451,884.00

The numerical solution of large, sparse Hermitian Eigenvalue Problems (HEP) and
Generalized HEP (GHEP) for a few extreme eigenvalues is one of the most
important but also computationally intensive tasks in a variety of applications.
Examples abound in spectral graph partitioning, large scale spectral graph
analysis, structural engineering, electromagnetics, lattice Quantum
Chromodynamics, and electronic structure applications from atomic scale physics
to molecular scale materials science. Closely related is the problem of
computing a partial Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of a matrix, which finds
everyday use in numerous applications including data mining and machine
learning. The importance of the problem is evidenced by the significant
resources that have been invested over the last decade in developing high
quality eigenvalue software packages. However, these packages still do not
include the near-optimal methods that have made the package PRIMME the software
to beat. PRIMME, or PReconditioned Iterative MultiMethod Eigensolver, is a
software package developed in 2005 for the solution of HEP. PRIMME brings state-
of-the-art preconditioned iterative methods from "bleeding edge" to production,
with a flexible, yet highly usable interface. Yet, it is its focus on numerical
robustness and computational efficiency that has gained PRIMME the recognition
as one of the best eigenvalue packages. This success calls for a new effort to
extend PRIMME with some long awaited functionality but also to include new
algorithms to address some outstanding problems in eigenvalue computations. This
work is critical to many groups whose research depends on the lattice QCD and
materials science software packages that PRIMME will improve through
collaborations. PRIMME already has a PETSc interface, and with the proposed
development of Hypre and Trilinos interfaces, it will be accessible by a far
wider community of users. The most requested feature, however, has been a MATLAB
interface. This will unleash the power of an "industrial strength" software to
end users. Last but not least, this project will educate and train two graduate
and several undergraduate students in the art of high performance numerical
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals for this projects include: PRIMME
extension to GHEP, with special attention to ill conditioned mass matrices;
PRIMME extension to SVD, with special attention to obtaining results at high
accuracy (the solution must include not only PRIMME's robust components but a
combination of known and new methods, as well as a dynamic way to choose between
them); implementation of new methods and techniques for the solution of highly
interior eigenvalue problems and for the computation of a large number of
eigenvalues; interoperability with DOE libraries and MATLAB, and improved means
of dissemination. As a numerical linear algebra kernel, PRIMME has a large
potential audience in the computational sciences community. However, two
specific collaborations will provide real-world, challenging problems and serve
as a stress-test evaluator of the resulting methods and software. One involves
the lattice QCD group at the DOE's Jefferson Lab, and the other involves the
high performance computing and materials science group at IBM, Zurich.