* 1440117
* Symposium &amp; Workshop: Thinking about change: an integrative approach for examining cognition in a changing world, SICB Annual Meeting, West Palm Beach, Florida, January 3-7, 20
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Timothy Roth, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2015
* USD 16,450.00

This project will bring together a diverse group of scientists for a symposium
at the 2015 annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology in West Palm Beach, FL, January 3-7. The goal of the symposium is to
understand the effects of global climate change on animal cognition. Traditional
approaches for understanding how animals respond to climate change often focus
on physiology; however, recent progress in the field demonstrates that behavior
can provide a rapid and efficient response to such change. Thus, the
participants of the symposium will integrate physiology, behavior, ecology,
evolution, and psychology to understand the strategies that animals use to cope
with change. By taking an integrative approach to cognition, the researchers
will discuss methods to better predict the effect of climate change on a wider
variety of species, thereby augmenting the scientific knowledgebase that
resource managers and policy makers can utilize when making decisions in the
context of climate change. In addition, this symposium will provide students and
early-career faculty the opportunity to engage with scientists from a variety of
different fields and career levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals living in
extreme environments have a suite of physiological adaptations to cope with
their environmental conditions (e.g., thermal regime). However, many
physiological attributes require evolutionary time to become expressed and, as a
result, many studies focus on the consequences of possessing (or not) these
physiological adaptations for the survival of a species in a given location. The
research objectives of this symposium are to discuss and better understand 1)
how animals use cognition to cope with rapid environmental change, 2) how these
mechanisms "scale up" to affect ecological/evolutionary patterns, 3) how we
might determine which features of the environment are most important for the
evolution of cognition, and 4) which of these features may be critical for
future investigations.