* 1440016
* AWM Workshops and Noether Lecture 2015, January  10-13, 2015; March 14-18, 2015
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Ruth Charney, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2015
* USD 42,325.00

This proposal from the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM) includes two
workshops for early-career women, the first at the Joint Mathematics Meeting
(JMM) in San Antonio, January 10-13, 2015, and the second at the SIAM Conference
on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) in Salt Lake City, March 14-18,
2015. It also includes a named lectureship, the Emmy Noether Lecture, to be held
at the San Antonio JMM meeting. The workshops are designed to create sustainable
networks, encourage mentoring relationships, and promote research collaborations
in key fields of mathematics. The Noether Lecture highlights outstanding
contributions by a female mathematician and provides an inspiring role model to
more junior women. As such, these events address some of the key issues that
frequently inhibit women's participation in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each workshop will focus on an area of
mathematics of current interest. The 2015 AWM-JMM workshop will focus on
homotopy theory. Homotopy theory, an area of algebraic topology, has close ties
to algebraic geometry, geometric topology, number theory, representation theory,
and mathematical physics. It is a highly active area and has seen significant
progress in recent years. The 2015 AWM-SIAM workshop will focus on mathematical
modeling and high-performance computing for multiphysics and multiscale
problems. Advances in science and engineering - in disciplines ranging from
health to energy and the environment to defense - rely on predictive measurement
and analysis of multiscale multiphysics systems. Topics to be addressed at the
workshop include physical modeling, mathematical analysis, numerical analysis,
algorithms, implementation, performance, and scalability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;https://sites.google.com/site/awmmath/programs/workshops