* 1440686
* CC*IIE Campus Design: Building The 10Gbps Network for Big Data in the Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Matthew Richey, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 327,640.00

This project expands access at St. Olaf College to massive, complex datasets and
delivers the analytic power they require. The 2-year effort upgrades the current
campus network so researchers in physics, biology, economics, computer science
and mathematics can accelerate their projects and expand the range of datasets
they investigate. In particular, greater network capacity advances the NSF-
funded Center for Interdisciplinary Research and the CSinParallel initiative.
"The Network for Big Data" also enhances formal instruction in data science
across the STEM disciplines. Looking ahead, the Network for Big Data will enable
St. Olaf researchers to access massive data sets generated via remote sensing
methods, including Light Detection and Ranging
(LIDAR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The Network for Big Data" continues St. Olaf's
tradition of taking innovative, cost-effective approaches to advanced computing.
All data transfer nodes and Big Data enclave devices reside in a single virtual
local area network to serve St. Olaf's science and mathematics data management
zone. Once core and data center switches are consolidated in one enhanced
switch, external connectivity, which includes Internet2, will increase to 10
Gbps. The fiber infrastructure connecting St. Olaf's network border to its core
and to key STEM buildings is upgraded to support 10Gbps connections, with IPv6
campus-wide deployment, and continuous performance monitoring performance and
outcomes of these upgrades using a perfSONAR node.