* 1440297
* LTER: Comparative Study of a Suite of Lakes in Wisconsin
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2022
* Corinna Gries, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 10/31/2022
* USD 8,026,657.00

Freshwater lakes around the world provide essential ecological and human
benefits that range from aquatic habitat to sport and commercial fisheries to
safe and reliable drinking water. The goal of the North Temperate Lakes (NTL)
Long-Term Ecological Research Program is to understand how and why lakes change
over time and to determine the consequences of these changes for these and other
basic services. The research focuses on two sets of lakes and their surrounding
landscapes. One set lies in the rural, forested, and tourist-dominated Northern
Highland Lake District in northern Wisconsin and the other lies in the
agricultural and urban landscape around Madison, Wisconsin's capitol. Studies of
these contrasting settings provide insights into how individual lakes and groups
of lakes across landscapes and regions are affected by phenomena such as
shifting climate conditions, large storm events, invasive species, harmful algal
blooms, urbanization, and changes in environmental policies. The project
implements a number of different approaches to collect data over long time
periods and to analyze these long-term observations. Results improve
understanding of ecological change in lake districts that is important to anyone
concerned with the future of a particular region, its freshwater resources, and
the welfare of its residents. Results are also integrated into multiple
educational and training activities. The NTL program is committed to supporting
diversity in science, and to outreach efforts that communicate scientific
findings and expertise to broad audiences, informing individuals, non-
governmental organizations, academics, and local, state and federal agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address the overarching question of how
biophysical setting, climate, and land use and cover interact to shape lake
dynamics and organization in the past, present and future. Activities will be
organized in thematic areas that involve (1) documenting, describing, and
interpreting long term change in lakes and lake districts; (2) exploring how
past and potential future climate conditions influence lake physical, chemical,
and biological processes; (3) understanding how and why long-term changes vary
spatially within and among lakes; and (4) examining how lakes and lake districts
respond to sudden changes, extreme events, or interacting drivers. The work
informs and is informed by concepts and models from landscape ecology,
disturbance ecology, and multiple causation. Questions will be addressed across
a range of scales and topics, including within-lake changes in thermal regime
and fish habitat in response to climate, abundance-impact relationships for
aquatic invasive species among lakes; watershed organic carbon and phosphorus
dynamics, regional water clarity trends, and many others. Research approaches
include generating and analyzing long-term observations, experiments,
comparative studies of multiple lakes, and diverse modeling and statistical
tools. The research group comprises an interdisciplinary team with expertise in
biogeochemistry, climatology, paleolimnology, demography, ecology (landscape,
ecosystem, community, population, and paleo- ecology), economics, education and
outreach, hydrodynamics, hydrology, information management, and microbiology.
The multi-scale, multi-faceted NTL research program is designed to detect
patterns of long-term change, evaluate and advance concepts to understand causes
and consequences of these changes, and build forward-looking models and
hypotheses that will be tested using future long-term observations.