* 1440530
* SI2-SSE: LC/DC: Lockless Containers and Data Concurrency
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Damian Dechev, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2018
* USD 516,000.00

Multicore programming demands a change in the way we design and use fundamental
algorithms and data structures. This research represents a forward-looking and
pragmatic approach that will lead to the discovery of the key principles for
effective data and resource management for multiprocessor application
development. In the course of this project the PI will create new methodologies
and tools for the design, verification, and effective use of lock-free and wait-
free data structures and algorithms. The proposed methodology will allow for the
construction and use of lightweight multiprocessor algorithms with minimal
overhead by supporting only the minimal set of operations and guarantees
required by the user's application. The ideas advanced in this work will allow
first-of-a-kind technology that will deliver immense boost in performance and
software reuse; thus productivity will increase for developers of commercial and
scientific applications. This research will pave the way for tool-based
specification and verification of nonblocking algorithms, which will help
reliability of multiprocessor programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
create novel multiprocessor data structures that provide wait-free and lock-free
progress. A concurrent object is lock-free if it guarantees that some thread
makes progress. A wait-free algorithm guarantees that all threads make progress,
thus eliminating performance bottlenecks and entire classes of safety hazards
such as starvation, deadlock, and order violations. Unlike a sequential data
structure, a concurrent container must maintain correctness when multiple
threads are performing its operations. Achieving this correctness adversely
affects the complexity and performance of the operations. As a result, users of
concurrent containers are often forced to sacrifice functionality or safety
guarantees to achieve desired performance. Here, the PI will introduce the use
of alternative function models that will deliver high performance in parts of
the program that require less functionality and more functionality in other
fragments of the program that need it. The deliverables of this research
include: a collection of formally verified multiprocessor data structure designs
including queues, vectors, ring buffers, sets, and hash maps; a wait-free
database; a multiple resource lock manager; a set of unified concurrent APIs to
assist the end users of the data structures; and a technique for specification
of the key progress and correctness properties of these containers. All software
developed under this project will be released under BSD License and will be made
available to the broad research and development community.