* 1440609
* CC*IIE IAM: FeduShare: Bridging Campus and Research Identity and Access Management for Self-Managed Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Jill Gemmill, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 291,040.00

Scientific challenges are often addressed by a team of people from multiple
science disciplines, institutions and geographic locations. These teams use
computation, communication and data resources scattered across many sites or
institutions. Because of the need to authorize access to these resources, it is
currently a non-trivial problem for a team to set up the needed working
environment, and that problem delays research projects and consumes time and
other resources. The sources of difficulties include: campus and research
communities are familiar with their own Identity and Access Management (IAM)
solutions but are not familiar with the entire solution space; general purpose
solution software has been developed in different environments but adoption
outside the original environment has been limited; and members of domain science
teams are not expert in distributed systems
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designing a system
architecture supporting self-managed collaboration and federation of services
named "FeduShare". The FeduShare framework builds on existing Identity
Management solutions such as the InCommon federation, Shibboleth servers and the
GENI solutions for people/resource management/authorization that build upon
them. Case studies used to inform the investigation include InCommon based
logins for shell-based access to campus computing clusters, and the integration
with identity management in GENI for the purposes of establishing seamless end-
to-end communication paths.