* 1440906
* CS 10K: Leveraging Teach For America's National Infrastructure to Build a Pipeline of High-Quality Computer Science Instructors in Low-Income Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Melissa Moritz, Teach For America
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 03/31/2016
* USD 174,976.00

Teach For America (TFA) proposes a project to bring computer science to the low-
income high schools they serve. TFA is guided by the mission that "one day, all
children in this nation will have the opportunity to attain an excellent
education." Motivated by the desire to alleviate educational disparities that
exist for the students in low-income communities, TFA views access to high
quality computer science education as a key organizational priority. Over the
next three years, TFA has plans to build the national capacity, infrastructure,
and knowledge of computer science (CS) education from the expansion of our
current New York-based computer science pilot -- EAGER: Increasing the Supply of
High-Quality Computer Science Instructors to Low-Income Communities -- to at
least 6 new regional sites and a total of 100 new computer science (CS)
educators. This CS 10K planning grant will continue the preliminary work to put
TFA in a position to increase and broaden participation in CS education --
attracting new talent and reaching underserved student populations -- and create
a scalable, sustainable foundation for future growth and deepened understanding
of CS educator development.

The planning process will (1) recruit leaders with computer science backgrounds
to teach in low-income public schools, (2) train and support those teachers to
implement the Exploring Computer Science (ECS) curriculum, (3) develop and
implement strategies for engaging TFA alumni educators in expanding the
collective impact of this work, and (4) develop an evaluation plan. The
evaluation will refine two questions: (1) To what extent does information on
people gathered at various stages (recruit, applicant, accepted applicant,
matriculating applicant) on the road to becoming a successfully placed computer
science teachers predict progress on this road, and what strategies promote such
progress? (2) What are the relationships among resource issues (school
computers, student poverty), teachers' reported struggles and victories in
teaching the ECS curriculum, and student outcomes in both cognitive and non-
cognitive domains?