* 1440671
* Collaborative Research: The Evolutionary Biology and Health Consequences of Human Inactivity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Brian Wood, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 19,792.00

Recent research has associated sedentary living, and specifically, long periods
of Western-style chair-sitting, with high levels of cardiovascular disease
(CVD), suggesting that such behavior may be an important component of elevated
rates of CVD-related morbidity and mortality in Western society. This increased
risk has been attributed to a sitting-induced reduction in lower limb muscle
activity, with concurrent decrease in the production of enzymes that siphon fat
from the blood stream. Individuals in other cultures also are often inactive for
long periods of time, yet do not seem to develop the same risk of CVD. It
therefore is possible that styles of resting are more important than time spent
sitting, and that people in other societies rest in ways that maintain muscle
activity and thereby reduce cardiovascular disease risk. For example, it may be
that squatting, potentially requiring levels of muscle activity similar to
standing, is a prominent form of resting posture in non-Western societies which
can be related to enhanced cardiovascular health. And as such resting behavior
may have similarly characterized early human ancestors, the health costs
associated with alteration in forms of resting posture also may have an
evolutionary basis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This research tests the hypothesis
that the style of sitting in non-Western societies increases muscle activity and
improves blood lipid profiles compared to Western-style sitting, thereby
promoting beneficial health effects. Initial testing of this hypothesis will
entail a field study of contemporary human hunter-gatherers (the Hadza people of
Tanzania) in order to examine styles of rest and inactivity in traditionally-
living humans. Second, focusing on a population of subjects experienced in
squatting, a randomized crossover experimental design will be employed to
measure muscle activity and changes in blood lipids following prolonged periods
of squatting versus chair-sitting. Using these methods, the research will
explore the evolutionary and contemporary human biology of resting postures in
the context of health and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As the first study
to explicitly examine human inactivity from a cross-cultural and evolutionary
perspective, this project will transform our current understanding of how more
sedentary lifestyles impacted functionality of modern human physiology. And in
the assessment of the impact of such behavior on human biology relevant to
disease and mortality rates in the US, this work also could find translation
into behavioral interventions which improve public health in Western societies,
as well as application in societies undergoing transitions to more Western-style
inactivity patterns.