* 1440036
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Extensional Tectonics Beyond the Ethiopian Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kathleen Keranen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2016
* USD 238,288.00

Research in continental rift systems commonly assumes that lithospheric
deformation has a similar scale to and is spatially coincident with the surface
expression of rifting. However, ongoing continental extension between Nubia and
Somalia appears localized to a narrow rift zone (the Main Ethiopian Rift) only
in the thin elastic uppermost crustal lid. At greater depths in both the lower
crust and mantle lithosphere, very weak materials appear to accommodate
extension by viscous stretching over long length scales at lower strain rates,
resulting in highly depth-dependent stretching. This possibility is important
because it challenges existing understanding of continental rifting and provides
an opportunity to investigate the implications of heterogeneous rheology for
continental mechanics. Although the Main Ethiopian Rift has been studied with
many, none of the previous efforts have extended far beyond the rift zone to
provide a synoptic view of the region. Therefore, no existing data suffice to
test for distributed deformation in the Ethiopian Highlands or the Somali
Platform. This project combines a large-aperture GPS network and a large-
aperture broadband seismometer array with numerical modeling to characterize the
lateral and vertical deformation patterns within the lithosphere surrounding the
Main Ethiopian Rift.

The theory of plate tectonics includes continental breakup as one of its
fundamental principles. In the past, continental masses have both coalesced and
fractured but it is unclear how continental breakup progresses over space and
time, aside from general inferences that this breakup must be very variable in
heterogeneous continental materials. The East African region is the best ongoing
example of a fracturing continent, but it has mostly been studied in the great
rift valleys, omitting any important processes extending beyond the rift. This
experiment takes a broader view of continental breakup, studying not only
surface rifting, but also deformation far beyond the rift. The results have
potential scientific implications for the general understanding of plate
tectonics processes and of the fundamental properties of the continents. The
results will also help map new geothermal energy resources, earthquake and
volcano hazards, and the rise and fall of high mountains and plateaus in Africa.