* 1440709
* SI2-SSE: Petascale Enzo: Software Infrastructure Development and Community Engagement
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The purpose of this project is to develop an astrophysics and cosmology software
application "Enzo-P", built on the highly scalable parallel adaptive mesh
refinement (AMR) software framework "Cello" that is being developed
concurrently. The Enzo-P application will be capable of running extreme scale
numerical simulations to investigate frontier questions in star formation,
molecular cloud turbulence, interstellar medium dynamics, galaxy formation,
intergalctic medium, formation of the first stars and galaxies, galaxy clusters,
and cosmic reionization. This new software will empower the current large and
diverse Enzo user/developer community to take full advantage of current and
future high performance computer (HPC) systems. The Cello AMR framework can be
used independently of Enzo-P, thus enabling researchers in other diverse
scientific fields to develop AMR applications capable of running on "Petascale-
and-beyond" HPC platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel approach used for
Cello is to implement a "forest-of-octree" AMR scheme using the Charm++ parallel
programming system. Octree-based AMR has been shown to be among the highest
scaling AMR approaches, with demonstrated scaling to over 200K CPU cores. The
Charm++ object-oriented parallel programming language supports data-driven
asynchronous execution, is inherently latency-tolerant and automatically
overlaps computation with communication, and provides support for developing
Exascale applications, including in-memory distributed checkpointing and
sophisticated dynamic load balancing schemes. Enzo-P development will be
directed by the vibrant Enzo open development community, who will migrate Enzo's
self-gravity, cosmology, chemistry and cooling, MHD, and radiation hydrodynamics
capabilities to use the Cello scalable AMR framework.