* 1440852
* RIPS Type 2 Collaborative Research:  Water and Electricity Infrastructure in the Southeast (WEIS) - Approaches to Resilient Interdependent Systems under Climate Change
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Dennis Lettenmaier, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 899,121.00

This research will develop a general methodology to study climate change
implications for the interdependent critical infrastructures (ICI) systems of
water supply and electric power generation. Competing demands for water services
affect the availability of water for the power sector (and hence its
reliability), while reliable power supply is needed to operate the water supply
system. This project will demonstrate a method for evaluating the
interdependence and resiliency of ICI systems on the Southeast U.S. through
2050. In order to evaluate the risks and improve the resilience of the ICI
systems, the project will include five interconnected research thrusts, each
developed in general terms, then applied in the target area: 1. Social Context:
What are the organizational, social, psychological, legal, political, and
economic needs, wants, resources, and obstacles relevant to creating resilient,
socially acceptable improvements in the electric power and water supply ICI
systems? 2. Hazards: How will climate change and related extreme weather events
affect local hydrology and thus water-induced risks in the southeastern U.S.? 3.
Vulnerability: How will these changes affect short-term operations and long-term
planning for existing and future electric power and water supply ICI systems in
the Southeast between 2010 and 2050? 4. Adaptation: What are technically and
economically feasible climate adaptation investments in the electric power and
water supply ICI systems between 2010 and 2050? 5. Communication and
acceptability: How can these analytical results be communicated to the
stakeholders who will need to evaluate and act on them?

This research will advance both the individual sciences (e.g., numerical
modeling, natural hazards research, impact assessment, energy and water
management, decision science) and their integration. This project will stimulate
interactions between disciplines that infrequently have the sustained
opportunities for the collaboration needed to understand the mutual implications
of their research and to develop methods that address those interfaces. The
shared focus on ICIs will allow these communities to develop the common language
needed to develop the integrative methods that enrich the respective fields
while creating unique joint products. For example, improved understanding of the
hydrological impacts of climate change and extreme weather events will inform
scientists working on climate assessment, while stimulating the behavioral
science research needed to engage stakeholders responsible for using that
information in electric power and water supply ICIs. Similarly, this project
will prompt research integrating control and engineering science as they apply
to these problems. It will also extend science communication research to
grappling with the unique issues raised by ICIs (e.g., long-time horizons,
complex interactions), informed by the expertise of the other scientists on the
project. The project will support interdisciplinary collaboration among
engineers, earth scientists, and social scientists at three different
institutions. A primary goal of this project is to communicate with stakeholders
so as to make its work as relevant as possible and to engage them throughout the
process so that they are ready to see the implications of its questions and
results for policy making. To that end, the project will include outreach
activities targeting climate/environmental entities, utility companies, policy
makers and community leaders, the academic community, and the general public.