* 1440386
* Mathematical Biosciences Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Luis Casian, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 8,192,000.00

Modern biology is in the midst of profound change, owing in part to the
convergence of ideas from the mathematical sciences with those in the biological
and life sciences. It is a national goal to accelerate this convergence and it
is the role of the Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) to help with this
acceleration. Common principles in mathematics, statistics, and computational
science are helping scientific understanding in fields as diverse as
neuroscience, epidemiology, ecology, genomics, physiology, and cancer, among
many others. MBI supports these interactions through robust postdoctoral fellow
and early career research and training programs and through a workshop program
that brings together interdisciplinary researchers in the mathematical and life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MBI has four principal goals. (1) To foster
innovation in the application of mathematical, statistical, and computational
methods in the resolution of significant problems in the biosciences. (2) To
foster the development of new areas in the mathematical sciences motivated by
important questions in the biosciences. (3) To engage mathematical and
biological scientists in these pursuits. (4) To expand the community of scholars
in mathematical biosciences through education, training, and support of
students, postdoctoral fellows, and researchers. MBI will achieve these goals
through its extensive and distributed postdoctoral fellow program based on co-
mentoring by researchers in both the mathematical and biological sciences;
through its early career training program that enables tenure-track but
untenured researchers to participate in MBI programming for an extended period;
through its robust interdisciplinary workshop programs; and through its long-
term visitor program.