* 1440800
* SI2-SSE: Synthesizing Self-Contained Scientific Software
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Ashish Gehani, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,919.00

Computational aspects of scientific experiments have been growing steadily. This
creates an increasing need to be able to reproduce the results. Science is also
increasingly performed by exploring diverse sets of data. Unsurprisingly, there
is a demand for being able to easily repeat the numerous transformations
performed. Software packaged with tools from this project will allow scientists
to publish their code in a form that can be utilized by others with minimal
effort. By eliminating many of the challenges of building, configuring, and
running software, it will allow members of the scientific community to more
easily reproduce each others' computational results.

Increasingly, entire virtual machines are published to ensure that a recipient
does not have to replicate the compute environment, retrieve data and code
dependencies, or invest effort into configuring the system. However, this
approach scales poorly with the growth in size of the included data sets, the
extraneous functionality in applications that utilize versatile software
libraries, and the irrelevant code in stock operating system distributions. This
project will design, develop, and evaluate a toolchain that allows scientists to
transform their software into specialized applications with all the necessary
environmental conditions and portions of required data sets built directly into
the code. The resulting scientific appliances can be distributed for others to
explore and verify results without the overhead of shipping extraneous data and
code.