* 1440412
* SI2-SSE: Wavelet Enabled Progressive Data Access and Storage Protocol (WASP)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Lawrence Frank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 04/30/2018
* USD 599,999.00

Advances in digital imaging methods are revolutionizing a wide range of
scientific disciplines by facilitating the acquisition of huge amounts of data
that allow the visualization and analysis of complex, multidimensional images.
Concurrently, modern computing technologies enable numerical modeling of a broad
gamut of scientific phenomena, resulting in vast quantities of numerical data,
which are just the starting point for the scientific exploration that modern
computational and visualization methods enable. This is particularly true in the
biological and geosciences, two seemingly very different disciplines. These
capabilities come with a cost: increasing data size and complexity require more
sophisticated methods for data analysis and visualization. This project will
conduct research that will lead to a common software framework for supporting a
multi scale progressive data refinement method based upon the representation of
the data as a wavelet expansion, and enabling interactive exploration of large
data sets for the bio and geoscience communities. The development of a general
toolkit for wavelet based representations of data will have broad impact,
allowing the multi scale analysis, storage, and visualization for data collected
in a wide range of fields and on a multitude of platforms, from high end
computing facilities to laptop computers used by students, field biologists, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis and visualization of large data sets play
an important role in scientific discovery. Efficient, and broadly available
tools to accomplish these tasks are crucial for a wide range of scientific and
educational fields.  However, efficient analysis and visualization is a non
trivial problem as the size and complexity of data increases. This research
addresses this challenge through a general progressive access, multi scale data
representation for efficient handling of structured data sets across a range of
science domains. The development is based upon a wavelet enabled data
representation developed by NCAR for geoscience applications.  The tools will
utilize the very flexible and open source standard NetCDF format, and the
methods will be documented as a set of conventions and a toolkit developed that
incorporates and integrates these components for dissemination. In addition to
an open source toolkit, these tools will be integrated into the VAPOR (NCAR) and
STK (CSCI) platforms, thus expanding the capabilities and efficiencies of these
platforms for the geo and bio sciences communities, respectively.   Advancements
generated by this project will be openly disseminated to the user community
through an open source toolkit.