* 1440637
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Enabling and Improving Data-Driven Research at Texas State University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Ronald Walter, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,896.00

Data are now woven into every sector and function in our society. Texas State
researchers are pioneering in solving some of the most pressing challenges using
big data in the fields of Biochemistry, Biology, Geography, Computer Science,
Finance and Economics, Mathematics, and Information Systems. Nonetheless, the
current Texas State cyberinfrastructure and connectivity capacity present
obstacles to the research projects involving big data and the collaborations
among multiple institutions sharing massive amounts of data.

This project develops a high-speed campus network infrastructure to enable and
improve data-driven research at Texas State. It enables immediate 10Gb
capability and 100Gb in the future, and creates a Science DMZ on the campus
network dedicated to research data to allow researchers to exchange large
datasets with their peers over the network at a much faster speed. The
infrastructure enhances and better facilitates big data research across a wide
range of disciplines at Texas State with notable societal benefits, enables all
other Texas State University System member institutions to establish similar
environments to accommodate their research and education needs, advances the
integration of research and education, promotes cross-institutional
collaborations, and will significantly enhance the current big data research and
teaching capabilities at Texas State and beyond.