* 1440764
* RAPID response: Assessment of Potential Ecological and Health Impact of Coal Ash Spill in Dan River North Carolina
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* April Gu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2015
* USD 49,995.00

1440764&lt;br/&gt;Gu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research demonstrates the
application of a new, cost-effective toxicity evaluation method for water
quality monitoring. The study will encompass the Dan River, site of a recent
coal ash spill. It has significant benefits to environmental and public health
protection. The synergized arrays of education outreach and public education
programs and strategies related to leading-edge water quality monitoring
technology, as well as environmental and health implications of coal ash
contamination of river water, will bridge the gap between scientific research,
field implementation and public health protection. They will present the
technology, benefits, and societal and environmental impact of rapid scientific
community response to disasters to a wide range of audiences at various
levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will demonstrate the
application of a toxicogenomics-enabled in vitro assay scheme and methodology
platform that can be an effective toxicity evaluation method for timely and
informative water quality monitoring, as urgently needed by incidents like the
Carolina coal ash spill. The results will lead to a paradigm shift in water
remediation efficacy assessment from methods that suffer from often biased and
limited chemical information to a more reliable method that identifies realistic
endpoints and better reflects the actual risks to receptors. This will provide
timely and useful information needed to facilitate containment and response
strategies development and, to help inform the public and government of any
potential ecological and health impacts associated with the spill.