* 1440610
* CC*IIE Networking Infrastructure: Enabling Scientific Discovery through a UW-DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Craig Douglas, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Wyoming is developing an environment providing researchers and
students with access to local, regional, national, and international
computational, networking, and data storage resources needed to transform
scientific discovery and education. The university is developing a perimeter
network named UW-DMZ (University of Wyoming DeMilitarized Zone) that contains
and exposes the university's external facing services to the Internet. UW-DMZ
enhances Big Computing and Big Data based research by providing infrastructure
needed to leverage high performance, dynamic network services. Research is
informed by a wide variety of data collected from field work and sensor
networks, mined from databases, observed by lab experiments, or generated by
simulations. The movement of data from their source to computational and
visualization resources and then to the scientific world is critical. The
university has good connectivity from the main computer center to the outside
world, but currently researchers transfer data through a general purpose campus
network. UW-DMZ creates a research optimized, devoted high speed network that is
explicitly designed for Big Data applications and provides researchers access to
existing wide area science services on campus.

Class projects in upper division and graduate level networking classes help
monitor, evaluate, and optimize UW-DMZ for different users and applications,
thus providing students with deeper, enriching experiences. Through the
university's significant research collaborations with Jackson State University
on environmental hydrology, their students and faculty are trained in accessing
and using computational and visualization resources and gain firsthand
experience in how to facilitate scientific discovery through management and
integration of Big Computing and Big Data.