* 1440471
* The Institute for Mathematics and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Fadil Santosa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2019
* USD 6,480,140.00

The Institute for Mathematics and its Applications (IMA) is a visitors'
institute whose goals are to (1) develop transformative mathematical research
through interdisciplinary exploration, (2) strengthen the workforce that engages
in interdisciplinary mathematical research, and (3) provide rapid dissemination
of research and promote the mathematical sciences. To achieve these goals, the
IMA offers activities involving the mathematical sciences in the broadest sense
and encompassing the physical, computer, life, and social sciences, as well as
engineering and industry. Through these activities, the IMA works to solidify
the role of the mathematical sciences as the foundation for twenty-first century
research and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMA serves as a hub for
collaboration, bringing together mathematical scientists and application domain
experts. The annual thematic program focuses either on an application field
where mathematics is poised to make important contributions or on a branch of
mathematics and its applications. Long-term visitors and postdoctoral fellows
form the intellectual anchor of the activity; shorter-term visitors come for
week-long workshops on related topics. The IMA is also an established center for
industrial mathematics, serving as a resource for industry through joint
sponsorship of postdoctoral fellows and workshops in areas of importance to
industry. These activities facilitate technology transfer from researchers to
industrial users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMA programs provide research training
for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates. The IMA also
offers educational activities designed to engage future scientists of high-
school age and beyond. The IMA vigorously pursues the engagement of under-
represented groups in the mathematical sciences and also runs workshops directly
addressing diversity in the mathematical sciences. The Institute runs a public
lecture series to increase awareness of, and appreciation for, the role
contemporary mathematics plays in the resolution of important technological,
scientific, and societal problems.