* 1440108
* Foundations of Computer-Aided Process Design (FOCAPD-2014)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Mario Eden, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2014
* USD 40,000.00

PI: Eden, Mario R.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1440108&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Auburn
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Foundations of Computer-Aided Process Design
(FOCAPD-2014)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is
to provide funds for partial support of graduate students, postdoctoral
associates and US academic junior faculty speakers to attend the 8th
International Conference on Foundations of Computer-Aided Process Design,
FOCAPD-2014, which will be held at the Suncadia Resort, Cle Elum, Washington
July 13-17, 2014. The conference is sponsored by CACHE and the AIChE CAST
Division. The major theme of FOCAPD-2014, "Innovation for Sustainability at the
Interface of Process and Product Design", reflects an ongoing emphasis of
chemical process and product design on sustainability both within traditional
chemical processes and at the interface of traditional processes with non-
traditional areas. The primary goal of FOCAPD-2014 is to create an academic and
industrial dialogue, a critical assessment of existing enabling technologies, a
discussion of research, education, and industrial needs, and a forum for new
directions, challenges and opportunities in product and process design. The
FOCAPD-2014 conference will feature two keynote lectures, 25 plenary lectures by
world-renowned experts, a future challenges session featuring eight junior
faculty, and three contributed paper sessions. The conference aims at attracting
over 150 participants and over 100 contributed papers. It is expected that the
FOCAPD-2014 conference will be an exciting meeting that will have a lasting
impact for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;1. FOCAPD-2014
will bring together and foster interaction among world-renowned experts from
academia and industry, researchers and practitioners from government
laboratories and several industries, graduate students, and post-doctoral
associates.&lt;br/&gt;2. FOCAPD-2014 will create a technical and scientific
forum for the topics of integrated product and process design; enabling
technologies in design: modeling, simulation, optimization methods and
applications, operations; product and process design for energy and the
environment; education, training and industrial needs in product and process
design; and challenges and opportunities in frontiers of product and process
design that include systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;3. A special session on Thursday
afternoon will feature eight outstanding junior faculty focusing on defining the
new challenges and opportunities at the frontiers of sustainable chemical
product and process design.&lt;br/&gt;4. FOCAPD-2014 will foster the definition
of new problems and challenges in the areas of sustainable chemical product and
process design that will be motivated by changing industrial needs and feedstock
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;1. FOCAPD-2014
will aim at attracting the next generation of researchers in the product/process
design area that is reflected in the graduate students and postdoctoral
associates.&lt;br/&gt;2. The conference will serve as a vehicle for
dissemination of the state of the art in sustainable chemical product and
process design through its fully indexed and citable proceedings that will
include the plenary and contributed papers, its website, and more importantly
through the informal discussions on research, education, training and industrial
needs.&lt;br/&gt;3. The chemical, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, manufacturing,
and services/software industries will benefit by the introduction of new
approaches, problems and technologies for discovery through computer-aided
product and process design. Such technologies will lead to better products,
faster response to consumer demands and more efficient utilization of
manufacturing facilities, which has a direct benefit to the US economy.