* 1440582
* CC*IIE Engineer: Exploration of Roles and Tools to Fulfill Diverse Researcher Needs in Collaborative Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Timothy Middelkoop, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,775.00

There is a need to transform supercomputer and other cyberinfrastructure (CI)
resource provisioning procedures and practices on campuses with federated,
hybrid cloud services handled by specialized expertise of a CI Engineer. The CI
Engineer complements campus system/network engineering personnel, and leads the
seamless orchestration of provisioning local and remote resources (e.g., cyber-
enabled scientific instruments, public clouds) to meet data-intensive research
and education needs of faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates roles, tools and policies that enable the viability and
sustainability of the CI Engineer position. More than just exploration, the
project involves several pilot experiments with domain-application workflows.
The experiments consider connectivity and communication procedures necessary for
transitioning interdisciplinary collaborations from experimental environments to
production systems. To automate the provisioning of application-specific
resources, custom templates are being developed for diverse data-intensive (web-
based) applications. The custom templates abstract the high-level policy and
performance throughput requirements of data-intensive applications, and
personalize them to lower-level control specifications implementable in an on-
demand manner by virtualization technologies such as OpenStack and OpenFlow.
Lastly, case studies, best practices and open-source software applications are
to be generated to foster hybrid cloud service models in research and education,
while avoiding many layers of co-ordination. Significant attention is being paid
to broadening participation of underrepresented groups, and to the CI Engineer
interaction with peer communities that are addressing challenges of next-
generation campus cyberinfrastructures.