* 1440443
* SI2-SSE: A Next-Generation Open-Source Computational Fluid Dynamic Code for Polydisperse Multiphase Flows in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Simanta Mitra, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2019
* USD 499,551.00

Many processes for the production of drugs, fuels and plastic materials, as well
as energy from coal or biomasses, involve multiphase flows, which are composed
by a combination of a fluid, either liquid or gas, and particles, droplets or
bubbles. This type of flow is also naturally present in the environment.
Examples are the formation of a mixture of air and solid particles due to
volcanic eruptions, and particles of sand and other materials transported by the
wind. Scientists and engineers use software to study how these flows behave in
order to improve the yield of industrial processes, reduce their environmental
impact, and energy consumption. The computer programs used to perform these
studies solve complex mathematical problems, and require powerful computers to
be able to obtain the results in a useful time. This project focuses on
developing the next generation of computer software for the simulation of
multiphase flows, enabling it to use the latest generation of computers which
combine traditional and graphical processors for improved performance. This
software will be released to the public and will enable, scientists and
engineers from different research areas to tackle real-world problems by taking
advantage of the latest developments in multiphase flow science, combined with
the benefit of being able to use the software on powerful computer
infrastructures. Students and educators will be able to use the software and
learn about multiphase flows through the examples and the documentation that
will be provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project will be
achieved by first developing computational models to describe turbulent flows in
the framework of quadrature-based moment methods, an efficient and accurate
approach to describe this type of flows. These computational models will then be
implemented, together with appropriate numerical methods that will ensure the
accuracy of the computational codes, in the open-source framework OpenFOAM.
Three representative problems of typical multiphase flows will be considered: a
population balance equation for particles with negligible inertia, such as in
the formation of nanoparticles in a fluid flow; the description of gas-liquid
flows, where the bubble inertia is small but not zero; and the most complex case
of gas-solid flows, where particle inertia is large. The possibility of using
graphical processing units will be added to the OpenFOAM framework, to enable it
to run on hybrid computational systems involving traditional processors and
graphical processing units. The source code and its documentation will be made
available to the public at an early stage of their development, under the GNU
GPL 3 license, in order to disseminate the results of the research and gather
feedback. Detailed code documentation, verification and validation cases, and
tutorials will also be created to favor external contributions to the software.