* 1440208
* Sustainability Content in Engineering Courses and Curricula: A Multidisiplinary Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Cliff Davidson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2015
* USD 77,992.00

1440208 (Davidson). This grant is in support of the organization and conduct of
a workshop related to identifying the capabilities of a web-based platform that
will serve as a repository for educational materials in the field of sustainable
engineering. The overall objective of the workshop is to bring together experts
in education, sustainable engineering, and development of high-use web platforms
to discuss two aspects of the proposed platform. The first aspect is to identify
the most important activities and web platform features that would attract
educators across the country and eventually globally to contribute materials for
posting on the platform. There are numerous barriers that could prevent
educators from contributing their materials, and discussions at the workshop
will specifically address ways to overcome them. The second aspect is to
identify the most important activities and web platform features that would
attract educators around the world to download and make use of materials posted
on the platform. To facilitate this goal, current learning systems, some with
sustainability content, will be demonstrated. Experts will present state-of-the-
art instructional design and strategies that promise to increase course
preparation and teaching efficiency as well as student learning. Barriers to
widespread use of such materials will also be discussed, and ways of overcoming
them will be addressed. The output of the workshop will be a summary document on
the results of these discussions that will enable serious thought on development
of a web platform repository for sustainable engineering education materials.
The methods to be employed in the workshop include plenary talks, panel
discussions, open question and answer periods, and breakout group
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop has the potential to
develop a blueprint for a web platform that could have a major effect on
education in sustainable engineering. Hundreds of U.S. universities with
engineering programs are currently inventing educational materials, courses, and
curricula in the burgeoning field of sustainable engineering. There is a lack of
coordination among these universities, with significant repetition of efforts to
develop new educational materials. Coordinating content across multiple
engineering disciplines offers an opportunity to generalize, cross-fertilize and
more efficiently use content generally. Existing computer technology can make
the process of educating the nation's engineers much more efficient. This is of
great importance in a world of finite resources and a rapidly growing population
as well as rapidly growing standards of living. Engineers are being tasked with
solving many of the world's most pressing problems, and thus training these
engineers to understand the constraints of twenty-first century is an urgent
need. This project addresses this need using state-of-the-art equipment and
methods. Diversity will be sought in all aspects of the project - the attendees
of the workshop will be from several underrepresented groups, and from
underserved institutions across multiple engineering disciplines. But the
proposed workshop is expected to have an impact far beyond the workshop
attendees. In particular, working toward a repository for educational materials
in sustainable engineering accessible by everyone has the potential to benefit
educators everywhere, and that can ultimately benefit engineering students
everywhere. This work is thus the start of a multi-step process that has the
potential to enhance the nation's educational infrastructure and benefit the
nation's practicing engineers and thus society at large. This award is co-funded
by two divisions in EHR (DUE and DGE) and three divisions in ENG (EEC, CMMI, and
CBET).