* 1440452
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Role Of Material Culture In Social Identification
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* E. Charles Adams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,684.00

Under the guidance of Dr. E. Charles Adams, Saul Hedquist will examine the
social uses of turquoise and other blue-green minerals in the late prehispanic
Western Pueblo region of the U.S. Southwest. Scholars have long recognized the
importance of turquoise among past and present Pueblo groups. Despite knowledge
of its long-lasting social and symbolic importance, however, late prehispanic
patterns of turquoise use remain poorly understood. This research seeks to
address this deficiency and illuminate associated identity structures through an
interdisciplinary investigation of provenance, style, and deposition. The
project incorporates archaeology, geochemistry, and ethnography in an effort to
address a central research question: How did the circulation and use of
turquoise vary throughout the late prehispanic Western Pueblo region, and what
are the implications for understanding interactions and identity expressions
within and among newly aggregated settlements and settlement clusters? The
research gains fundamental importance for the insight it will provide on how
societies at a "simple" level of social compxity are organized. In this case the
specific issue is: how do multiple groups, often speaking different languages
and with different sets of customs and beliefs become integrated into
effectively functioning social units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes
three primary components. First, a comprehensive geographic information systems
(GIS) database of previously documented late prehispanic turquoise occurrences
will be developed to examine: 1) the regional variety and distribution of
stylistic traits; 2) the regional variety and distribution of documented
depositional patterns; and 3) contextual associations between turquoise and
other materials. Second, regional patterns of acquisition and exchange will be
explored using measurements of lead and strontium isotopes. Recent pilot studies
indicate turquoise from at least three geologic locales circulated throughout
the Western Pueblo world during the late prehispanic period. Additional isotopic
measurements will be used to clarify the regional spread of turquoise from these
(and perhaps other) sources and expose potential networks of interaction. Third,
consultation with Hopi and Zuni tribal members will aid interpretations of
archaeological patterns and ensure Pueblo knowledge is accurately represented in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will foster collaboration
with descendent communities by directly incorporating Hopi and Zuni
participation and perspectives. In addition, through exclusive use of existing
museum collections, the project promotes research with minimal impact on the
archaeological record. The project's database will integrate archival data
spanning more than a century's worth of fieldwork. These data will be made
available to qualified individuals through the Digital Archaeological Record
(tDAR). Research results will be further disseminated through public talks,
conference presentations, presentations to tribal members, and peer-reviewed
publications. Displays and web-based modules will also be prepared for use in
museums and K-12 curricula.