* 1441075
* Bringing a Rigorous Computer Science Principles Course to the Largest School System in the United States
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2021
* E. Paul Goldenberg, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 7,874,876.00

This project involves a partnership between the Education Development Center,
the University of California-Berkeley, the New York City Foundation for Computer
Science, and the New York City Department of Education. The project team will
develop curricular materials, based on the Beauty and Joy of Computing course
developed at University of California-Berkeley, for teaching Computer Science
Principles at the high school level using the Snap! programming language. They
will run in-person teacher-training programs each summer, and develop an online
teacher development course. During the project, 100 high school teachers in New
York City will be trained to teach this course, and early participants will also
become teacher-trainers who will work with later participants. The teachers
involved will become part of a Community of Practice that will continue to
provide support for the teacher cohorts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
design and development study. The central research hypothesis is that the
explanatory power of a visual programming language can make advanced techniques
such as recursion and higher order functions accessible to high school students,
including traditionally underrepresented groups. The project team also hopes to
show that students completing this Computer Science (CS) Principles course will
be motivated and well prepared to succeed in later courses, such as the Advanced
Placement (AP) CS A course. They will use the knowledge gained from this
experience in New York City (NYC) to improve the course through iterative
development and refinement and to increase understanding of the implementation
of these ideas in high school contexts more broadly. Formative data will be
collected throughout the project and analyzed, and used to inform subsequent
revisions to the curriculum materials. They will use qualitative, quantitative,
and mixed methods analysis approaches. Over the four years of the project, the
project team will work with the 100 teachers who will participate in the
project, attend professional development activities, and teach the CS Principles
course to a total of approximately 2,000 students in NYC. Evaluation instruments
will include background surveys, feedback surveys, course assessments, the AP CS
Principles exam (currently under development by the College Board), classroom
observations, student interest and engagement assessments, student papers, and
teacher interviews. All 100 NYC teachers involved will be part of the research
study.