* 1441788
* Developing a Community Based Participatory Project in Interior Alaska to Bridge the Digital Divide.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Paul Thompson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2015
* USD 18,045.00

This award funds the PI for two-weeks to explore with three Alaska Native
villages of the Yukon Flats School District a community based participatory
research (CBPR) project that would assess rural Alaskan information access and
the potential of Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN) technology for use in Alaska
Native communities where current internet connectivity is frequently poor. To
the PI's knowledge DTN is not in use in Alaska, but has recently been
successfully prototyped in the Lapland and Slovenia. Since Thompson served as
the Librarian for Yukon Flat's Communities in the 1970's he has maintained an
interest in improving rural Alaskan community access to information
technologies. This project will enable Thompson to explore contemporary rural
information access issues through discussions with rural residents in Yukon
Flats villages; with the intent of creating a CBPR research project that will
explore the digital divide in Interior Alaskan communities collaboratively.

Information access has become widespread through the growth of the Internet, the
World Wide Web, and mass products such as Web search engines and social media
products such as Facebook. Such products are not designed to support information
access optimally for different cultures, such as those of rural Alaska. The DTN
itself is a protocol that promises to make communication technically easier in
sparsely inhabited rural areas. When information access systems that are
designed in a community-based participatory way, such systems not only
facilitate rural information access but also hold promise to improve health care
and other critical infrastructures, which all depend on the Internet. In
addition, this project will increase the participation of Alaska Native people
in information science with the potential for transforming the way rural Alaskan
communities access the internet.