* 1441785
* RCN:Network Integrated Biocollections Alliance (NIBA): Organizing, Coordinating, Sustaining
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Richard O'Grady, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 498,502.00

Biological collections (biocollections), such as those maintained by natural
history museums, botanic gardens, universities, field stations, and other
research centers across the United States are the result of nearly 250 years of
scientific investigations, discovery, and inventories of living and fossil
species from around the world. Billions of specimens (for example, plants,
insects, and fossils) and their associated data (audio recordings of bird calls,
field notes, geospatially referenced occurrence data, etc.) are held in more
than 1000 biocollections across the United States. Until recently, these
resources have largely been relegated to cabinets and drawers with few
researchers, educators, or the public aware of their existence. The potential to
digitally capture images of specimens and their associated data offers great
promise to transform research on the environment, public health, food safety,
commerce, and national security. Achieving the ambitious goal of digitizing the
nation's biocollections and making them available to the broader community
requires an organized, coordinated, and sustained effort. The resources created
will engage a new community of users that cuts across traditional boundaries of
biology, geology, computer science and software engineering and connects
academic researchers with educators, policy makers, and the wider public.
Cooperation with similar efforts overseas will result in a truly global
resource. The purpose of this Research Coordination Network is to create such a
community.

The NIBA Research Coordination Network will enable new research; create novel,
cross-disciplinary user communities; and promote the development of software and
cyberinfrastructure that will not only support collections digitization, but
will have more general applicability far beyond the bounds of this field. Most
importantly, it will create sustainable structures, capable of maintaining
effort in this field over the long period required for full digitization of the
nation's collections. The Steering Committee for the RCN will help to plan
workshops and establish working committees that will evaluate and seek
stakeholder input on the goals outlined in an Implementation Plan for a Network
Integrated Biocollections Alliance (NIBA), a proposed mechanism for organizing
and coordinating a sustained effort to digitally capture specimens and their
associated data from biocollections. The RCN will engage the broader scientific
community and public in an iterative process to evaluate the appropriateness and
feasibility of the six goals articulated in the Implementation Plan for a NIBA,
which include: 1) establishing an organizational and governance structure; 2)
advancing engineering of the biodiversity collections cyberinfrastructure; 3)
enhancing training of existing collections staff and creating the next
generation of biodiversity information managers; 4) increasing participation
from a broad range of stakeholders; 5) establish an enduring and sustainable
knowledge base; and, 6) infusing specimen-based learning and exploration into
formal and informal science education. The products of the workshops will
include published reports and plans that will guide a national effort to build
the infrastructure and implement NIBA. The new research communities and
collaborations that are established through this RCN will stimulate the
development of new tools, such as software or new data-mining techniques. As
biocollections specimens and data become more publicly available, citizen
scientists, government agency personnel, K-12 educators and many others will
begin to access and use this information. All products will be archived and made
available at www.aibs.org.