* 1441450
* EAGER: Iron sensing and signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Elsbeth Walker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 05/31/2018
* USD 217,489.00

Living organisms keep the level of the highly reactive metal, iron, carefully
controlled to avoid cellular damage. In plants, part of this control is a
mechanism to allow the shoot, where iron is most heavily needed, to signal iron
status to roots where primary iron uptake occurs. The molecular details of this
shoot to root signaling mechanism are unknown, but are likely to be essential
for successful engineering of plants to accumulate additional bioavailable iron
in edible parts. This project explores the hypothesis that Yellow Stripe1-Like
proteins are responsible for signaling the iron status between the shoot and the
root of plants. Our current state of ignorance about many of the mechanisms
involved in plant iron homeostasis is a major obstacle to devising approaches
for biofortification of staple foods with iron. Biofortification refers to the
genetic engineering of staple crops to accumulate additional bioavailable iron
in edible parts; it is widely regarded as a sustainable means of improving the
iron nutrition of the 2-3 billion people worldwide whose inadequate diet causes
iron deficiency anemia. Improving our understanding of plant iron homeostatic
mechanisms is also critical if we wish to improve growth of crops in marginal
soils, where iron deficiency frequently limits crop
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A double mutant with null mutations in the
Arabidopsis Yellow Stripe-Like1 and Yellow Stripe-Like3 (ysl1ysl3) has severe
pleiotropic growth defects related to iron. YSLs are transporters of iron and
other transition metals (Zn, Cu, Mn, Ni) complexed with the plant-specific metal
chelating compound nicotianamine (NA). It is important to note that both tissue
localization (mainly in the leaf veins) and regulation (down-regulated by iron
deficiency) argue against the idea that these proteins participate in primary
metal uptake from the soil. The phenotype of ysl1ysl3 plants, which includes
iron deficiency chlorosis, low Fe levels in tissues, failure to re-translocate
Cu and Zn from leaves during senescence, pollen failure, and incomplete embryo
development, were at first all thought to be consequences of failed metal-NA
transport by AtYSL1 and AtYSL3. But ysl1ysl3 plants also exhibit defects in Fe
signaling, which are difficult to explain as a simple consequence of metal
transport defects in leaf veins. New evidence has indicated that ysl1ysl3 plants
have a pervasive inability to respond vigorously to iron deficiency, and a new
hypothesis is put forward that AtYSL1 and AtYSL3 function as "transceptors":
transporters that also function as receptors for the iron status of the plant.
In this project, we will investigate the hypothesis that, in addition to their
roles as metal-NA transporters, AtYSL1 and AtYSL3 function in signaling the iron
status of shoots. A key test of this idea is to make mutations in YSL1 and YSL3
that affect receptor function without affecting transporter function, and vice
versa. In this project, transport defective versions of YSL1 and YSL3 will be
made using site directed mutagenesis and will be tested for functionality in
yeast. Three properly localized transport defective versions will then be
introduced into the ysl1ysl3 double mutant under their own promoters, and the
resulting plants will be tested for ysl1ysl3 phenotypes. In a second, more
limited experiment, the acidic N-terminal domain(s) of YSL1 and YSL3 will be
tested. These domains may be iron binding, and thus could be involved in iron
sensing. We will test whether removing these domains affects transport function
in yeast, and if it does not, the proteins will be tested in planta for
complementation of ysl1ysl3 phenotypes. These experiments will elucidate whether
YSL1 and YSL3 are directly involved in iron signaling. This project will be
integrated into a laboratory course for undergraduates and provide training in
bioinformatics and genomics methodologies, as well as the process of hypothesis-
driven research.