* 1441024
* Investigating Mathematical Modeling, Experiential Learning and Research through Professional Development and an Integrated Online Network for Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,348,892.00

Mathematical modeling, in which mathematics is applied to solve real problems,
is a mathematical practice, used by mathematicians and specified in the Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics. The need to improve the teaching and
learning of mathematics at the elementary level is well documented. Moreover,
very limited attention has been paid to how to teach mathematical modeling in
the early grades. The importance of this mathematical practice, in which
mathematics is applied to real problems, is recognized in the Common Core State
Standards for Mathematics and is a foundational tool used by all mathematicians.
This project will design and deliver professional development for elementary
grades mathematics teachers and will result in curriculum modules that focus on
mathematical modeling in the elementary grades. The project is based on
mathematical modeling as it is practiced in the workforce and will yield
research results regarding how teachers learn about and implement the modeling
process. The project will offer an online repository as a clearinghouse for
materials produced as well as a virtual interface to help facilitate a dialogue
among teachers about the teaching, learning and practice of mathematical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research question at the heart of this study
is: How does targeted professional development in mathematical modeling affect
teacher practice? The project is an institutional partnership, with
collaborating partners including: George Mason University, Harvey Mudd College
and Montana State University with three respective collaborating school
districts, Fairfax County Public Schools, Pomona Unified School District and
Bozeman Public Schools. The project will provide high-quality teacher
professional development in mathematical modeling through a content-focused
summer institute and collaborative coaching through follow-up Lesson Study. The
work will have broad impact as it engages elementary (grades 2-6) mathematics
teachers, special educators, and teachers of students with Limited English
Proficiency, to focus on: a) modeling mathematics ideas aligned to the Common
Core mathematics content, classroom strategies, and student assessment
standards; b) developing problem-based assessment and performance-based tasks
for mathematical modeling in elementary grades; c) creating activities to
differentiate instruction with parallel tasks that enrich 21st century skills in
modeling (communication, collaboration, creativity and critical thinking) aimed
at increasing the academic achievement of diverse populations (special
education, gifted, Limited English Proficiency and economically disadvantaged);
and d) developing need-based on-site and online web-learning professional and
curricular resources (video clips of exemplar lessons, real-life math
connections and concepts modeled using virtual manipulatives). The professional
development web resources and tools will be available to school divisions across
the respective partnering states as they are being developed and then
disseminated nationally. The project will use three levels of evaluation: an
external evaluator who will conduct an annual review of project documents,
including research protocols and data analysis methods, advisory board meeting
agendas and supplementary materials, and reports to the funding agency; an
internal review by a team member experienced with models for evaluating
professional development; and peer review by an expert Advisory Board. This tri-
phase model of evaluation will maximize project resources and expertise.