* 1441409
* Female Sociality, Dispersal, and Comparative Microbial Community Composition in Pan troglodytes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Kevin Langergraber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 376,155.00

Research focused on the exceptional degree of sociality characterizing the human
species and many of the other primates has demonstrated clear, adaptive benefits
to strong social bonds. These positive benefits include increased health,
longevity, and reproductive success, as well as associated reductions in stress,
increased resilience, and enhanced social learning. Such multiple and critically
important benefits of strong social relationships suggest that there are evolved
mechanisms underlying these adaptive consequences. Deciphering the core aspects
of developmental origins and the mechanisms accounting for persistence of bonds
throughout the lifetime of highly social females, however, is difficult in the
complex, multilayered societies found in exceptionally long-lived species such
as our own. This research therefore will examine the developmental and
longitudinal aspects of female social bonds in a primate model, that of wild
chimpanzees, the closest living relatives of humans. These primates also are
long-lived, transient during their lifetimes, and characterized by complexly
structured societies and relationships, with females developing strong
affiliative and preferential bonds in their natal communities, before emigrating
to new communities as adults and forming social relationships in this context.
Utilizing a unique research design employing microbiome signatures indicative of
female movements between their natal and adult communities, as well as genetic,
behavioral, and hormonal data related to social bonding, the project will
circumvent research limitations for such highly social females and permit
addressing hypotheses relevant to understanding the relationships between social
bonds, health and well-being.

This interdisciplinary, collaborative research applies distinctly transformative
microbiome and autosomal genotype-based analyses with behavioral and
endocrinological studies to explain patterns of female immigration and the basis
for, benefits of, and persistence of female bonds through their lifespan.
Specifically, this study will conduct next generation, direct-DNA microbial and
autosomal sequencing of over 1000 wild female chimpanzees to determine natal
community origins, immigration patterns, and longitudinal perspectives of female
sociality and relationships. To test the hypothesis that female social
relationships are adaptive, the research will apply hormone analyses (cortisol,
a stress marker, and oxytocin, a marker for bonding) to a subset of habituated
females. This natural laboratory permits examination of the relationships
between microbial variation and host genetics, biogeography, and relatedness
(kinship), which will contribute to understanding the factors driving social
relationships, host-microbial diversity, and associated health consequences.

The expansive and diverse datasets generated through the research will be
broadly disseminated, facilitating future research in multiple scientific areas.
Associated training and collaboration will focus on both US and international
collaborators and students, thereby enhancing research capacity. And as the wild
primates serving as the model study species are critically endangered, the
microbiome and dispersal patterns data will find application in promoting the
health of the species and informing conservation policy, particularly in
increasingly fragmented habitats.