* 1441140
* RIPS: Type I: A Meta-Network System Framework for Resilient Analysis and Design of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,958.00

Interdependencies between critical infrastructure systems and processes
exacerbate the consequences of initial failure, lead to cascading effects, and
compound the propagation of damage. The project enhances the fundamental
understanding of interdependent critical infrastructures (ICIs) by providing
theoretical guidelines. The framework developed in the project serves as the
basis of future computing for a multi-infrastructure modeling, design and
simulation platform. This framework interfaces existing software tools for
individual infrastructures and enables engineering design and public policy
analysis. In addition, the quantitative methodologies developed in this project
bridge the disciplines of engineering, computer science, social and economic
sciences, and create a new interdisciplinary paradigm that provides a holistic
view towards ICI resilience planning and design.

The main focus of this project is to develop a meta-network system framework
that captures the physical, cyber and human dependencies within an individual
infrastructure and across multiple ICIs and to assess their effects on the
outcomes of disastrous events. This theoretical framework considers feedback
loops, cascading chains of failures and self-aggravating effects. The
identification of network structures or motifs provides insights on the design
of resilient ICIs and allows for the quantification of metrics relevant to
resilience. The techniques for finding multi-resolution representations of meta-
network models provide a system modeling platform that is appropriate not only
for designing engineering resilient solutions but also for examining socio-
economic policies and communication protocols in the context of organizational
behaviors. An event-driven and network-based reliability model provides
quantitative metrics such as hitting time and mean time to failure. Control and
game theory capture risks and uncertainty and assist in the design of risk-
sensitive and robust resilient planning schemes for ICIs.