* 1441794
* Research Initiation Grant: Student-directed differentiated learning in college-level engineering education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Margret Hjalmarson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,952.00

Differentiated learning, i.e. adjusting educational material delivery according
to the strengths and weaknesses of each student, has gained traction in K-12
education, but not in higher education. Part of the reason is the significant
workload imposed on the instructor, who needs to design material delivery on an
individual basis. While this is reasonable for younger children, higher
education students are adults that need to take charge of their own educational
pathway, especially in view of the need for them to sustain life-long education
efforts. In this study, we investigate tools and methodologies that support
students into choosing their own individualized study plan, including frequent
feedback though formative homework assignments, homeworks that offer options at
different levels of challenge, and online reference video libraries. This aims
at providing additional support to students with lower readiness levels, while
still offering challenging tasks to students with stronger backgrounds. We
expect this approach to help increase retention and success rates for students
of varied educational background and possibly socio-economic status, while at
the same time providing a more stimulating experience for students with higher
readiness levels. While the proposed research is mainly directed towards a
traditional classroom-based course, the student-driven approach adopted makes it
relevant to environments where there is a need for student-initiated instruction
plan choices, such as MOOCs and life-long learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this project it twofold. First, we intend to develop techniques for creating
a framework for student-directed differentiated instruction material for adult
learners. For this part, we investigate a general framework of combined
formative assignments, tiered homeworks and a tiered reference video library.
Elements of this plan include formative assessment, which provides information
on student readiness levels in order to help with subsequent decisions; tiered
homework menus to help students practice and develop skills at the level they
perceive as most appropriate; and a library of online video material aimed at
creating customized recitation sessions based at what students think they need
most help with. Our interest is both on how to optimally develop these tools,
and how to combine them within course design. Second, we investigate the factors
that influence student decisions when creating an individualized study plan
within this framework. The main focus of this research is to analyze how
engineering students use information from the formative assessment together with
their perception of their readiness level in order to make choices, and how this
affects their overall learning experience and its outcomes.