* 1441840
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Socioeconomic And Political Development In Imperial Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Sarah Dost Kerchusky, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,006.00

Researchers wish to understand the nature of empires and the varying impacts of
imperialism. Archaeology can contribute unique insights at both local and broad
regional scales, and over considerable ranges of time. The strategies empires
use to impose their power over new peoples and regions depend upon how those
societies and economies are organized. Therefore to study empires one must study
not just the empire, but also the people that fell under its control, and in
what ways each influenced the other. This project will investigate interactions
between people living in the Nasca region of Peru and representatives of the one
of the earliest New World empires, the Wari, during the period AD 750-1000. It
will provide specific information about the collapse of the Nasca Civilization
as it was conquered by the Wari Empire, and the ways in which the Wari imposed
its control over the Nasca people. It will contribute to general studies of
empires and imperialism, adding to knowledge of the varied strategies available
to expanding states. The knowledge thus derived will have application in a
present day context as many extant "states" are the result of such processes and
face similar issues in maintaining political control and unity. In addition,
this project will provide international experience for American students, and
educational opportunities for them and Peruvian students. Field experience
gained on the project will fulfill students? degree requirements; and data
recovered during this project will be used as the basis for the Co-PI?s doctoral
dissertation.

The following questions guide this research: 1) What was the relationship
between the Wari Empire and Nasca peoples? 2) What effect did Wari imperial
policies and agendas have on the Nasca community of Zorropata? 3) Did the Wari
Empire exert direct political or economic control over Nasca communities in the
valley around that community? Archaeological excavations will examine the
remains of houses and public buildings in order to understand Nasca economic and
cultural practices that may have been impacted by the Wari Empire. Researchers
will investigate differences in social status, the use of space at the site, the
local economy, the production and use of pottery and textiles, cooking
practices, agricultural production, and other traditional practices.
Archaeologists will map and excavate the site of Zorropata, and analyze
artifacts and other samples collected during excavation. In addition, samples
will be prepared for special analyses to be performed in American labs including
chemical analyses of pottery and stone tools, and samples for radiocarbon
dating.