* 1441882
* Support for the 3rd Penn State Bioinorganic Workshop and the 3rd "Frontiers in Metallobiochemistry" Symposium, May 28 - June 4, 2014
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* John Golbeck, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Enzymes containing transition metal ions in their active sites catalyze some of
the most difficult chemical reactions in biology, including as the oxidation of
water to dioxygen in photosynthesis, the reduction of dinitrogen to ammonia, and
the stereospecific functionalization of unactivated carbon-hydrogen bonds.
Remarkably, these reactions proceed under ambient conditions. The area of
bioinorganic chemistry aims to (i) understand these processes in detail and (ii)
use this understanding to enable design of new bio-inspired catalysts. The
efforts are important to society, because they may enable, for example, the
generation of renewable energy to power the planet and cheaper fertilizers for
agriculture. The field of bioinorganic chemistry is diverse and includes a wide
variety of scientific disciplines, including genetics, molecular biology,
biochemistry, bioinformatics, analytical chemistry, and physical chemistry. Many
different experimental techniques (e.g. reaction kinetics, a wide variety of
spectroscopies, X-ray crystallography, and mass spectrometry) and theoretical
methods (e.g. electronic structure calculations and bioinformatics methods) are
combined to study the reaction mechanisms of enzymes containing metals. For
these reasons, research in this area is generally highly collaborative. This
workshop will train students and postdoctoral scholars in the area of
bioinorganic chemistry. The training of students, postdoctoral scholars and even
faculty has a long tradition in this research field and is an important
prerequisite for a productive collaborative environment. With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding a
biennial training workshop, which is led by Prof. Carsten Krebs and colleagues
at the Department of Chemistry at The Pennsylvania State University. The 2014
workshop provides training for approximately 150 participants and encompasses
(i) 16 lectures by faculty experts in the field in their area of specialty and
(ii) hands-on training in 21 different methods offered to small groups of up to
6 participants in 2-hour time-blocks (repeated up to 12 times) and taught by 70
student/postdoc/faculty experts in bioinorganic methods. This workshop will
uniquely train the next generation of researchers in the field of bioinorganic
chemistry. This year's workshop is even larger than the 2012 workshop, which was
received with broad enthusiasm by the scientific field.