* 1441806
* Research Initiation Grant: Social Justice in Engineering with a Focus on Control Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Barbara Moskal, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2017
* USD 162,548.00

Technical description: The focus of this research initiation grant is
engineering and social justice, specifically within a control systems course
required for electrical and mechanical engineering students at the Colorado
School of Mines. Using a mixed-methods approach, the team will begin by
assessing the state of social justice awareness of the junior- and senior-level
students entering the class, which will provide information about its presence
elsewhere in the curriculum. A survey offered to all enrolled students will be
followed by focus groups and semi-structured interviews for selected students.
This team will then evaluate the impacts of social justice interventions that
are implemented in this course. To the best of the team?s knowledge, this
research will represent the first time social justice is framed specifically
within control systems engineering, which will help to expand understanding of
social justice as it relates to this specific engineering discipline. Second,
this research will collect baseline information of these electrical and
mechanical engineering students? prior experiences with engineering and social
justice. This baseline information will provide important background for future
curricular changes required to teach social justice. Finally, this research
includes an evaluation of the impact of social justice interventions within a
required control systems course, contributing to the engineering education
research community by evaluating the effectiveness of the pedagogical techniques
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical explanation of significance/importance:
The concept of social justice defies a concise, universal definition, but is
fundamentally about human rights. The vision implied in social justice is that
people and communities have the right to equality, to health, to dignity, and to
opportunities. Social justice is closely tied to care for the natural
environment because equitable access to clean water, clean air, and Earth?s
resources is an important element of human rights. Social justice is a key
element of the "sustainability triangle," with economics and the environment
forming the other two axes. However, whereas economics has long been considered
an important part of engineering education and the environment has gained
significant ground in recent years, social justice receives very little
attention within typical engineering curricula. Therefore, most engineering
graduates are unprepared to perform thorough assessments of the social justice
implications of their engineering decisions and designs. The proposed research
will lay the groundwork to remedy this shortcoming. The approximately 50
students enrolled in the intervention courses during fall 2014 and fall 2015
will learn social justice concepts and will therefore be better equipped to
consider social impacts of their engineering decisions. Ideally, these students
will become ambassadors for social justice within their future careers. The team
will share its intervention materials with the control systems and social
justice teaching communities, thereby increasing the opportunity for additional
students to learn about this important area. The research activities will also
complement those of CSM?s Humanitarian Engineering minor. In addition,
ethnographic research suggests that women and other minority engineering
students disproportionately place a high priority on the human side of
engineering, so targeted instruction in social justice may impact their
motivation to continue in the profession beyond graduation.&lt;br/&gt;