* 1441877
* I-Corps:  Development of Scalable Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework Membranes for Hydrocarbon Separation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Polypropylene is the 2nd largest petrochemical commodity and 5th largest
produced material in the US. The key step in propylene production is
propylene/propane separation achieved by energy intensive cryogenic distillation
method. Membrane separation technology is a more energy efficient solution to
the separation problem, but propylene perm-selective polymer or inorganic
membranes are not stable for this application. Recent study in the principal
investigator's laboratory shows a new group of membranes, zeolitic-imidazolate
framework (ZIF), to have desired separation properties and stability for the
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ZIFs are highly tailorable with a wide range
of chemical, textural, and crystalline properties that can be implemented into a
number of other technological applications. The activities proposed in this
project are directed towards development of membranes that can be scaled up for
industrial olefin/paraffin separation. This project will gain much insight into
the fundamental nature of material selection for membrane supports and synthesis
and properties of ZIF membranes on scalable supports. The project will increase
learning and understanding in membrane science and engineering to the academic
community, while also delivering valuable information on how to transition such
novel materials into useful industrial applications.