* 1441935
* Conference: FASEB Mechanisms of mRNA decay; Big Sky, Montana; July 6 - July 11, 2014
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Ambro van Hoof, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2015
* USD 7,000.00

The transfer of information from the genomic DNA to messenger RNA (mRNA) during
the process of gene expression provides an important way to control the genes
responsible for specific biological processes. Understanding how these processes
work normally allows us a means to comprehend how they can change when organisms
face alterations in their environment or evolve. Recently, it is clear that mRNA
degradation is also an important means for regulating gene expression. Thus,
gaining a complete understanding of mRNA degradation mechanisms and its
regulation are of critical interest. More recently, the spectacular use of
interfering RNA to experimentally degrade specific mRNAs has expanded the
applications of understanding mRNA decay mechanisms beyond any expectations. The
Federation American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) meeting on
mechanisms of mRNA decay from July 6th to 11th 2014 in Big Sky, Montana brings
together the leading experts in mRNA decay in animal, fungal, plant, viral,
bacterial, and archaeal systems. One of the chief benefits of this 5-day meeting
is that it brings together experts who study mRNA degradation using various
approaches and organisms, providing the opportunity for cross-fertilization and
allowing many parallels between mRNA degradation in pro- and eukaryotes to
become evident. Both the size and planned organization of the meeting support
junior investigators in the field of RNA degradation. With only 100-150
attendees all being housed in the same venue, and with talks and posters only in
the morning and evening, there is expected to be ample time and opportunity for
informal interactions between junior and senior attendees. Some of the oral
presenters will be selected from submitted abstracts to give junior
investigators the opportunity to present their work for critical viewing by the
community. In addition, poster sessions will allow others to display their work
to stimulate conversations and feedback. There will also be meet-the-expert
sessions and opportunities to interact with them more informally during the
meeting. All of these aspects are viewed as positive enhancements of the
professional development of junior investigators in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be used to reimburse seven
speakers for about half their costs some selected from submitted abstracts.
Priority for this support will be students, post-docs, early-career independent
investigators, and members of underrepresented groups who are members of the US
scientific community.