* 1441686
* REU Site: Studies in ecology, environmental and conservation biology in Ghana, West Africa
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Daniel Wubah, Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2016
* USD 169,023.00

An award has been made to Virginia Tech that will provide research training for
8 weeks for 6 students, during the summers of 2011- 2015. The award, which is
also supported by the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering,
supports the continuation of the international Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site program at the University of Cape Coast (UCC), Ghana
that has taken place in the past 8 years. The program focuses on ecology,
ethnobotany, biodiversity and conservation and environmental biology in the
tropics. The students will work on defined research projects under the
mentorship of Ghanaian scientists and faculty members. Students will be selected
based on their academic record and motivation to attend graduate school. This
program has two main research foci: i) bioprospecting for potentially useful
plants and ii) ecological and biodiversity studies. Students will design
experiments in collaboration with their mentors, collect and analyze their data,
and present their results in Ghana. They will conduct full time research during
the weekdays and attend seminars and group discussions during the evenings. Over
the weekends, field trips will be made (such as to the Mole game reserve, the
Kakum National forest, and the Kakum estuary) to provide the students with
additional experience that will enhance their understanding of ecology and
conservation. Upon their return to the US, students will make presentations at
regional and national meetings. Participants will acquire skills in ethnobotany,
tropical biology, aquaculture, ecology, entomology, taxonomy and analytical
chemistry. They will be expected to publish their results in peer-reviewed
journals. The ecological studies will yield new and valuable information on
tropical species of insects and plants that may not have been described in the
literature yet. Data gathered in the project will also contribute towards an
inventory of potentially endangered species and conservation studies.
Participants will have an invaluable cross-cultural experience. Students will be
tracked through annual surveys and the program will be evaluated using various
methods including the REU common assessment tool. More information is available
at http://www.undergraduate.vt.edu/GhanaREU/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. Daniel
Wubah at wubah@vt.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Judith Wubah at jawubah@vt.edu).