* 1441381
* RCN Arctic-COAST: Arctic COASTal Community and Environmental Resilience International Interdisciplinary Research Coordination Network
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2024
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,996.00

This award will support the establishment of an international Research
Coordination Network (RCN) for science-policy interface among researchers,
policy and decision makers, and young local and indigenous leaders to better
understand and enhance resilience to ongoing dramatic changes in the Arctic.
Arctic-COAST will provide an interface between the transdisciplinary research of
biophysical, socio-economic, and decision-making academic research domains and
policy applications to address the resilience of coastal socio-ecological
systems. The Arctic coastal zone, especially in Eurasia, lacks an integrated
framework for monitoring socio-ecological systems that could provide key
observations for measuring resilience and assessing environmental and community
sustainability. Knowledge and policy gaps exist with respect to understanding
coastal socio-ecological systems, indicators of sustainability and resilience,
scenario-based modeling, and scientific foundations for adaptive governance
responses in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating data-rich regional
case studies, developing data management tools, and presenting information
through an education web-based portal, the network will contribute to research
cyberinfrastructure in the circumpolar Arctic. Using a resilience framework as
an overarching concept, Arctic-COAST will be instrumental in closing knowledge
and policy gaps to foster sustainable development of Arctic ecosystems and
communities, which is one of the deliverables for the Sustainable Development
Working Group of the Arctic Council during the US Chairmanship
2015-2017.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic-COAST employs a transdisciplinary
approach of biophysical, socio-economic and policy research that will interface
from the project's inception. Arctic-COAST knowledge structure encompasses five
crosscutting themes related to Arctic coastal social-ecological systems (SES)
resilience: indicators and monitoring, community resilience, adaptive
governance, future scenario building, and nurturing new Arctic leaders. A sixth
information and knowledge management theme is an integrated effort that
summarizes, presents and delivers RCN results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic-COAST
will synthesize and disseminate knowledge about the state, dynamics and
resilience of coastal SESs focusing on the circumpolar Arctic. To bridge
existing knowledge gaps, Arctic-COAST will (1) provide systematic, synthetic
knowledge about Eurasian and Northern American Arctic coastal SESs; (2) compile
spatial, systems-based understandings of SES resilience for different
geographical scales and regional contexts; (3) craft future research directions
for Arctic SES resilience and ecosystem stewardship, focusing on governance
issues; and (4) foster a new generation of scientists, policy and decision
makers capable of adaptive management. Arctic-COAST will fund regular meetings
and workshops to promote exchange, collaboration, training and educational
opportunities for scientists, early career and Indigenous scholars, students and
local community members.