* 1441009
* Project Engage: Training Secondary Teachers to Deliver Computer Science and Engineering Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Pauline Dow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2017
* USD 457,287.00

Developing computer science teachers who can support high school students in
being successful in rigorous, academic computer science courses is a national
need. Project Engage: Training Secondary Teachers to Deliver Computer Science
and Engineering Instruction will support the implementation of an emerging
Computer Science Principles course called Thriving in Our Digital World (TODW)
in forty-five urban, suburban, and rural schools, including public, private,
magnet, and charter schools, in Texas. The TODW course will be offered in a
unique dual enrollment mode (concurrent high school and college credit). This
project will test two innovative professional development techniques for
expanding the reach to more schools: flipped classroom techniques, in which
teachers receive recorded video-based professional development, and then use
face-to-face time for more hands-on activities; and an automated system which
will use artificial intelligence technology to support negotiation of common
grades for student work between high school teachers and college faculty. This
project's research agenda will address the following core challenge: In a field
such as computer science where there is limited expertise, how can we most
efficiently scale professional development so as many schoolteachers as possible
can provide high quality instruction? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM-C (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, including Computing) Partnerships
program supports research-driven partnerships between STEM experts and K-12
school systems to bring about institutional change for better STEM education at
the K-12 level. This STEM-C Partnerships' Computer Science Education Expansion
project builds on prior funding of the UTeachEngineering: Training Secondary
Teachers to Deliver Design-Based Engineering Instruction Partnerships through
the National Science Foundation's Math and Science Partnership program. This
project will produce the scientific foundation and the concrete artifacts needed
to deliver a highly scalable curriculum for TODW. The artifacts will include a
differentiated curriculum, scalable professional development, and scalable
assessment tools and processes. The differentiated curriculum will include
formative assessments which can be used by teachers to architect novel pathways
through the curriculum for individual students or whole classes. Assessments
will be created that can be delivered through a double-blind collaborative
review (DBCR) rubric scoring tool, which will include machine learning
algorithms that help detect consistent discrepancies between scores of
individual (novice) computer science teachers and (expert) college-level
computer science professors. The DBCR tool will use machine learning techniques
such as basic text features (Bag of Words), syntactic and semantic modeling
(n-grams and Latent Dirichlet Allocation), and cluster analysis against existing
artifact corpora. Since the assessments of student artifacts are explicitly tied
to rubrics, human evaluators may also use the DBCR tool to specify specific
features that support line item rubric scores. The available features will vary
from project to project but will leverage a variety of tools available in the
DBCR user interface: (1) selectable categorical classifications, (2) the
highlighting of relevant text features, and (3) annotations to mark document
structures, such as cross references and supporting evidence. Project evaluation
will focus on both implementation fidelity of the TODW course and student-level
outcomes in classes that implement TODW. If successful, the professional
development could serve as a model for more scalable teacher professional
development in many domains.