* 1441779
* Travel support for U.S. students to attend the 4th International Palaeontological Congress
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Dena Smith, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 11/30/2014
* USD 30,000.00

Smith-1441779. Title: Travel support for U.S. students to attend the 4th
International Palaeontological Congress

Funded by NSF Office of International and Integrative Global Venture Fund and
NSF Sedimentary Geology & Paleobiology Program

Non-Technical Description: This award will provide partial support for the
international travel of 15 US graduate students to attend the Fourth
International Palaeontological Congress (4th IPC) in Mendoza, Argentina from 28
September ? 3 October 2014. It is expected that more than 500 professional
paleontologists from around the globe will attend the 4th IPC. Students selected
to receive travel support will be chosen from across the subfields of
paleontology, ensuring that a diverse group of students have the opportunity to
attend and present their research results. In addition to sharing their own
research, the meeting will provide opportunities for participants to explore new
research directions and debate topics with specialists from across the globe.
There will be a combination of plenary lectures, symposia on leading issues,
interactive workshops, technical sessions and short courses. Technical
Description: Paleontology is a vibrant discipline that includes such currently
relevant topics as the origin and evolution of life, the response of biotas to
environmental perturbations, extinction and the nature of preservation of fossil
data. It is a completely interdisciplinary field of study that includes
researchers from biology, sedimentary geology, stratigraphy, geochronology,
geochemistry, and modeling. The STEPPE coordinating office, in collaboration
with the Geological Society of America, the Paleobotanical Section of the
Botanical Society of America, the Paleontological Society, the Society for
Sedimentary Geology-SEPM and the Society for Vertebrate Paleontology will read
and evaluate undergraduate and graduate student applications, ensuring that
there is equal representation from across the societies? disciplines and that
there is balance in terms of gender and participation by those from
underrepresented groups. Student participation in the 4th IPC meeting will
uniquely contribute to the geological and biological sciences because it will
bring together global paleontologists, of all career stages, to share their
research methods, findings and experiences in the field. This will lead to new
opportunities for collaboration and the creation of novel approaches to studying
our world.