* 1441231
* Collaborative Research: RIPS Type 2: Vulnerability Assessment and Resilient Design of Interdependent Infrastructures
* ENG,EFMA
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2019
* Christopher McCarty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,099,460.00

Modern infrastructure systems, such as power grids, communication networks, and
transportation networks are interdependent in such a way that a failure of an
element in one system may cause multiple failures of elements in other systems.
This process can propagate back and forth between interdependent systems in a
cascading fashion, resulting in a catastrophic widespread failure. In addition,
the diverse human behaviors to disruptions, such as drivers? reaction to
gridlock, can further complicate the cascading behaviors. Radically new models
and analytical techniques are needed to assess and design resilient
interdependent systems.

In this project, a team of five investigators from the domains of computer
science, optimization, transportation systems, power engineering, and social
science will work together to gain a better understanding of cascading failure
phenomena, develop tractable mathematical models for designing resilient
interdependent systems, and investigate innovative strategies to enhance the
resilience of interdependent systems by preventing the occurrence of cascading
failures and quickly restoring system operations. This research will lay a
foundation in understanding the fundamental properties that contribute to the
robustness of interdependent systems under disruptions, and thus, advancing the
state-of-the-art in modern complex network theory and optimization algorithms.
The transformative contributions of the project are as follows. The
investigators will offer the first models that can characterize the scale and
depth of cascading failures in interdependent systems, introduce the new concept
of "human vulnerability", and provide the first model on identifying critical
network elements based on serviceability. The findings of the research will
provide timely support for public and private agencies to better understand the
impacts of cascading failures and the implications of protecting critical
elements, and develop policies to enhance the resilience of the interdependent
infrastructure systems. In particular, the findings can potentially diversify
the choices of these policies for managing transportation networks and power
grids. The research results will also enrich the literature in the areas of
network science, graph theory, optimization, communications, transportation
systems, power engineering, and social science. The project will involve
students at all levels, with emphasis on attracting students from
underrepresented groups. The real-world applications will offer an ideal
platform to engage undergraduate and K-12 students and to reach out to
practitioners and policy makers.

Via a combination of theoretical (mathematical modeling and optimization) and
applied (domain expertise) approaches, this project will comprehensively
investigate vulnerability and resilience issues in interdependent systems. As
specific steps towards this goal, the investigators will pursue five
interdisciplinary research tasks: 1) analyzing the mechanisms of cascading
failures in interdependent systems by mathematically quantifying the "depth" and
"breadth" of cascades; 2) identifying critical elements (nodes and/or links)
whose removal yields the most significant loss of resilience of interdependent
systems; 3) enhancing the resilience of interdependent systems via optimal
addition of inter-network links and finding adaptive control strategies to
rapidly react to the cascading behaviors before the systems decay into full-
blown failure; 4) investigating "human vulnerability" associated with critical
elements, and deriving metrics of human vulnerability, which will be further
integrated into the mathematical models of interdependent systems to refine the
detection of critical elements; 5) applying the proposed rigorous mathematical
models and algorithms to the real-world interdependent networks in Florida,
which consist of power grids, communication networks, and transportation
networks, with an impact of human behavior.