* 1441416
* iNeuro: Response to an identified need for a workforce trained to curate and manage large scale data and databases
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* William Grisham, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 101,006.00

The potential for advances in coordinated design, production and analysis of
big-data bases in neuroscience to help us better understand the interaction
between the structure and function of the brain are highlighted by the White
House Brain Initiative (http://whitehouse.gov/share/brain-initiative). However,
in order for that potential to be realized, there is a need for a workforce
capable of both creating and maintaining these data bases in a sustainable, well
annotated, easily accessible format. This workshop is designed to consider the
challenges inherent in educating such a work force and ensuring undergraduate
education in information-neuroscience (iNeuro) will reflect the diversity of the
nation's population and institutions of higher education, consider the myriad
demands on that work force, and promote workforce flexibility in responding to
changing needs and resources as the discipline evolves. It will benefit the
nation in such areas as workforce development, curriculum enrichment,
undergraduate student education and establishing interdisciplinary approaches to
complex national challenges.

This one and one-half day iNeuro workshop will create a roadmap outlining
necessary steps to educate the next generation of information
curators/scientists. It will identify: 1) the skill set(s) and training
necessary for such individuals (e.g. neuroscience, mathematics and quantitative
methods, information science, computer science, and others) as well as the
appropriate trans-disciplinary blend, 2) the educators and programs needed to
train such individuals, and (3) actions needed to help faculty and institutions
incorporate the precepts advanced by the Vision and Change report into their
educational strategies/programs. Attendees will represent the full spectrum of
higher education institutions across the nation and will include experts in such
areas as: managers and purveyors of data resources, individuals involved in
bioinformatics/analytics training, library and information scientists, computer
scientists, neuroscience educators and research-involved neuroscientists. The
workshop will be preceded by a period of information exchange among the
participants to ensure an efficient use of workshop time and will be followed by
production of a white paper summarizing workshop findings.

This project is being supported jointly by the Division of Undergraduate
Education and the Division of Research on Learning in the Directorate of
Education and Human Resources and the Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems within the Directorate of
Biological Sciences as part of their efforts toward support of Vision and Change
in Undergraduate Biology Education.