* 1441638
* CAREER:   Exploiting Antenna Capabilities in Wireless Mesh Networks: Theory, Protocols, and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Romit Roy Choudhury, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2015
* USD 116,164.00

The edge of the internet continues to grow rapidly over the wireless medium.
Sustaining this growth rate is not trivial. The vagaries of the wireless
channel, in conjunction with the distributed nature of large scale networks,
raises diverse challenges in capacity, scalability, reliability, and security.
Every new opportunity has to be maximally exploited to cope with the escalating
end-user demands. Emerging antenna capabilities offer one such opportunity.
Crucial advances have been made in antenna systems, as well as in the wireless
protocol design community. Early evidence shows that significant end to end
performance benefits can be extracted by effectively integrating antenna-
awareness into the network protocol stack. However, such inte- gration is not
trivial, and entails a rich set of research challenges. This project, named
Spotlight, is oriented to achieve this goal, through theory, protocols, and a
prototype demonstration. Instead of attempting all- encompassing solutions, the
project categorically targets wireless mesh network architectures.

Spotlight takes an active step towards integrating independent innovations from
diverse research disciplines. Specifically, it brings the two communities of
antenna systems and wireless networking closer to each other. Research results
is being disseminated through technical publications, seminars, and tutorials.
Moreover, the project is committed to tightly integrate research and educational
plans. Techniques from Electrical Engi- neering is being unified with algorithms
from Computer Science, and presented in new courses for graduates as well as
undergraduates. Hands on experiences are integral components of these courses,
enabling stu- dents to appreciate the translation of theory to real life
systems.

PI: Romit Roy Choudhury ECE, Duke University