* 1441062
* Modeling Satellite Correlations of Aerosol Optical Depth Versus Cloud Optical Depth Over Megacities
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Mark Jacobson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2019
* USD 460,199.00

This project seeks to gain a better understanding of aerosol/cloud interactions
and the effects of these on global temperatures. The research is based on
investigating satellite measurements of the thickness of aerosols (small
particles) and clouds in the atmosphere over several global megacities. Data
from a prior study over 2 megacities suggest that as the thickness of aerosols
increases in the atmosphere, the density of clouds tends also to increase to a
point, but then begins to decrease. Since satellite data can show correlations
but not cause and effect, and models can show cause/effect, a computer model
will be used in this project to simulate the relationship between clouds and
aerosols over three megacities. The results will help to improve the ability of
computer models to predict global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on the investigating satellite measurements of aerosol optical
depth (AOD) and cloud optical depth (COD) over several megacities to assess the
relative importance of different types of aerosol feedbacks on clouds.
Previously a boomerang curve was identified (an increase then a decrease of COD
with increasing AOD) where the increase in COD at low AOD is believed to be due
to microphysical (indirect) effects and a decrease in COD at high AOD is thought
to be due to radiative effects (cloud absorption effects and the semidirect
effect).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three tasks: 1) complete
the satellite retrieval worked performed for the first part of the project over
one more megacity region, New Delhi India; 2) use a nested global-through-local
3-D model (GATOR-GCMOM) to determine whether the boomerang curves found in the
satellite data can be attributed to absorbing aerosols; and 3) run a 24-year
global baseline simulation and sensitivity simulations examining the separate
effects of fossil-fuel soot, solid biofuel soot and gases, biomass burning soot
and gases, methane, and all anthropogenic components on global climate,
accounting for indirect effects, semi-direct effect, and the cloud absorption
effect. To evaluate the significance of the model results, a two-sided t-test
for unequal sample sizes of unequal variance will be used to determine whether
the computer modeled difference in a given parameter between a baseline
simulation and a sensitivity simulation is statistically significant relative to
chaotic variation in a climate model.