* 1441542
* DIP: Extending CTSiM: An Adaptive Computational Thinking Environment for Learning Science through Modeling and Simulation in Middle School Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,348,142.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and PI teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. An important issue
in education is helping learners understand scientific phenomena, especially
those that are too small or large, fast or slow, dangerous or inconvenient to
experience and manipulate first hand. A way of helping learners experience such
phenomena is through modeling -- building a model of the phenomenon or process
and then manipulating it to see what happens in different circumstances.
Computer tools are available for creating such models, but model building,
though very useful for learning, is a complex and difficult task for many
learners. In this team's Cyberlearning Exploration (EXP) Project, they developed
what looks like a promising way to help middle school students learn to build
computational models of scientific phenomena. They designed a visual language
for expressing models and showed how progressing from less to more sophisticated
models across several phenomena could help middle schoolers not only learn
targeted science content but also learn how to design and build models and how
to interpret and learn from models. In this follow-on project, they build on
that approach, aiming to extend the technology to cover more sciences, automate
some of the help teachers provide to students as they engage in model building
and interpretation, systematically study the challenges learners face in
learning through model building and interpretation, and identify pedagogical
approaches that will foster successful learning in these circumstances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to improve middle
schoolers' computational thinking and scientific modeling capabilities in
parallel with each other and in a way that prepares young learners for the
computational sciences of the future. The PIs' earlier Cyberlearning EXP project
explored the potential of using what is known about learning to be a
computational thinker to guide sequencing of activities for fostering model-
building and interpretation capabilities in science. The sequencing they
proposed has middle schoolers building models of phenomena that they gradually
make more sophisticated over the course of a science unit, then in the next
unit, repeating that sequencing again, but with different content requiring more
sophisticated or different modeling practices. They designed a language for
model specification that they hoped would foster computational thinking and
model-building capabilities. CTSIM, the software that supports the approach, is
a visual programming platform for modeling scientific modeling that includes
discipline-specific constructs, provides a scalable architecture that seamlessly
weaves together model construction, simulation, testing, experimentation, and
verification, is usable across science domains, and connects to NetLogo, which
runs the simulations. In this project, the team will extend the technology to
cover more sciences, add adaptive scaffolding based on what they saw teachers
providing to help students build and learn from models, identify pedagogical
approaches for promoting learning from model building, and systematically study
the challenges students face and how to address those challenges. Their research
questions focus on students' abilities to simultaneously learn science content
and computational thinking skills involved in modeling, the ins and outs of
using linked representations, the kinds of feedback needed for scaffolding the
approach, and scaling issues for teachers.