* 1441527
* DIP: Potential for everyday learning in a virtual community: A design-based investigation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Rhiannon Crain, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,467,530.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advancing what we
know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and PI teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project team
aims to explore how to foster learning in socially-networked communities,
particularly learning that results in behavior change. Understanding how to
foster such learning could have a wide variety of societal impacts, e.g., better
fostering science, engineering, mathematical, or design thinking in school or
college or on the job, fostering healthy behaviors, helping teens develop pro-
social behaviors, and helping people learn to make environmentally-friendly
choices as they live their lives. In previous work, this team has developed
YardMap, an infrastructure for citizen science that brings together retired
adults who are interested in planting and managing their yards in
environmentally-friendly ways. YardMap enables social interactions and shared
creation of virtual worlds in which participants can try out different ways of
managing their yards and see what the downstream effects will be. They also
track and display their changing practices and actual yards in ways that are
visible to others. YardMap is used by many thousands of participants. In this
project, the team is taking YardMap to the next level, using what is known about
how people learn and come to change their behaviors to design and refine ways to
more directly support individuals in critiquing and improving their behaviors
and designs for the common good. What can be learned from the new YardMap will
be useful in other fields that focus on helping people change their behaviors in
productive ways.

The PIs seek to explore how people learn and how to foster learning in socially-
networked citizen science communities. Their research addresses how learning
happens, how to foster learning, how to design to increase social activity, and
how increased interaction with others elevates interest, generates knowledge,
and leads to behavior change. Their technological innovation, an infrastructure
for citizen science that fosters behavior change, builds on YardMap, an existing
infrastructure for citizen science around environmental issues that allows
collective data collection and analysis and supports interactive graphing and
mapping. Participants design and refine ways of managing their yards in ways
that take into account environmental concerns. YardMap enables social
interaction and co-creation of a set of virtual worlds for trying out new ideas;
learners who are part of the community interact with others in the community,
create and refine virtual worlds together, interact with things in the virtual
world, manipulate those worlds and collect and analyze data about outcomes, and
discuss visual objects that represent real things and practices. As well,
individuals track and display their changing practices and actual yards in ways
that are visible to others. YardMap can be thought of as a maker movement
community focused on yard maintenance; like other maker communities, it
encourages participants to create, share and discuss new inventions and
practices in a social-networked community setting. Using both what is known
about learning in communities and what is known about social drivers of
interaction, the team is is extending YardMap to focus on fostering learning and
investigating the relationships between learning and behavior change and the
influences each has on the other. Much will be learned about how to use social
interactions in positive ways to help individuals become more comfortable with
behaviors they need to or should take on for health, civic, or educational
reasons. What is learned and the technological infrastructure that is created
will be directly applicable to other situations where individual behavior
changes are needed for change to happen in a social system (e.g., environmental
action, changing the culture of an organization, changing norms in a community,
perhaps even creating learning communities in formal on-line courses).