* 1441879
* DNA Floor Boards
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Challa Kumar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 202,155.00

Non-technical: One of the challenges for chemists and engineers is to arrange
molecules in a well-defined order on nanometer to millimeter length scales; such
order is essential to create materials with predictable and unique properties.
For example, nature creates large biological structures by arranging
biomolecules in a particular order to produce materials with high strength, high
elasticity or conductivity and so on. Humans have yet to successfully mimic this
extraordinary ability of nature to form complex but well-ordered assemblies, and
it remains one of the challenges, which makes this a high risk but high pay-off
project and suitable for the EAGER program. The spontaneous formation of highly
ordered assemblies of DNA and proteins on millimeter scales were serendipitously
discovered in the PIs laboratory. Systematic studies are proposed to learn how
these assemblies are formed in the laboratory, under very simple conditions of
simply mixing of the reagents, so that important insights into how to form and
manipulate these assemblies from nanometers to millimeters can be gained. These
super structures may find use in solar light capture, conversion to liquid
fuels, DNA-computers or advanced biomaterials. During this award period a number
of graduate, undergraduate and high school students will be trained in the
state-of-the-art and interdisciplinary methodology developed
here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Nature has the ability to form complex
biomolecular super structures on nanometer to millimeter length scales. The
construction of such elegant assemblies with extraordinary detail is highly
promising for practical applications. These assemblies could potentially be
transformative while leading to the creation of new areas of research in
biomolecular assembly for DNA-based electronics, bio-electronic components, bio-
solar cells, bio-fuel cells or biomaterials for cellular patterning. Recently,
artificially created protein and DNA molecules were observed to form
extraordinary assemblies that are rectilinear in shape with order ranging from
nanometers to millimeters, all via self-assembly, in the PI's laboratory.
Understanding the complex mechanism of this assembly formation and unraveling
the fundamental forces that drive it would allow a major advancement in the
construction of complex, functional, advanced, novel biomaterials. To address
this challenge, the protein and DNA structure will be systematically modified at
the molecular level and minimum required features for the assembly formation
will be established. Advanced methods such as TEM, AFM, flow-dichroism,
nanocalorimetry, SEM and polarization microscopy will be used to examine
organization on various length scales which will enable the elucidation of the
mechanism of self-assembly. Broader impacts of this project are two-fold. One is
that these highly novel biomaterials may be of value for tissue-scaffolds,
sensing, cell-growth, biomolecular electronics, DNA-computing and solar energy
applications. The second aspect is the educational component, where high school,
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in biomaterials design,
biomolecular assembly and biological spectroscopy. The research training will be
integrated with project goals.