* 1441628
* Collaborative Research:  VertLife Terrestrial:  A Complete, Global Assembly of Phylogenetic, Trait, Spatial, and Environment Characteristics for a Model Clade
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Robert Guralnick, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 179,987.00

Terrestrial vertebrates (Tetrapoda) include our own species and represent one of
the great and diverse evolutionary radiations that intersect with humans'
everyday lives. The four tetrapod classes - birds, mammals, amphibians and
reptiles - together comprise ca. 33,000 species, include life histories ranging
from aquatic, subterranean, and arboreal to aerial, cover a variety of trophic
strategies, and harbor some of the most stunning ecological adaptations.
Tetrapods play a significant role in providing diverse ecological functions, and
they are vital to biodiversity monitoring efforts. However, significant
knowledge gaps remain in the evolutionary relationships, distributions of
ecologically important traits, and distributions of species. The project will
undertake concerted assembling efforts that will yield near species-level
completeness of key evolutionary and ecological attributes thereby establishing
a global model system for macroevolution, macroecology, comparative biology and
global change research. The compiled trait and spatial data will provide a vital
backbone for rigorous conservation monitoring and prioritization. The online
analysis and visualization tools will extend successful, existing projects and
will be built to be directly usable for other taxa and other Genealogy of Life
(GoLife) projects.

Massive parallel sequencing methods will be used to collect new multi-locus
genetic information for ca. 4,000 species currently lacking such data. These
data will be used to derive a dated posterior tree set that includes all
tetrapod species and captures remaining uncertainty. The posterior tree set will
be used to calculate evolutionary distinctness and a variety of tree metrics.
Together with key collaborators the researchers will compile morphological,
ecological and life history trait data for dozens of variables and additionally
benefit from phylogenetic imputation to predict missing values. A new tool
incorporated into the existing Map of Life infrastructure will link existing
species distributional datasets to global environmental data layers and provide
broad-scale niche characteristics for all vertebrates together with estimates of
uncertainty. Further integration will link these products to online phylogeny
visualization tools to allow map- and tree-based discovery and download.
Finally, the project will demonstrate the utility of the integrated layers
through example biogeographic, conservation and comparative analyses that will
highlight the advance in inference and in predictive conservation use arising
from near-complete and unbiased global data. The research will also provide
online visualizations and tutorials, a museum exhibit developed around the
products, a workshop based on VertLife infrastructure, and undergraduate and
graduate summer internships.