* 1441069
* CS 10K: Beauty and Joy, Adapted and Adopted:  Building a Computational Teaching Cadre from within Wyoming Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Lynne Ipina, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2018
* USD 587,947.00

The University of Wyoming, partnering with the Wyoming Council of Teachers of
Mathematics, and districts and high schools throughout the state, proposes a
project to bring AP Computer Science Principles (AP CSP) to students across
Wyoming. The project will adapt and adopt the Beauty and Joy of Computing (BJC)
- an AP CSP course developed at UC Berkeley - to prepare students for the new AP
CSP exam. The PIs have significant experience working with middle and high
school teachers throughout Wyoming, especially with mathematics teachers, who
are the main providers of high school computing education in the state. The
project leverages this experience by offering significant professional
development (PD) during a summer session and school year follow-up. Over the
summer, teachers will be introduced to the Snap! programming language and its
development environment, and the details of preparing students for the AP CSP
examination. Further PD opportunities will take place throughout the school year
in the form of one-on-one peer mentoring and online teacher circles, which will
be particularly useful in the sparsely populated state of Wyoming. The project
will work closely with high school teachers to teach the course as a pilot at
high schools in Albany County and Laramie County. After the pilot, it will
extend the collaboration to other school districts in Wyoming, ultimately
reaching the entire state.

The Beauty and Joy, Adapted and Adopted project will modify the existing BJC
curriculum to include alternative units on topics of particular interest in
Wyoming such as simulation of global climate models. The project staff will
conduct professional development for in-service teachers to improve high school
computer science instruction in Wyoming. The external evaluation will examine
the implementation of rigorous courses in computer science in high schools
throughout the state of Wyoming through the adoption of AP CSP classes, and the
extent to which broadening participation in computer science is advanced using
AP CSP as a vehicle. The key question addressed by the external evaluation is
the following: "To what extent was the project implemented as designed and did
it achieve its stated goals and objectives?"