* 1441396
* RAPID: The Endless Summer: Implications of a 100-year drought for the functional biology of native Californian plants and ecosystems
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Todd Dawson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2016
* USD 180,411.00

California is experiencing the most severe drought to occur in 160 years of
state meteorological records. While the causes of the current drought are not
yet fully known, it is similar to the warmer temperatures and more erratic
rainfall patterns that are predicted to occur in California under future climate
change scenarios. Extreme events such as the current drought are also
anticipated to act as 'triggers' of change in ecosystem composition and function
as the landscape adapts to warmer and drier conditions. Managing California's
biodiversity and the services performed by its natural environment in the face
of a changing climate is challenging because the response of species and
ecosystems to drought (and other extreme climate events) is still poorly
understood. The wide variety of plant species growing in complex soils,
topography and geology mean that the same imposed drought conditions may lead to
dramatically different outcomes in terms of the water stresses experienced by
plants. This project takes advantage of the once-in-a century Californian
drought to study the effects of water stress in different plant species growing
in different habitats in order to evaluate how different plant adaptations lead
to a spectrum of drought stress and susceptibility to ecosystem change. The
research will contribute to the training of young scientists at multiple stages
of their education, (postdoctoral scholars, graduate students and undergraduate
students). The results will be widely shared with conservation and resource
managers, providing a basis for enhanced planning of conservation priorities and
possible interventions in response to drought.

Although extreme drought events are becoming more common worldwide, detailed
monitoring of plant performance during these events remains scarce. Quantifying
the diversity of plant responses to extreme drought events provides an
opportunity to advance our understanding of the underlying (mechanistic) reasons
for how and why particular plant strategies may be either better or more poorly
suited for coping with extreme physiological stress. Drought-induced changes are
expected to drive the transient dynamics of vegetation communities, possibly
triggering species transitions and pushing ecosystem-scale ecohydrology into
novel states. The project will primarily draw on physiological measurements as
indicators of drought stress, specifically leaf water potentials, stomatal
conductance, native embolism and canopy area. These measurements will be made on
a monthly basis at two intensive research sites in the San Francisco Bay Area.
The effects of the drought on photosynthesis and plant carbon stores will be
measured using carbon isotopes as an indicator. The sources of water used by the
plants will be determined using oxygen and hydrogen isotopes of water.
Previously installed soil moisture and meteorological equipment will be used to
track site-specific microclimatic and hydrological conditions. Results will
contribute to understanding of the physiological limits of native plant species
to extreme drought and the suites of plant traits that mediate drought stress so
that plants either survive or die.