* 1441041
* BPEC: Computational Thinking in STEM: A Whole-School Model for Broadening Participation and Education in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kai Orton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 599,849.00

Northwestern University proposes a strategy to introduce all students to
computational thinking (CT) skills in a context that highlights the value and
relevance of computational methods. The Computational Thinking for All (CT4ALL)
approach embeds activities in existing high school science and mathematics
classrooms as a way to (a) enhance students' CT skills, (b) infuse modern,
computational practices of STEM professionals into existing STEM courses, and
(c) broaden the appeal of computing by concretely demonstrating its
applicability to diverse fields. The project staff have forged a strong
partnership with Chicago Public Schools who are embarking on a district-wide
effort to infuse computer science into all of their schools. CT4ALL complements
this strategy. The project will work intensively with two schools, both serving
predominantly low-income, minority populations. The intended outcome is to
develop and share practical knowledge of these implementations working within
the substantial constraints of large, resource-limited public high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern will analyze data gathered from
student attitude questionnaires, student learning assessments, students' work on
capstone projects and teacher attitude surveys to inform this study The project
will use a Design Based Implementation Research study to develop and refine a
whole-school model of this concept that is guided by the following research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) what are the CT learning gains for students in the
schools;&lt;br/&gt;(2) how do students' attitudes toward CT change, particularly
for girls and other traditionally underrepresented groups;&lt;br/&gt;(3) what
are the CT learning gains for the STEM teachers; and&lt;br/&gt;(4) to what
extent to teachers' confidence, interest, and attitudes towards CT change as a
result of their participation?