* 1441484
* SaTC: STARSS: Hardware Authentication through High-Capacity PUF-Based Secret Key Generation and Lattice Coding
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Sriram Vishwanath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 306,667.00

Hardware authentication is one of the critical needs in the emerging discipline
of design for assurance and design for security. It is concerned with
establishing the authenticity and provenance of Integrated Circuits (ICs)
reliably and inexpensively at any point in a chip's life-time. Physical
unclonable functions (PUFs) have significant promise as basic primitives for
authentication since they can serve as intrinsically-generated hardware roots-
of-trust within specific authentication protocols. PUFs are pseudo-random
functions that exploit the randomness inherent in the IC manufacturing to
generate random output strings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central challenge in
realizing the potential of strong PUFs is their vulnerability to model-building
attacks using machine learning (ML) methodologies. Despite the effort devoted to
PUFs over the past decade, there is still a lack of a strong silicon PUF that is
both reliable and ML-resilient. This project develops a strong PUF that exploits
the physics of nanometer-scale CMOS to attain security properties that are
superior to existing designs. This new PUF exploits the physics of scaled
transistors, namely subthreshold operation and drain-induced barrier lowering,
to realize continuous nonlinearity. The project also investigates effective
algorithmic techniques, based on novel codes and lattice-constructions, to
enhance the overall structure as well as the robustness of the resulting PUF
output to enable high-capacity secret key generation. The strong PUFs developed
in this project possess a very large input-output space, making them invaluable
to many potential security applications.