* 1441208
* RIPS Type 2: Participatory Modeling of Complex Urban Infrastructure Systems (Model Urban SysTems)
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* John Crittenden, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,999,946.00

The fitness and function of infrastructure in urban areas (particularly
infrastructure for water, energy, and transportation) is critically important
for the survival, sustainability, resilience, and success of cities. But because
infrastructure systems generally are viewed as independent from each other, we
often fail to recognize the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of
the interactions and interrelations between systems. This balkanization is
compounded by cities' histories of centralized infrastructure creation and
control that has led to fewer, but bigger, disconnected systems that have proven
to be susceptible to failure, and may be unsustainable moving forward. The
central hypothesis of this project is that interconnected and decentralized
infrastructure systems are more resilient than isolated and centralized
infrastructure by increasing response diversity. A secondary hypothesis is that
decentralized infrastructure systems are more scalable and adaptable to change.
The means to assess these hypotheses, however, are not readily available. While
metrics and models exist to evaluate the subsystems, there is no way to consider
their performance and function working together as a whole and in the context of
social, behavioral, and economic decision making (SBEDM). This project will
create that capability and then use it to develop the necessary comprehensive
understanding of the resilience of centralized versus decentralized water,
energy, and transportation (WET) systems at the metropolitan city and community
level using Atlanta, GA as a test bed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There are 4 main
research elements in this project. First, it will develop a systems dynamics
model for the WET infrastructure, and the model will be used to assess how the
system responds and adapts to exogenous and endogenous stressors for two
alternate urban growth scenarios. The systems dynamics model will integrate the
challenges and impacts of technology implementation with SBEDM. Second, a model
will be developed to quantify the resilience of the WET infrastructures. The
model will adopt an ecological engineering conceptualization of resilience and
engage a demographically representative cohort of stakeholders in the process.
The resilience of the proposed WET infrastructure will then be benchmarked to
the expected range of climate change stressors, and compared to different
measures of resilience as defined by theories of complex engineered and
ecological systems. Third, a set of tools will be developed to simulate
decision-making in the SBEDM environment. An agent-based simulation tool will
capture the level of service impacts within the stakeholders, and a Bayesian
network model will examine infrastructure investment decision-making. This tool
will interact with the systems dynamics model to inform the stakeholders about
the system performance under stressors and convey the decision back to the
systems model providing directives for future development/ rehabilitation. The
level of service impacts will be determined with the agent based model and the
investment decisions will be conducted with a probabilistic approach. Lastly, a
Pareto optimality model will be created of resilience and sustainability in WET
infrastructure to assess the effect of climate change stressors like extreme
heat events, droughts and floods on the water-energy-transportation nexus. This
research represents a new system-of-systems approach to engineering the
resilience of critical urban infrastructures in the context of their physical
and socio-economic environments. It will develop fundamental theories about
interdependent infrastructure systems based on a complex systems engineering
approach as well as from the study of ecological systems. The insights developed
here will be useful in creating tools and methods for designing and evaluating
the resilience of complex urban infrastructure systems, examining the value of
engineering vs. ecological approaches, pioneering methods to bridge the gap
between social decision making and urban design, and contributing to the
creation of a national research agenda for integrating urban resilience and
sustainability into urban planning by identifying necessary data and
methodologies. Advanced course modules and curriculum materials (undergraduate
and graduate) related to complex engineering systems will be developed,
promoted, and widely distributed through the Center for Sustainable Engineering.
Results and methods will be integrated into existing programs at Georgia Tech,
including the Center for Education Integrating Science, Math, and Computing that
specifically target scientific interactions with African American high school
students. The team will engage stakeholders from the private and public sectors
to: 1) develop model structures and secure data for model implementation and
validation by industrial partners; 2) explore the full breadth of decision space
thus making the analyses and models relevant to stakeholders; 3) increase model
transparency and stimulate group learning through interactive model development
including a participatory game; and 4) make science and engineering results more
accessible (e.g., through visualization).