* 1441376
* EAGER: Exploring Federations of Campus and National Cyberinfrastructure as Scalable Platforms for Science: A Case Study using Open Science Grid
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Donald Smith, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 285,790.00

Advanced computing and data cyberinfrastructure (ACI) is playing an increasingly
important role in all areas of computational and data-enabled science and
engineering (CDS&amp;E), and has become a key enabler of scientific insights and
innovation. As a result, it is critical that researchers and students have
access to adequate campus ACI (e.g., computing and data resources). However, it
is also critical that such a campus ACI aligns and is integrated with national
initiatives, to connect with and share advanced computing/data resources and
expertise, enable collaborative and end-to-end science, and build upon and
leverage existing federal investments in high end infrastructure. This EAGER
focus on three main thrusts: (1) develop the expertise and experience at Rutgers
for establishing a campus ACI for CDS&amp;E research, and to align it with the
national ACI by integrating this campus ACI as part of a national resource,
i.e., Open Science Grid (OSG); (2) develop the necessary research partnerships
based on the OSG federated ACI to address important research problems in an end-
to-end manner and lead to significant insights; and (3) document processes,
experiences, and lesson learnt during this process to share these findings with
the broader community, providing a "cook-
book".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing campus ACI ecosystems is a common
practice that Universities follow in order to support their research and
education missions. However, these campus ACI ecosystems typically operate in
isolation, restricting the access to resources and therefore the potential
impact that they can offer to the community beyond their own campuses. The
outcomes of this research will provide important insights into the feasibility
of leveraging national investments to create resource pools where the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts. As a result, it can have significant impact
on the mindset of faculty, campus IT, and administrators, and on the overall
ability of campus IT groups to support the advanced computing needs of
researchers. The resulting models for collaboration will be seeded through
shared ACI to incentivize resource and expertise sharing that can enable faculty
and students to leverage a much larger and more robust set of resources. It will
also help foster the creation of necessary support teams to support science and
scholarship.