* 1441358
* EXP: Hands-on Haptics Laboratories for Classroom and Online Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Allison Okamura, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 566,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project's technology innovation is a haptic (force-feedback)
toolkit to be used in learning science and engineering content that involves
forces. The toolkit the team is developing will allow learners (K-12 and beyond)
to manipulate simulations and models through touch-sensitive devices and to
directly feel resulting forces. Learning and using the science of forces is
quite complex, as the ways forces actually combine and have effects are not
always consistent with what people experience. Understanding forces, however, is
essential for pursuits as varied as engineering, rehabilitative medicine, and
construction and for understanding concepts and phenomena in biology, chemistry,
physics, and engineering fields. The kind of direct engagement with forces at
the micro-level that the proposed toolkit will allow has potential to foster
better scientific understanding across this whole set of fields. Research in the
context of this technological innovation focuses on the extent to which and the
conditions under which such embodied experience with phenomena fosters deeper
understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of embodied experiences in
learning is both an important issue in learning how to better foster learning
and a newly-emerging possibility for learning technologies. In this project, the
PIs examine the potential for haptic technology to expand and transform student
learning. The haptic interface being developed is a mechatronic device
programmed with force-displacement relationships that a user experiences through
the sense of touch. The project aims to demonstrate the ways the programming and
use of haptic devices as a part of lab experiences can impact learning. The PI
is a mechanical engineer who is expert in materials and devices. The co-PI is a
learning scientist engaged closely with the maker movement and with helping
learners learn from simulation and modeling experiences. Through an iterative,
design-based research approach, new haptic devices and accompanying visual
programming software are being created to enable interactive hands-on virtual
laboratories for biology, chemistry, and physics, and experiments are being
carried out to understand both how to use such devices well to foster learning
and the affordances of haptics in learning force-related concepts and its added
value in the context of learning through modeling and simulation.