* 1441413
* Graduate Student Tutorial and Winter Digitization Meetings; February, 2015
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Shane Greenstein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 49,975.00

This award supports a graduate student tutorial and workshop on the economics of
digitization to be hosted by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
The NBER's Digitization Project, established in 2010, is building the
foundations for an economics-oriented research community that examines the
causes and consequences of digitization. Project participants are concerned with
the impact of rules, policies and institutions that govern the economic
incentives to create, store and use digital information. Issues of particular
salience include: (1) copyright policy and innovation in the digital economy,
(2) the economics of privacy and innovation with Big Data, and (3) Changing
Digital Media Markets. The tutorial, which will be conducted by three leading
researchers, will introduce a cohort of twenty graduate students to key topics
in the economics of digitization and will emphasize open questions on the
frontiers of research. After the one-day tutorial, graduate students will
participate in the regular Winter Meeting of the Digitization Project and have
the opportunity to interact with researchers attending the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitization is an important consequence of
advances in computing that are transforming the economy and driving innovation.
Understanding how digitization affects the economy is important in formulating
appropriate policy responses. This project will advance knowledge in this field
by exposing graduate students to the young and growing community of researchers
concerned with digitization, and enabling them to have face-to-face interaction
with research leaders that would otherwise be challenging for them to do. It
also brings together like-minded researchers to share frontier research, and
contributes to building the foundations for this community of scholars in this
policy-relevant area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks to accelerate the development of a research community around
important policy issues that give rise to challenging analytical problems in a
complex institutional setting. The policy issues are persistent, widespread and
required responses are non-obvious. By seeding the interests of a new generation
of researchers and promoting their professional development the project will
encourage the expansion of important skills in the STEM workforce.