* 1441826
* Research Initiation Grants: Nurturing the Creativity of Students with ADHD in Engineering Disciplines
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sally Reis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,997.00

Engineering breakthroughs play a crucial role in our nation's ability to face
the significant challenges of the coming decades. A critical need exists in
engineering education to draw on the divergent thinking and risk-taking
necessary for revolutionizing industries and making radical technological
discoveries. This study builds on the literature that establishes the
concurrence of strong divergent thinking skills and unparalleled risk-taking
potential in individuals with ADHD. This group of student is significantly
underrepresented, some work suggests that only 3% of college students with ADHD
choose to study engineering The objectives of this study are: 1) to investigate
if engineering students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
have greater potential than their peers to develop transforming solutions for
complex problems, 2) to determine impediments that significantly limit the
participation of these students in engineering programs and put them at a higher
risk of academic failure and 3) to identify the fundamental elements of
specialized engineering programs that promote the recruitment and retention of
students with ADHD. This work is potentially transformative because it addresses
the significance of the unique traits of students with ADHD, who may be at high
risk for academic failure but have the potential for creative productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using both existing valid measures of creativity and
established psychometric scales, the researchers propose to measure student
performance in engineering among ADHD and control cohorts, as well as to
identify impediments to ADHD students' success through questionnaires and semi-
structured interviews. The significance of this project is two-fold, as it has
the potential to positively affect the growth, competitiveness, and security of
our nation, as well as the well-being of an academically and socially vulnerable
group of students. Individuals with ADHD and their families experience
tremendous distress because their talents largely go unrecognized. This project
may lead to a paradigm shift in how these individuals are perceived by both our
society and our educational system.