* 1441497
* SusChEM:  Geochemical Characterization and Evaluation of the Environmental Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2018
* USD 364,100.00

Broader significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of unconventional oil
and gas resources through hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling has
increased energy production in the USA and is expanding globally. Yet, this
rapid development has triggered an intensive public debate over the
environmental implications of this technology. One of the environmental risks
associated with unconventional shale gas development is the contamination of
water resources. Hydraulic fracturing fluids (HFFs) are highly saline and
contain elevated levels of toxic elements such as barium along with high levels
of naturally occurring radioactive materials. Yet the ability to directly
identify hydraulic fracturing fluids and their release in the environment is not
known. This NSF project seeks to develop novel and diagnostic geochemical
tracers that are inherently connected to the hydraulic fracturing process. The
environmental forensic approach will enable us to distinguish hydraulic
fracturing fluids from other forms of contamination, including naturally
occurring saline groundwater and the legacy of past conventional oil and gas
exploration that can mask attempts to delineate water contamination sources and
evaluate the net impact of shale gas development. The methodology developed in
this NSF project could be applied universally to other unconventional reservoirs
as hydraulic fracturing expands globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use an extensive collection of
flowback and produced waters from shale gas and conventional oil and gas
exploration (total 80 samples) to establish a comprehensive geochemical database
that includes major and trace elements, combined with multiple isotopic
fingerprints (d18O,d2H, d13C-DIC, d11B, 87Sr/86Sr, d7Li, 206Pb/208Pb) and
radionuclides (228Ra/226Ra, 210Pb/226Ra). Based on preliminary data, it is
hypothesized that the novel multi-isotopes tracers will enable us to
characterize and identify the geochemical fingerprints of HFFs, providing the
basis for evaluation of their origin and possible impacts on the environment. It
is proposed to investigate already collected HFFs? samples in addition to new
collection of water resources in areas of shale gas development in WV and PA. In
particular, the study aims to (1) integrate geochemical and isotopic data for
reconstruction the origin and evolution of produced and flowback waters in shale
formations as compared to produced waters from conventional oil and gas wells;
(2) evaluate possible contamination of surface water by HFFs upon disposal of
inadequately treated wastewater, spills, or leakage from HFFs? ponds; (3)
simulate reactions of HFF with sediments and mixing with other water types
through laboratory experiments and thermo-kinetic modeling; and (4) evaluate
groundwater contamination in areas associated with shale gas development in
WV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the NSF
Geobiology and Low-Temperature Geochemistry program, the NSF Sustainable
Chemistry, Engineering and Materials (SusChEM) initiative, and the NSF
Environmental Sustainability program.