* 1441771
* Collaborative research: Untangling the Deep Genealogy of Microbial Dark Matter
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Duane Moser, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2018
* USD 204,955.00

Breakthrough technology enabling rapid sequencing of whole genomes from single
cells, will be used in this project to unlock secrets of life's early evolution
and genealogy. Prior to this breakthrough, many of life's earliest diverging
lineages could not be analyzed because they cannot be grown in laboratory
cultures. This unculturable "Microbial Dark Matter" (MDM) within the groups
Bacteria and Archaea constitutes the majority of biological species diversity
and biological mass on Earth, and this can now be brought to light by the
sequencing of single amplified genomes (SAGs). In this unprecedented research
project, many new genomes, encoding the blueprints for disparate organisms, can
and will be analyzed to illuminate (1) the genealogy of these ancient microbial
species, (2) the relative timing of their origins, and (3) the role that
horizontal gene transfer among distant relatives may have played in the origins
of new species and novel ways of living. Further, extensive MDM sampling will be
done from unexplored subterranean environments around the world, enhancing the
discovery and understanding of life forms that are new to science.

A team of collaborating scientists will analyze over 100 MDM-rich field samples,
collected from multiple study sites, including Precambrian shield environments
from the Kaapvaall Craton of South Africa, a Precambrian metamorphic complex
accessed via the Sanford Underground Research Facility in South Dakota, and
fault-associated springs associated with Tertiary volcanic areas and Cambrian-
aged sedimentary rocks of the Death Valley Regional Flow System in Nevada.
Extensive contextual information (environmental and biological metadata) will
also be incorporated in these sampling efforts. The research tasks begin with
the collection of field samples and metadata from sites known or suspected to
contain a high proportion of MDM. Then, the microbial community composition
within the collected samples is surveyed by sequencing their small sub-unit
(SSU) rRNA gene iTags. Based on the iTag data, 20 samples that best meet the
objectives of this project are selected, and 12,600 single amplified genomes
(SAGs) from them will be sequenced. The SAGs will then be identified by their
SSU rRNA genes, and 800 MDM SAGs that best meet the objectives of this project
will be further annotated, aligned and combined with various publicly-available
data sets for use in detailed, statistical phylogenetic reconstruction of a
comprehensive genealogy for Bacteria and Archaea. The genealogical inferences,
in combination with other data layers important to understanding MDM evolution
(including geochemical, geospatial, microbial community composition, and
microbial physiology data) will be compiled and used in addressing the project's
general evolutionary questions, as noted above. Analyses will also address the
potential for the deep subsurface environments of Earth to serve as a repository
for the early evolutionary history of Bacteria and Archaea. This project
leverages an existing major award to the researchers through the DOE Joint
Genome Institute to cover sequencing costs. The project has a very rich
educational and outreach component, geared toward research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and high school
teachers. Engaging outreach activities and media designed for the general public
are also planned. Further, the laboratory and computational tools and the
massive genomic data produced by this project will provide a major resource to
the broad research community and, potentially, to the biotechnology industry.