* 1441071
* STEM-CP: BPEC - Learning From Young Women Who Participate in Computing: Longitudinal Research on the NCWIT Aspirations in Computing Program
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Lucinda Sanders, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,994.00

The National Center for Women &amp; Information Technology (NCWIT) at the
University or Colorado will investigate the characteristics and external factors
influencing young women's interest in and pursuit of computing during and after
high school. Current research provides much evidence about what inhibits female
participation in computing, but only piecemeal insights into why, and how, some
women persist in the face of many challenges. NCWIT's Aspirations in Computing
(AiC) program has attracted thousands of female applicants since 2007. The
project team will conduct surveys, interviews and focus groups with AiC
applicants. Analyses of the resulting dataset will enable the computing
community to learn more about what circumstances encourage or hinder young
women's pursuit of computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCWIT will analyze data from
the AiC application portal and program to create a dataset on women's pathways
in computing from high school to college and early career. This unique, large,
national dataset will be built upon through surveys, interviews and focus
groups. This project will use a quasi-experimental research design to conduct a
longitudinal, mixed methods study to answer the following research questions: 1)
What factors support young women's pursuit of computing, and how do these
influence their interest, self-efficacy, outcome expectations, perceived social
supports/barriers, and intent to persist in computing over time? 2) What
challenges do young women encounter in the field of computing, and how do these
influence their interest, self-efficacy, outcome expectations, perceived social
supports/barriers, and intent to persist in computing over time? 3) What factors
contribute to why, and how, some women pursuing computing activities, study or
careers, persist despite many challenges to their inclusion in the field?