* 1441393
* Collaborative Research:  The Genomic Effects of Selection for Herbicide Resistance in Green Foxtail
* BIO,DEB
* 01/06/2014,07/31/2014
* Elizabeth Kellogg, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 34,218.00

PIs: Katrien M. Devos (University of Georgia) and Elizabeth A. Kellogg
(University of Missouri - Saint Louis)

CoPI: Jeffrey Bennetzen (University of Georgia)

Setaria viridis or green foxtail is a ubiquitous weed that was introduced from
Eurasia during the past 500 years. It is often found in and around cultivated
fields and the extensive herbicide pressure imposed by agricultural weed control
has led to the development of herbicide resistant genotypes. Resistance to four
different types of herbicides has been identified in S. viridis. Under continued
herbicide application, the genome region that carries the resistance will be
under strong selection and this is expected to lead to reduced variation at the
herbicide resistance locus and surrounding genome region. The project aims to
compare the genetic variation at the whole genome level with the variation
present in and around three herbicide resistance genes. To achieve this
objective, S. viridis accessions will be collected from North America and
Canada, where herbicide resistance has previously been observed. S. viridis
accessions from around the world will be obtained from national and
international germplasm repositories. The plants will be tested for herbicide
resistance. Cutting edge molecular techniques, including high-throughput
sequencing, will be used to analyze the genetic variation. The project will
provide new insights into the diversity of green foxtail worldwide, the history
and origin of green foxtail introductions into North America, the nature of the
mutations that give rise to herbicide resistance, how the resistance spreads
through populations and the effects of intense directional selection on genome
evolution.

The project provides a vehicle for training students at the undergraduate,
graduate and post-doctoral level in independent research. In addition, the
project data will be used as hands-on teaching materials in graduate courses
taught by the PIs. The project also aims to provide a link between weed
scientists, germplasm curators and geneticists with an interest in green
foxtail. To raise awareness of the research interests of the different groups
and to facilitate collaborations, the project will organize a workshop to
discuss available green foxtail collections, maintenance of those stocks,
genomic tools and common goals. All sequence data produced by this project will
be made publicly available through GenBank. Germplasm can be obtained from the
University of Georgia and the USDA-ARS Germplasm Resources Information Network
(GRIN) (www.ars-grin.gov).