* 1441636
* NSF EAGER: Evaluation of the osteogenic benefits of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound and whole-body vibration in an in vivo rodent osseointegration model
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Ola Harrysson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2016
* USD 185,195.00

PI: Harrysson, Ola L.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1441636&lt;br/&gt;Title: NSF EAGER:
Evaluation of the osteogenic benefits of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound and
whole-body vibration in an in vivo rodent osseointegration
model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance &amp; Importance&lt;br/&gt; Some
metal implants are placed into bones with the intent of becoming permanently
connected. This process is named osseointegration (OI). OI generally takes
several weeks and there is an advantage in achieving rapid and complete OI
because it accelerated the rehabilitation and training of patients. Several
strategies may be used to increase OI of metal implants. They have the advantage
to be applied externally and be effective with brief periods of exposure
(approx. 20 minutes per day). Little is known about the relative benefits of
these modalities and about any potential benefits of combining these modalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt; The goals of this
research are to investigate an integrated system to promote bone ingrowth into
transdermal OI implants. This includes the following aims: (1) Development and
validation of a mechanical actuation system for delivery of controlled LMHF
vibration with optimized strain and frequency to the pelvic limbs of rats
through a pilot in vivo study in rats, (2) The comparison of the relative
effectiveness of LMHF vibration (using the system developed in Objective 1) and
commercial LIPUS alone and combined, through an in vivo study in rats, (3) As a
secondary objective, the comparison of bone ingrowth and bone density assessment
using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) and micro-computed tomography
(micro-CT), (4) As another secondary objective, the comparison of bone surface
strains adjacent to an OI implant and acceleration of the implant, measured
using an accelerometer.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research is motivated by the
fact that OI is slow with some current implant designs. For example, the
rehabilitation process after placement of a transfemoral OI implant by the
Branemark group takes more than one year and requires two surgical procedures.
This research will help evaluate the benefits of LMHF vibration and LIPUS alone
and combined for implants with different designs in an in vivo rodent model.
Upon successful completion, the proposed work will: (1) yield a better
understanding of the bone surface strains generated through various vibration
protocols, (2) lead to the development of a device allowing the local
application of LMHF vibration, and (3) yield a better understanding of the
relative benefit and synergy of LMHF vibration and LIPUS on bone ingrowth of
threaded and textures implants. 332,000 total hip replacement and 719,000 total
knee replacements are performed annually in the United States. This number is
anticipated to grow in the foreseeable future. OI dental implants are a well-
established medical procedure. One of the most common complications of dental
implants is the lack of OI in patients with preexisting osteoporosis.
Approximately 1.7 million people live with a missing limb in the United States
and an estimated 185,000 amputations are performed each year. The number of
individuals experiencing amputation is predicted to increase to more than 3.6
million by 2050. Lower limb amputees commonly use socket-type prostheses. These
prostheses have several limitations: optimal fit is difficult to achieve causing
undesirable stresses on tissues that can lead to pressure points, soft tissue
sores, and nerve damage. Prostheses fixed by OI address many of the shortcomings
resulting from the use of socket prostheses and their applications will most
likely grow in the future. Patients fitted with a TOP instead of a socket
prosthetics can live more active and healthy lives and more efficiently
contribute to society. This research will further our understanding of
strategies that may benefit individuals with OI joint prostheses, with dental
implants, and with transdermal OI implants. By investigating non-invasive, user-
friendly strategies that promote bone ingrowth, this research will benefit all
patients receiving implants with the intent of OI.