* 1441128
* CAP: CSCL 2015 Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Jianwei Zhang, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 26,310.00

The Learning Sciences is an interdisciplinary field that draws on multiple
theoretical perspectives and research paradigms, with the goal of advancing
knowledge and the application of knowledge about human learning and development
in formal and informal educational settings. Within the context of an
international research community, it is essential to support the best young US
scholars to be able to share their ideas and learn from the community,
especially since junior scholars are most likely to struggle with the costs of
participation. This proposal supports participation of US students and
postdoctoral scholars in the Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshop at
the annual meeting of the International Society of the Learning Sciences, which
in 2015 is the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, to be held
in Gothenburg, Sweden. Organizing the workshops in conjunction with the flagship
conferences in the field gives the workshop participants further access to new
research, other researchers in the field and prospective employers, and
revitalizes the community with fresh faces and ideas.

Researchers in the learning sciences attempt to understand the nature and
conditions of learning, cognition, development, and related areas of human
performance, and they investigate cognition in its material, social, and
cultural contexts. The intention of learning science research is to develop
evidence-based claims about how people learn that have theoretical, practical,
and pedagogical implications. Capacity building is a central concern within the
Learning Sciences community. The International Society for the Learning Sciences
has historically addressed these needs, in part, through specialized workshops
held in conjunction with the Society's two major conferences, with multilateral
financial support from regional research funders in the US, the EU, and
Asia/Pacific regions. The Doctoral Consortium workshops host PhD students who
are grappling with their dissertation research, while the Early Career workshops
are designed for recent PhDs (post-docs, faculty in early tenure track, and
others) who are shaping career paths. This grant provides travel support to US
scholars selected through a competitive application process to participate in
these events. Their work is presented for feedback in the context of the events
with feedback from an international panel of expert mentors, and published in
the proceedings of the conference.