* 1441552
* DIP: Modeling in Levels
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,257,849.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and PI teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project aims
to tackle a difficult and important concept for learners at all levels:
understanding complex systems. Complex systems are systems with many interacting
parts and feedback loops and where the phenomena we experience emerge from the
interactions between very large numbers of underlying usually tiny components.
Our weather and climate systems, the flight patterns of birds, the circulatory
systems in our bodies, and results of predator and prey interactions are all
examples of complex systems. The NetLogo system is the premier system used in
educational contexts to help learners engage with and understand complex
systems; they can use NetLogo both to model such systems and to watch the way
such systems behave in different conditions. But it is difficult to
conceptualize complex systems so as to be able to model them, and causality and
influences underlying "emergence" of the phenomena we can sense are particularly
difficult to understand. This team is offering a new way to think about complex
systems and software to help with understanding the idea of emergence. They will
add multi-level modeling to NETLogo, and their research will focus on how
understanding of complex systems develops when software tools that make
emergence easier to understand are available and when learners are helped to
think about complex systems as having multiple levels. Such understanding is
important to understanding the natural phenomena around us as well as the
workings of social systems, and in disciplines as diverse as biology and public
policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding complex systems is an imperative in
our current society. Putting good social and other public policy into place
requires such understanding, as does reasoning about climate and environment. As
well, much of modern biology focuses on complex systems and their interactions.
The Northwestern team has been a leader in designing software infrastructures
for supporting such learning, using as their foundations literature on
cocneptual change and learning about systems. In this project, they are
extending the modeling approach called agent-based modeling so that it can
support multi-level modeling of complex systems. The innovation is two-fold: the
design of tools in support of multi-level agent-based modeling of complex
systems and support for modeling complex social systems. The hypothesis is that
such modeling tools will make it easier for both novice and expert modelers to
model and come to understand both particular complex systems and the idea of
complex systems. Research questions are grounded in that hypothesis, with the
aim to investigate the development of understanding of complex systems when such
tools are available and supported well in the surrounding socio-technical
environment and the special affordances for fostering such understanding when
learners are helped to conceptualize particular complex systems as multi-level
(rather than 2-level) systems. The proposed project has the potential to both
make the modeling of such systems more accessible and raise the ceiling on what
can be modeled qualitatively.