* 1441523
* DIP: ScienceKit for ScienceEverywhere - A Seamless Scientizing Ecosystem for Raising Scientifically-Minded Children
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Tamara Clegg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,419,391.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help in envisioning the next generation of learning technologies and
advancing what we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments.
Development and Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work
that showed the possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology,
and project teams build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed
innovation that allows them to understand how such technology should be designed
and used in the future and answer questions about how people learn with
technology. Although for years researchers have believed technology could afford
anytime-anywhere learning, we still don't understand how learners behave
differently across contexts, such as home, school, and in the community, and how
to get youth to identify as learners across those contexts. This proposal aims
to use mobile devices and strategically placed shared kiosks to 'scientize'
youth in two low-income communities. Through strategic partnerships with
community organizations, educators, and families, the innovation is to get
primary and middle-school students engaging in scientific inquiry in the context
of their neighborhoods. Research will help determine how the technology can best
be deployed, but also answer important questions about how communities can
provide support to help kids think like scientists and identify with
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and implement ubiquitous
technology&lt;br/&gt;tools that include mobile social media and tangible,
community displays (collectively called ScienceKit) that are deeply embedded
into two urban neighborhoods, and demonstrate how such ubiquitous technologies
and related cyberlearning strategies are vital to improve information flow and
coordination across a neighborhood ecosystem, in order to create environments
where children can connect their science learning across contexts and time (e.g.
scientizing). A program called ScienceEverywhere comprised of partnerships
between tightly connected neighborhood organizations with mentors, teachers,
parents, and researchers will help learners develop scientifically literate
practices both in and out of school, and will demonstrate students' learning to
their communities. Research will consist of mixed methods studies of use of the
tools, including iterative design-based research, ethnography, and the use of
participant observers from the community; these will be triangulated with usage
logs of the technologies and content analysis of microblogs by the learners on
their identities and interests. Discourse analysis of interviews with focal
learners will orient the qualitative work on identity development, and analysis
using activity theory will inform the influences of the social practices and
sociotechnical systems on learner trajectories. Formative evaluation will help
shed light on if and how the sociotechnical system promotes STEM literacy and
STEM identity development.