* 1441224
* Collaborative Research:   RIPS Type 2: Quantifying Disaster Resilience of Critical Infrastructure-based Societal Systems with Emergent Behavior and Dynamic Interdependencies
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Joanne Nigg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,452,773.00

This project will create a way to measure the resilience of critical
infrastructure-based societal systems (CISSs) that are necessary for community
functioning. A CISS is comprised of interdependent buildings that together serve
a community function and that are dependent on networks of critical lifelines
(water, wastewater, power, natural gas, communications and cyber-communications,
and transportation). They are a family of structures that are linked by
occupancy type, people, policies, information, geographic location, and/or
building services, and thus also rely on human, organizational, political, and
cyber links. Examples of a CISS structure include, but are not limited to, a
school district, a healthcare delivery system, a government building, a
university campus, a hospitality facility, a residential building, or a central
business district. The project will focus on the impact of single or compound
hazardous events on CISSs. The initial loss of a structure due to physical
damage can spread throughout the CISS or its supporting lifelines. Subsequently,
these interdependencies are dynamic and change over time through human
intervention, emergent organizational behaviors, and policy changes. Finally,
repairs and work-arounds can diminish the impact of the hazardous event(s). As a
test, the resulting framework and specific techniques will be demonstrated on
one type of CISS: a healthcare system. Insights gleaned from this test case can
be applied to improve, build, and maintain communities that are more likely to
withstand disruption or disaster. This effort will directly inform practicing
healthcare managers and emergency planners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will uniquely incorporate public policy, organizational policy, organizational
behaviors and risk communication into a broader assessment of disaster
resilience data of multiple hazards. An integrated approach will be used to
describe the role of adaptation (organizational behaviors) and human
interventions in interdependency dynamics. The project will seek to understand
and model how organizational behaviors emerge and evolve during a disaster
event. Moreover, it will study how cyber systems increase the impact of damage,
resulting vulnerabilities to follow-on attacks, and approaches to prevent such
escalation. Such approaches include risk communications strategies, using
security systems and protocols, and taking other adaptive actions. How
organizations work together to simulate and interpret reality, and how this can
shift or change disaster response, will be studied. The impact of strategic
communication on resilience will be measured. Analysis will require dynamic
fault-tree and modeling of complex, adaptive systems with time-varying system
states and changes. It will address the need for a computational framework for a
large-scale model with significant dimensionality concerns. Additionally,
educational and outreach tasks are aimed at strengthening the pipeline of women
in STEM fields at multiple education and career stages by adopting a "360"
mentorship philosophy that will foster training of female scientists of all ages
to be high-caliber mentors.