* 1441677
* Collaborative Research: The Zygomycetes Genealogy of Life (ZyGoLife)- the conundrum of Kingdom Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Matthew Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 12/31/2019
* USD 690,389.00

Fungi comprise one of the most successful groups of life on Earth. They inhabit
most of the world's environments, where they perform numerous functions (e.g.,
nutrient cycling, foundations of food webs, etc.) that are central to healthy
ecosystems. Importantly, fungi interact with all other forms of life, including
plants, animals and bacteria -- in associations that range from beneficial to
antagonistic. Zygomycete fungi, the focus of this research project, are an
ancient group in which most of the morphological and ecological traits
associated with Kingdom Fungi first arose, but their evolutionary history and
ecological associations have not yet been well resolved. This project will
reconstruct the genealogical relationships of this earliest branch in fungal
evolutionary history, resolve the origins of symbiotic relationships between
plants and zygomycetes, reveal how complex body plans evolved in the group,
elucidate mechanisms of mating genetics between organisms with complex and
differing life cycles, and develop genomic barcodes to facilitate identification
of unknown fungi. The results of this research will contribute to many
scientific disciplines and to society. Expanding and maintaining expertise on
these fungi is critical for the field of biology, human health and productivity,
and safe food production. This project includes training of the next generation
of mycologists, dissemination of information on basic fungal biology,
development of teaching resources, expansion of biological database and web
resources, development of research materials including strain cultures and
genomes for the wider scientific community, and broadening of participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zygomycetes
are filamentous fungi that lack flagella and that produce simple but defined
reproductive structures. An initial analysis of zygomycete genomes support the
hypothesis that the group is a pivotal transition point between certain
flagellated Fungi and their specific life histories, and what became the
dominant eukaryotic terrestrial clade of Fungi (the fleshy fungi, e.g.,
mushrooms). Because the zygomycetes are the first terrestrial fungi that exhibit
fruiting bodies, understanding how these structures evolved will provide a basis
for understanding the origins of complex morphogenesis (e.g., multicellularity)
in the Fungi, as well as the evolution of complex life histories. Zygomycetes
also display a diversity of ecological relationships with plants (mycorrhizae),
animals (pathogens) and bacteria (endosymbionts). Resolving the phylogenetic
origins of these interactions will provide an evolutionary framework for
elucidating molecular and biochemical mechanisms that govern these interactions,
and in doing so, will have direct impacts on research into natural and managed
ecosystems and human welfare. This research will also refine molecular
environmental sampling techniques, resulting in a more accurate census of
zygomycete biodiversity, especially in soil ecosystems. By gathering orders of
magnitude more genome-scale data and integrating it with biochemical,
morphological, subcellular, and fossil data layers, this elusive region of the
fungal genealogy of life will be illuminated and will provide a foundation for
broad scale biological research.