* 1441705
* SaTC: STARSS: Collaborative: IPTrust: A Comprehensive Framework for IP Integrity Validation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Swarup Bhunia, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 02/29/2016
* USD 193,333.00

To reduce production cost while meeting time-to-market constraints,
semiconductor companies usually design hardware systems with reusable hardware
modules, popularly known as Intellectual Property (IP) blocks. Growing reliance
on these hardware IPs, often gathered from untrusted third-party vendors,
severely affects the security and trustworthiness of the final system. The
hardware IPs acquired from external sources may come with deliberate malicious
implants, undocumented interfaces working as hidden backdoor, or other integrity
issues. Tampered hardware IPs can lead to security and privacy concerns (e.g.,
when used in handheld devices) as well as life-threatening consequences (e.g.,
when used in safety-critical systems). It is extremely difficult to verify the
integrity and trustworthiness of hardware IPs due to incomplete functional
specifications and lack of golden reference models. To address this critical
need, in this project, we develop a comprehensive and scalable framework for IP
trust analysis and verification. We evaluate IPs of diverse types and forms and
develop threat models, taxonomy and instances of IP trust/integrity issues. We
investigate an integrative IP trust validation framework that combines the
complementary abilities of functional, structural and parametric verification.
We employ both statistical as well as judicious directed tests to sensitize
rarely triggered malicious changes and observe their effects. The unified
validation framework is flexible to detect diverse tampering efforts, scalable
to large designs, and eliminates the need for a golden model. A platform for IP
trust validation, threat analysis, and trust metrics would provide enabling
technology to future designers to implement secure and trusted systems for
diverse applications.