* 1441741
* Student Travel Grant: 2014 Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning Conference and Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Adrian Pearce, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This project will support travel grants to students from the US to attend the
Doctoral Consortium of the 2014 Principles of Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning (KRR) conference to be held in Vienna, Austria. The field of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning is important to build intelligent computer systems
and in recent years it has been highlighted with respect to initiatives and
successes such as the Semantic Web and the Watson system. However, with respect
to some measures (such as percentage of papers submitted), the USA has fallen
behind other countries, in this field. Recognizing this and the importance of
KRR, a Workshop on Research Challenges and Opportunities in Knowledge
Representation was organized by NSF in February 2013. The KRR conference series,
established in 1989, is the premiere conference in this field. This award will
enable US students to meet and interact with the top researchers in the field of
KRR. This will have a long term impact on developing qualified researchers in
the USA in this field and this will have further impact on both the academia and
industries in the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will address a bottleneck
in student education in the field of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
(KRR). The PIs are among the main drivers of the conference series. They are
established researchers with high visibility and proven track record of
successful student mentoring. The KRR conference is a premier event attended by
prominent researchers in the area. This award will help the students supported
by the award to be better researchers in the field of KRR. This field is not
only important to building Intelligent Systems, but has implications in many
related areas such as: Event recognition in video analysis, Question answering,
Machine reading, and Analysis of big mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
further information on the 2014 KRR conference see the conference web page:
&lt;br/&gt;http://www.kr.tuwien.ac.at/events/kr2014/