* 1441995
* Lead, Support, and Sustain:  Influencing and Implementing IAU, IUPAC, IUCr, IMU, ICO, and IUPAP Programs, 2014-2017
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Kathryn Hughes, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,204,575.00

The U.S. mathematical and physical sciences communities are represented by the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS) in six international scientific unions: the
International Astronomical Union (IAU), the International Union of Pure and
Applied Physics (IUPAP), the International Commission for Optics (ICO), the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the International
Union of Crystallography (IUCr), and the International Mathematical Union (IMU).
U.S. National Committees (USNCs), staffed by the NAS, coordinate U.S.
preparations for meetings of the corresponding international unions and for
scientific conferences, symposia, and workshops organized by these unions to
identify research topics, issues, and programs of interest to their specific
disciplines; identify and support U.S. scientists to participate in union
activities; and arrange for payment of U.S. dues to the six unions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is demonstrated
through activities related to the utilization of knowledge for the achievement
of social goals, establishing nomenclature and standards, participating in the
governance of the six international unions, and advancing knowledge and
understanding across the research community. The activities encourage
cooperative research and education efforts that reach across international
boundaries and are designed to further develop and enhance each discipline
nationally and internationally. The broader impacts of this project manifest
themselves through activities that promote teaching, training, and learning,
that promote the growth of and diversity in the national and international
workforce, and that help shape the international dialogue in the respective
disciplinary areas.