* 1441241
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Insight Into Early US Social And Subsistence Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,175.00

Due to global changes in sea level, some of the most pivotal questions in human
history necessitate the investigation of archaeological sites that are now under
water. These contexts have unique potentials for preserving ancient sites
without disturbance from later human occupations. For example, it is extremely
difficult to uncover a crucial time in US prehistory - when the nation was first
inhabited by humans - because at the end of the last Ice Age when this
presumably occurred sea levels were significantly lower and evidence of coastal
habitation or migration routes are now under water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
Alpena-Amberley Ridge beneath modern Lake Huron offers unique evidence into
early adaptation, and sites preserved on this landform are providing an
unprecedented view of prehistoric caribou hunting. Under the supervision and
guidance of Dr. John O'Shea at the University of Michigan, doctoral student
Ashley Lemke will conduct an innovative autonomous underwater vehicle survey of
the lake bottom to discover new archaeological sites and map cultural features
in detail. In addition, scuba divers will collect archaeological and
environmental samples to understand the social and economic organization of
hunters 9,000 years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research under Lake Huron
has identified over 60 hunting features made of stone which are some of the
oldest and best preserved in North America. These structures include stone lines
and hunting blinds which bear similarity to those historically used in the
arctic to hunt caribou. Thus far, these structures range from simple hunting
blinds that could conceal a single hunter, to complex structures that would
require several people or families cooperating in order to have a successful
hunt. Ms. Lemke's research will further investigate known structures and conduct
a survey to discover additional archaeological sites. Detailed mapping of
hunting sites will provide an understanding of how prehistoric hunter-gatherers
modified their environments and utilized strategic places to intercept migrating
animals. This research will provide new data demonstrating that ancient peoples
living in the Great Lakes region had complex economic strategies which relied on
a sophisticated knowledge of the local environment and animal behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has wide ranging broader impacts. It will
integrate interdisciplinary scholars and technicians with disparate
archaeological, earth science, computer science, and marine technology
backgrounds and promote international research collaboration between American
and Canadian scholars. This integration of multinational researchers with a
range of experience will test new methods for detailed underwater site mapping
and documentation which will be broadly relevant to efforts at underwater
research in other areas. Beyond anthropology, this project will generate data
relevant to a range of questions from Pleistocene geology to contemporary
changes in water levels. Results and data will be presented in peer-reviewed
publications and public outreach will include lectures given at local
universities and museums.