* 1441184
* EXP: BodyVis: Advancing New Science Learning and Inquiry Experiences via Custom Designed Wearable On-Body Sensing and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Tamara Clegg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2019
* USD 549,990.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by building examples and studying their possibilities for fostering
learning as well as challenges to using them well. As technologies become
smaller and more portable, the possibility of wearable computing becomes more
and more realistic. This proposal takes advantage of this possibility to help
elementary school aged children learn about anatomy and physiology by making
clothing with sensors and displays to help kids see how their own bodies work.
For example, a life-sized pair of lungs on a shirt might light up to show how
air flows in and out of a child's lungs in time with their own breathing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has interconnected research and design
activities. A formative inquiry phase will document what kids do and do not
understand about their bodies through surveys, interviews, and a "body map"
approach, while in-service elementary school teachers in a STEM education
Master's degree program will be probed as to learning goals for kids in this
domain. An iterative, participatory and informant design process will then be
used to refine e-textile shirts and associated learning activities in two
contexts that host underserved youth: the CASA de Maryland, and the Boys and
Girls Club of Hartford County. Co-design will also be undertaken with teachers.
Finally, learning studies will be done on children in schools and informal
settings to probe students' pre-post gains in physiology and anatomy knowledge,
and knowledge of how everyday activities change health and biological processes
in the body. Video observation and logfiles will be used to study the learning
activities themselves, and coded using Chinn and Malhotra's framework for
scientific inquiry. Finally, the technology designs themselves and relevant
activities will be disseminated through the use of online portals such as
Instructables, so that other educators can build or experiment with similar
health education wearables.