* 1441885
* Enhancing Accessibility in the Geoscience: A Field-Based Workshop for Accommodating Students with Disabilities
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Anthony Feig, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 11/30/2014
* USD 74,998.00

Participating in field-based learning experiences is a critically important
activity during the preparation and training of future geoscientists, because it
allows students to see complex Earth system processes at spatial and temporal
scales that are difficult to emulate in laboratory or virtual environments.
Participation in field-based activities can be particularly challenging, and in
some cases insurmountable, for students with physical disabilities, thus
creating significant barriers to the engagement and achievement of such students
within geoscience education and career pathways. This project directly addresses
the NSF and Directorate for Geosciences priority of recruitment of the future
STEM workforce and broadening participation of students - including those with
disabilities - in STEM disciplines generally and in the geosciences
specifically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being used to convene a field-
based workshop that will provide students with disabilities the opportunity to
learn about the Earth in a natural setting, and for geoscience instructors to
discover first-hand how to universally design their field courses to be fully
inclusive of students with disabilities. There are two main objectives of this
project: 1) conduct a completely accessible field workshop where students with
disabilities and geoscience faculty work together to define the methods of
inclusive field-based learning experiences while in the field; and 2) promote
the workshop design, logistical planning, and research-based outcomes as a set
of guidelines that will enable the broader geoscience education community to
provide accessible field-based learning opportunities for students with
disabilities on into the future. Prior research identifies three primary
barriers as being: 1) Attitudinal (e.g., personal attitudes of staff, other
students and the general public); 2) Organizational (e.g., course requirements,
time constraints, institutional regulations); or, 3) Physical (e.g., site
access, supporting materials). A group of 15 undergraduate students with
disabilities and 15 faculty mentors will participate in the workshop, which is
being held in conjunction with the 2014 annual conference of the Geological
Society of America (GSA) in Vancouver, BC (October 19-22). Workshop student
participants will be recruited from high school and non-declared college
students, as well as veterans with acquired disabilities. The workshop will
leverage the rich variety of "sea to sky" geological terranes offered by the
Vancouver region, with a focus on natural hazards. An external evaluator
conducting pre- and post-workshop assessments will collect data to inform the
development of the guidelines, which will be disseminated broadly within the
geosciences community in conjunction with the Instructional Approaches to
Access, Accomodation, and Inclusion in the Geosciences workshop being offered at
a variety of venues. This field workshop will serve to broaden both public and
academic awareness of geoscience as an accessible field of study and a viable
career option for all students, regardless of physical ability.