* 1441397
* Student Support: IEEE Cluster 2014 Conference; Madrid Spain; September 22-26, 2014
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Michela Taufer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides travel grants to 20 students to attend the IEEE Cluster 2014
Conference which will be hosted in Madrid, Spain, in September 2014. The
students will participate in the regular conference activities and a special
student program comprised of sessions that target research presentation
training, research experience and career guidance, and industry interaction as
well as two lunch sessions with invited speakers. The students have the
opportunity to present their own work, and receive valuable feedback from both
fellow students and experienced researchers working in the field of cluster
computing, and interact with academic and industry researchers in the cluster
computing community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is often used as the
primary venue for interaction between academic and industrial researchers and
designers. Historically, the conferences have attracted top research papers from
both academia and industry, and many innovations published in the proceedings
have been influential in the understanding of emerging applications and
computing systems. Increasing the attendance of students in will expose more
students to the exciting developments in the field and in the long run will help
to build a broad base of expertise in the field, which will impact both industry
and academia.