* 1441301
* RIPS Type 2: Collaborative Research: Towards resilient computational models of electricity-gas ICI
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Anuradha Annaswamy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,783,855.00

One of the fastest growing consumers of Natural Gas (NG) is the electricity
sector, through the use of NG-fired power plants. Already a large portion of the
electricity portfolio mix in many regions in the US, NG-fired power generation
is increasing even further with growing penetration of renewable energy due to
the former's fast, on-demand response capabilities, and latter's characteristics
of intermittency and uncertainty. As a result, NG and electricity networks are
getting increasingly linked and interdependent. Tighter coordination and
information sharing between electric grid operators and NG suppliers is
therefore becoming highly necessary to have a resilient interdependent critical
infrastructure of electricity and NG.

This proposal seeks to create computational models of this infrastructure, gain
analytical insight into the existing infrastructure in response to system and
policy changes, and design guidelines for a coordinated infrastructure with
improved resilience. These models are based, wherever possible, on real data
from industrial partners and incorporate scaled versions of the electrical and
NG networks of the New England area. Specific tools to reach these objectives
include security constrained unit commitment, a powerful tool that provides
optimal dispatch of power generation for a given network topology and policies,
dynamic market mechanisms and hybrid network science, that permit analysis of
uncertainty on the infrastructure, and cyber-security based resiliency tools for
malicious and non-malicious events.