* 1441476
* Travel Grant Proposal to Support Participation of US Researchers at the International Water Association Workshop, Global Challenges:Sustainable Wastewater Treatment and Resource
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Kartik Chandran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,574.00

1441476&lt;br/&gt;Chandran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel Grant Proposal to Support
Participation of US Researchers at the International Water Association Workshop,
Global Challenges: Sustainable Wastewater Treatment and
Resource&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, as a society, we live in a resource
constrained world, while facing global, interlinked challenges associated with
lack of quality water, energy and food (the water-food-energy nexus). To meet
many of these global challenges of the future in a sustainable fashion,
wastewater must be acknowledged as a renewable resource for water, energy,
nutrients and other materials. The current practice of wastewater treatment,
which focuses on using energy and chemicals to remove constituents, must change
to the new paradigm focused towards what can be recovered, especially since
population growth is depleting resources. The rapidly growing urban centers in
developed and developing countries are in severe need of wastewater treatment
while simultaneously promoting resource conservation and reuse. As the water
sector looks to face the new challenges with innovative solutions that protect
the environmental, public health, and global sustainability, minimizing use of
resources and maximizing the recovery of resources from wastewater is destined
to become the focal point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wastewater contains valuable
resources such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. Whereas untreated wastewater
threatens human health, ecosystems, biodiversity, food security and the
sustainability of water resources, the carbon present in the wastewater can be
recovered to generate energy while nitrogen and phosphorus recovery can
supplement nutrient demand for agriculture. There are many innovative approaches
and technologies for energy neutral nutrient removal and recovery. The drivers
for resource recovery and energy neutrality include decreased energy demand and
carbon emissions, marketable commodities, and improved efficiency at reduced
cost. Notably, these very benefits of resource recovery oriented thinking can
additionally promote access to wastewater treatment and sanitation for the
majority of the world's population, which currently lacks such access (2.5
billion people). However, prior to the widespread implementation of resource
recovery (whether in developed or developing settings), a proper framework
(technical, economical and practical) and appropriate technologies need to be
identified. This workshop is expected to significantly help towards this effort.
This workshop will support only US personnel and expose these faculty and
students to the needs and developments from across the globe on topics related
to resource recovery, thereby laying the pathway for them to potentially pursue
and lead this field. This activity is cofunded by the NSF International Science
and Engineering Section.