* 1441754
* SaTC: STARSS: Trojan Detection and Diagnosis in Mixed-Signal Systems Using On-The-Fly Learned, Precomputed and Side Channel Tests
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 160,000.00

The use of outsourcing in silicon manufacturing has rendered hardware
susceptible to malicious bugs, called Trojans, that can cause an Integrated
Circuit (IC) to fail in the field, similar to the way viruses manifest
themselves in software. While there has been significant inroads into Trojan
detection and diagnosis in the recent past, high-resolution Trojan detection has
been hampered by the increased variability in silicon manufacturing processes,
allowing Trojans to hide behind the design guardbands necessitated by process
variability effects. The key objective of this research is to develop
techniques, algorithms and support infrastructure for detecting, diagnosing and
mitigating the effects of Trojans in a variety of circuits that can cause system
malfunction after deployment in the field, in the presence of process
variability effects.

The underlying Trojan detection techniques for both mixed-signal and digital
circuits use test stimulus optimization algorithms that maximize the
sensitivities of the tests applied to the presence of malicious hardware
Trojans. Such algorithms are supported by hardware for delivering the tests to
vulnerable hardware designs in the field. Since the nature of bugs inserted
maliciously into chip designs is not known apriori, the investigators use on-
the-fly learning algorithms to refine the applied tests to expose the effects of
inserted Trojans. In addition, precomputed and side-channel tests are applied to
increase overall test effectiveness by up to 30X over existing methods. These
techniques will enable significantly increased security of US industrial and
government intellectual property and prevent tampering of US chip designs by
external third parties.