* 1441467
* IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Rafe Mazzeo, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2020
* USD 4,446,346.00

The IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute (PCMI) is a three-week summer school in
the mathematical sciences, held each July in Park City, Utah. Its primary goal
is to promote the development of mathematics students, teachers and researchers
through concurrent overlapping programs of undergraduate and graduate study,
teacher development, and mathematical research activities. This award supports
five components of PCMI. Three of these components are the Research Program, the
Graduate Summer School and the Undergraduate Summer School, that are organized
around a single area of contemporary mathematical research. The Research Program
and Graduate Summer School are led by world-renowned mathematicians. Lecturers
in the graduate and undergraduate programs are world leaders in their
specialties. All are chosen for their expository abilities. A fourth component,
the Undergraduate Faculty Program, considers that year's mathematical research
topic in light of undergraduate education. It is lead by a specialist who is an
excellent teacher at the undergraduate level. PCMI contributes to the
development of under-represented minorities in the STEM disciplines through the
fifth funded component, a one-week Workshop for Mentors of Undergraduate
Research by Minority Students. Workshop participants develop research projects
suitable for use in undergraduate research programs. Workshop participants go on
to lead undergraduate research programs for under-represented minorities after
attending PCMI. One key goal is to build a pipeline of minority students who are
prepared to participate in PCMI's undergraduate and graduate summer schools. The
dissemination of PCMI activities to the wider mathematical community of graduate
students and researchers is accomplished through its publication program.
Polished versions of the lectures from each year's Graduate Summer School
constitute a volume published by the American Mathematical Society (AMS). Quite
often, one of the undergraduate lecture series, or the Undergraduate Faculty
program leads to an innovative undergraduate text, also published by the AMS.
PCMI is also now embarking on a series of volumes incorporating material
developed in its program for secondary school teachers.

The research themes for PCMI vary from year to year. Each theme is chosen to
reflect current trends of high importance in the mathematical community and is
based on the identification of organizers who take seriously the synergistic
nature of PCMI. The research themes for the first three programs that will be
funded by this award and their organizers are as follows:

2015: Geometry of Moduli Spaces and Representation Theory; Roman Bezrukavnikov,
Alexander Braverman, and Zhiwei Yun

2016: The Mathematics of Data; Anna Gilbert and Michael Mahoney

2017: Random Matrices; Alexei Borodin, Alice Guionnet, and Ivan Corwin.