* 1441894
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Family Resilience And Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Kent Johnson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 26,966.00

Kent Johnson, Ph.D. candidate at Arizona State University, under the direction
of Dr. Jane Buikstra and Dr. Chris Stojanowski, will investigate the effects of
transformative sociopolitical processes on families. This research will benefit
society by providing temporal depth to understanding of how human families have
been constructed and the ways that family relationships respond to, shape and in
turn are affected by larger social institutions. This project will generate new
anthropological knowledge about families' responses to state collapse and
contribute to current discussions about the nature and structure of families by
exploring what constitutes relatedness in non-Western context. This research
will enhance understanding of kinship in the past and present by investigating
how kin-based social networks influence individual lives and community
histories. This new information has implications for understanding the decline
of complex polities worldwide. The project will advance discovery and
understanding by producing educational brochures that describe the studies
findings and promote the museums that provide access to research collections.
The project will enhance the infrastructure for research and education by
fostering dialogue and collaboration among the institutions to be visited and
the researchers' home institution. Study results will be disseminated to
scholars interested in family, kinship, and Andean archaeology through
professional publications, public presentations, and the online digital archive
for archaeological data, the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioarchaeological investigations of kinship have typically
focused on improving methods for identifying biological kin in archaeological
contexts and thus generate relatively narrow inferences. Rather than simply
identifying kin groups within the archaeological record, this study will explore
the diverse ways that families are constructed and how they influence individual
and small group responses to political turmoil and economic collapse. Drawing on
recent developments in kinship research in contemporary societies and
bioarchaeological studies of social groups, this project will examine evidence
from human skeletal remains and their associated burial contexts to evaluate
three important aspects of kin-based social organization following political
decentralization: (1) the degree to which criteria for kin group membership is
redefined or adapted; (2) the extent to which family ties are strengthened or
weakened by political decline and economic destabilization; and (3) the role of
family-based responses to political and economic upheaval in shaping broad
changes in social organization. To investigate the effects of political decline
on family, the researchers will collect and analyze data on patterns of mate
exchange, cranial modification practices, and mortuary rituals of Middle Horizon
(ca. AD 500-1100) and Late Intermediate Period (ca. AD 1100-1450) Tiwanaku and
Chiribaya communities of the lower Osmore Drainage in southern Peru. Skeletal
and dental markers of genetic relatedness will be combined with evidence of
cranial modification practices and funerary rituals to investigate the role
families played in shaping responses to political decentralization and the
collapse of long-distance exchange networks.