* 1441736
* SaTC: STARSS: Combatting Integrated Circuit Counterfeiting Using Secure Chip Odometers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Kenneth Mai, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Electronics counterfeiting is a significant and growing problem for electronics
manufacturers, system integrators, and end customers, with an estimated annual
economic impact in billions of dollars. These counterfeit Integrated Circuits
(ICs) can have degraded reliability, smaller operating ranges, or lower
performance compared to the genuine article. This project combats IC
counterfeiting, by designing and implementing secure chip odometers to provide
ICs with both a secure gauge of use and age and an authentication of provenance
to allow system integrators to easily discern genuine parts from counterfeit
ones. These techniques will provide ICs with functionality analogous to a car's
odometer and vehicle identification number (VIN) which can securely measures its
mileage and the VIN uniquely identifies its make, model, date of manufacture,
and options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the IC aging phenomenon
to determine the most accurate, variation-tolerant time measurement, and the
most efficient with respect to very large scale integration. The investigators
study attacks that are possible against IC odometers, and determines the best
method of securing IC odometers against each attack. The project develops
fabricated IC odometer testchip prototypes, which will provide proof-of-concept
designs and experimentally measured data to back theoretical analysis and
models.