* 1441446
* EAGER: A Relational Model for Understanding the Use of Research in the Policy Process
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Kelly Joyce, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2017
* USD 94,163.00

SES-1441446 Roberta Spalter-Roth Kelly Joyce George Mason University

The National Science Foundation supports research on a range of policy-relevant
topics. For example, its social science research portfolio includes projects on
education and learning, immigrations, demography, terrorism, the environment,
disasters, crime and criminal justice, marriage and family, social welfare,
employment and occupations, the military, health and behavior, and issues
associated with cities and urban areas (e.g., homelessness, poverty, and urban
and economic development). These studies have the potential to inform domestic
and international policy, public debates and practice and some do, but in
indirect and non-transparent ways. The PIs plans to further conceptualize and
test a new approach, a conceptual model that better captures how social science
research is brought into the policy process and practice. The project is
transformative in that it does not assume an "idealized," but simplistic, causal
model that takes for granted that policymakers will read research in scholarly
journals and adopt their methods and findings to craft new policy. Rather than a
linear model that starts with the research and ends with new public policy, the
researchers propose a relational model based on relationships, strategies,
activities, networks, and processes that result in the use of social science
research for policy purposes at a variety of policy locations. To test and
refine this relational conceptual model, the PIs will convene an
interdisciplinary group of social scientists who will provide case studies of
both successful (and not so successful) social science researchers whose work
has found its way (or not) into the policy process. The case studies will be
used to produce a refined model of successful pathways in which social science
research can and does inform public policy.

Broader Impact

The project is potentially transformative because rather than examine an
"idealized" casual model of the impact of research on policy, the project uses
cases studies of researchers' experiences to inform an interactive model of
human relationships, networks, and social processes that result in the use or
the failure to use social science research in a variety of policy situations.
The widespread dissemination of a findings has the potential to increase the
number of social scientists who are more attuned to considering (1) about their
research and findings beyond the academic research community; and (2) in more
specific terms how social science research findings can inform public policy and
practice.