* 1441263
* RIPS Type 1: The Interdependence of Built, Social and Information Infrastructures for Community Resilience: A Participatory Process
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Leysia Palen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,219.00

This project supports foundational research that explores and creates
collaborative processes to foster community resilience. Current approaches that
characterize resilience are engineering-based and predict possible
infrastructure damage in the face of acute and/or chronic stressors. When
resilience is more broadly reframed as the interdependence between the built,
social, and information infrastructures, engineering and statistical models of
infrastructure damage benefit from an adaptive and participatory approach that
is effective, inclusive, and fair. It is hypothesized that participatory
processes of model-building lead to community ownership, social learning, and
capacity building, all of which contribute to resilience. Within the one-year
time frame of this study, a framework is developed using the case study of 2013
flooding events in Boulder, Colorado. The Boulder case is used to explore and
test the modeling and participatory processes, to generate a new understanding
that can be transferred to other communities. The project provides a platform
for team-building and formalized collaboration of cross-disciplinary expertise,
while training a cohort of scholars, students and practitioners, who can bridge
across disciplines and between research and practice to create usable science
and models to foster resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops the
conceptual framework and methodological approaches to marry physical and
participatory processes for designing, modeling, and evaluating resilient
communities. The study explores and test innovative, inclusive, and adaptive
processes through which community stakeholders engage in and contribute to model
development. At the same time, advanced predictive engineering-based models of
interdependent built infrastructures are developed and piloted by the team. In-
situ and participatory empirical research and design, combined with new forms of
digital participation, generate a new understanding of inclusive development and
delivery of predictive models. The novel integration of physically-grounded
model development with participatory action research that engages stakeholders
helps the development of predictive models of interdependent infrastructures in
a larger, more realistic, and inclusive context.