* 1441896
* Laboratory Studies of Oxygen Atom Recombination in Nitrogen at Mesospheric Temperatures
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Konstantinos Kalogerakis, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2018
* USD 397,876.00

This award supports laboratory experiments to study the kinetics of the process
of oxygen atom recombination in a molecular nitrogen environment and the
pathways that lead to excited states of molecular oxygen (O2) at temperatures
relevant to the Earth's mesosphere. The project will supply basic physical
measurements needed to interpret and model important processes in the upper
atmosphere, such as O2 airglow and atmospheric dynamics. In addition to
observational and theoretical studies of Aeronomy, this work could benefit
research on planetary atmospheres. The project will contribute to the training
and research experience of one or more postdoctoral fellows and undergraduate
students. The role of collisional relaxation, the temperature-dependent
recombination rate coefficient, the dominant energy flow pathways, and the
resulting O2 excited state yields will be studied. These measurements are needed
for a quantitative understanding and reliable modeling of the atmosphere and its
airglow emissions. Knowledge of the details relevant to the production of
excited O2 is critical input for the study and modeling of atmospheric
composition, energy transfer, airglow, and transport dynamics. The experimental
methodology involves the photoinitiation of O-atom recombination in a suitable
bath gas by an ultraviolet radiation pulse from an excimer laser. Fluorescence
and resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) techniques are used to
monitor the decay of the O-atom population and detect excited O2 molecules, thus
providing insight into the relevant removal rate coefficients, energy flow
pathways, and yields of the excited O2 states produced following recombination.