* 1441380
* Gordon Research Conference on Photonuclear Reactions and Frontiers and Careers in Photonuclear Physics in Holderness, NH, August 10-15, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ronald Gilman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 06/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides partial support of the 2014 Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
on Photonuclear Reactions, which will be held at the Holderness School in
Holderness, NH from August 10 - 15, 2014. The Gordon Conference serves as a
forum for the presentation of the newest ideas and results in the field, and
plays an important role in driving forward theoretical and experimental work on
electromagnetic reactions in nuclear physics. Ronald Gilman of Rutgers
University, the PI of this proposal, is chair of the meeting. The money will be
used to support domestic travel costs and registration fees of junior
scientists. The award will also support an associated conference "Frontiers and
Careers in Photonuclear Reactions," during the two days immediately prior to the
GRC. This Frontiers meeting is organized by and for junior scientists and is
meant to provide an introduction to the topics that will be discussed at the
GRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of this award is in the
training of junior scientists. The participation of junior scientists is a focus
of the Gordon Research Conferences organization, with the intent of having the
junior scientists interact extensively and develop a network of scientific
collaborators, while also developing the breadth and depth of their physics
knowledge, leading to greater career achievements. The Gordon Photonuclear
Reactions Conferences have been notable for the large attendance of junior
scientists. For the 2012 Conference, 30% of attendees were graduate students,
and 14% were postdocs. It is very noteworthy that 27% of attendees were women,
far in excess of the percentage of women in the field.