* 1441080
* Expanding Pathways into Computer Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Diana Koch, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 563,533.00

Developing computer science teachers that can support high school students in
being successful in rigorous, academic computer science courses is a national
need, particularly in rural communities. The STEM-C (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics, including Computing) Partnerships program supports
research-driven partnerships between STEM experts and K-12 school systems to
bring about institutional change for better STEM education at the K-12 level.
Building on a prior partnership, this STEM-C Partnership's Computer Science
Education Expansion project will permanently increase and enhance computer
science learning opportunities for 9th and 10th grade students in the Rapid
City, South Dakota, area. Over a three-year period, this Partnership will
support twenty-four current teachers in offering the Exploring Computer Science
(ECS) course. This Partnership is led by two core Partners, the Black Hills
State University and the Rapid City Area Schools, which serve the most pre-
service teachers and the most off-reservation Native American K-12 students in
South Dakota, respectively. Additional Partners include most of the districts in
the Rapid City region, the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology,
Technology and Innovation in Education, and the Sanford Underground Research
Facility, a major scientific research lab in the region.

In addition to establishing the Exploring Computer Science Course at Rapid City
Area Schools and neighboring school districts, this Partnership will build
strong capacity within K-12 teachers to implement the course well. It will also
build linkages among teacher training institutions, local science facilities,
K-12 districts, and a regional science and technology university. The project
will conduct teacher training activities both on-site and at workshops, and will
provide a variety of outreach trainings designed to encourage teachers,
administrators, and youth too young to take the ECS course to become excited
about the possibilities within computer science. In addition, the project will
contribute research findings to the field of computer science education about
the teaching and learning of computer science at the high school level. The
educational research agenda will address the extent to and ways in which
participation in the ECS course influences students' attitudes and beliefs about
the nature of computer science, its importance, and its relevance to their
lives; and their content knowledge of computer science and related problem-
solving skills. Research will also explore the extent to and ways in which
teacher participation in the EPCS Project increases teachers' capacity to
provide high-quality instruction. Together, the Partners build on the success of
a prior Math and Science Partnership project focused on mathematics education,
including ways of developing new instructional materials, the introduction and
development of a team of instructional coaches, training opportunities for
administrators, and family engagement. Research instruments will be developed to
measure students' attitudes and beliefs about the nature of computer science,
its importance, and relevance to daily life. These instruments, plus the Horizon
Classroom Observation Protocol, will be used to evaluate the impact of the
computer science courses and associated outreach on teachers and learners in a
mixed methods study.