* 1441291
* EXP: Collaborative Research: PerSketchTivity- Empowering and Inspiring Creative, Competent, Communicative, and Effective Engineers through Perspective Sketching
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wayne Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2018
* USD 179,999.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by building examples and studying their possibilities for fostering
learning as well as challenges to using them well. This project examines whether
technology can support learning to freehand sketch. Sketching has been
demonstrated to play an important role in a number of domains, including
engineering, and the ability to quickly sketch has been shown to improve
creativity by making it easier for engineers to generate ideas and communicate
them. This project will modify artificial intelligence tools that support
recognizing sketches to directly help teach undergraduate engineers how to
sketch well. Research studies will examine whether the tool helps students learn
sketching skills, and importantly how it influences their spatial reasoning
ability. Thus, if successful this research will not only create tools to allow
people to learn to sketch better, but also will advance our understanding of how
spatial reasoning and sketching are linked, and could eventually lead to more
effective engineering education.

The project proposes two interconnected strands of work: developing the software
tool and conducting research studies in the context of undergraduate engineering
courses. The software tool will use a heterogenous set of classifiers to help
provide feedback to learners as they perform a sequence of sketching exercises
on tablets. The design process will iterate on the tool to explore what types of
feedback are most helpful and how different classifiers can be used to detect
different levels of sketching skill. The program of research will include
studying whether sketching training leads to advances in spatial reasoning
skills, whether it affects design self-efficacy and attitudes towards sketching,
transfer of spatial skillsets to design activities in other courses, and how
sketching skills correlate to success on spatial reasoning tasks. In addition,
through iterative development including user-centered design processes, design
principles for sketching based tools will be derived. Data sources will include
both qualitative and quantitative data such as pre- and post-test spatial
reasoning tasks, structured interviews, surveys, and artifact analysis.
Additionally, students (N=approximately 30-40) using the new tool in class will
be compared to control cohorts of approximately 30 students who either use
traditional engineering curricula (little free-hand sketching and some isometric
drawing) and a sketching curriculum without the AI tool.