* 1441642
* International Workshop: Estimation of Time or Cycles to Failure of Aging Components and Systems; Changwon, Korea; June 14-17, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Victor Giurgiutiu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 02/28/2015
* USD 14,923.00

The management of aging infrastructure such as bridges, dams, aircraft, nuclear
reactors, oil and gas pipelines, and other complex systems has come into
question. Hurricane Katrina; the Interstate 35 bridge collapse in Minneapolis,
Minnesota and the Mianus River Bridge collapse in Connecticut; and the disaster
at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant serve as recent notable examples.
Due to the status of South Korea as an emerging international leader in advanced
technology and manufacturing, an international workshop will be held in Changwon
with a follow on visit to the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology. International researchers from Germany, India, South Korea, France,
the United Kingdom, the People's Republic of China, and the United States of
America will exchange ideas for improved approaches related to the management of
aging and high risk complex systems. Improved management of such systems will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. A bound volume will summarize the workshop
and provide recommendations for the future.

In the post-Fukushima era, engineers are faced with increasing responsibility to
come up with new and more effective tools for test data collection and mining,
microstructural imaging, damage diagnostics, life-to-failure modeling, and cost-
benefit risk-balanced analysis for time-critical decision-making to ensure the
safety of the public. This workshop will address the knowledge gaps in the
physics based prediction of service life and the benefits to be offered by
rapidly evolving nondestructive evaluation and structural monitoring systems. A
focus of the workshop is on fatigue behavior and estimation of time or cycles to
failure, including a new generation of fatigue resistant materials.
Contributions will be on a fundamental level with high priority assigned to
revolutionary experimental and simulation approaches to support the materials
genome initiative.