* 1441478
* CBMS2015: A Study of Undergraduate Programs in the Mathematical and Statistical Sciences in the United States and the Publication of the Results
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2019
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 06/30/2019
* USD 518,574.00

The project, CBMS2015, will be coordinated by the Conference Board for the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) and will be managed by the American Mathematical
Society (AMS). CBMS2015, will be a comprehensive survey of the nation's
undergraduate mathematical and statistical sciences programs at two-year and
four-year institutions scheduled to commence in the fall of 2015. This project
will continue a cross-sectional survey of undergraduate mathematics programs
that has been done every five years since 1965. CBMS surveys track changes in
the curriculum, pedagogy, enrollment levels by individual courses, bachelor's
degrees granted, and program faculty in US undergraduate mathematical sciences
programs. CBMS2015 will provide current national benchmark data that the
Nation's mathematical sciences department chairs called for in the 1999 AMS
publication "Towards Excellence: Leading a Mathematics Department in the 21st
Century". A comprehensive report describing the findings of this survey will be
distributed in the spring of 2017 to science policy leaders at the national
level and to all mathematics programs in the US and will also be freely
available in print and online. The findings of the survey will be promoted to
the mathematical sciences community at relevant professional meetings and in
appropriate publications. Improving the Nation's undergraduate STEM efforts
depends on improving undergraduate mathematics and statistics, and planning
future reforms begins by knowing the present. The survey report will provide
data on crucial issues within the mathematics community, catalyzing other
educational research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The statistical design of the
stratified random sample survey and associated statistical analysis will be
conducted by statisticians at Westat, Inc. in consultation with a steering
committee appointed by CBMS. The final report will be written by the project's
senior personnel and published by the American Mathematical Society. The
survey's evolving structure will contribute to educational survey research
methodology. In addition, CBMS2015 will focus on a selection of topics of
importance to leaders of various organizations concerned with undergraduate
education in the mathematical sciences. The topics include, but are not limited
to: (1) evidence-based teaching practices; (2) practices in distance-learning
courses; (3) instructional strategies in College Algebra, Calculus I, and
Elementary Statistics; (4) instructional strategies and delivery methods in
developmental mathematics; (5) assessment of mathematics and statistics
programs; (5) data on gender and under-represented groups; (6) research and
internship opportunities in the mathematical sciences for undergraduate
students; and (6) other full-time faculty (faculty at four-year departments that
are full-time, but not eligible for tenure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded jointly by the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education, and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, Division of Mathematical Sciences.