* 1441457
* NanoEHS: A Workshop Focused on Fundamental Science Needs, November 1, 2014, Boston, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Vicki Grassian, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2016
* USD 49,999.00

CBET - 1441457&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to conduct a workshop to examine
fundamental science needs in NanoEHS. Research in this topic has reached a
plateau of understanding by using fundamental testing methods. New approaches to
deeper scientific questions are needed. The workshop will identify new questions
in order to bring a better understanding of the interactions of nanomaterials
with living systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the workshop are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. Engage a broad range of participants to focus on the theme
of the workshop topic NanoEHS: Fundamental Science Needs&lt;br/&gt;2. Identify
areas where fundamental studies are needed to better understand
NanoEHS.&lt;br/&gt;3. Identify challenges and opportunities in understanding
NanoEHS: Fundamental Science Needs, i.e. identify problems, techniques and
methods including, but not limited to, the role of computation and theory, size-
dependent behavior for very small particles such as quantum size effects, and
surface structure.&lt;br/&gt;4. Articulate the importance of fundamental physics
and chemistry within interdisciplinary approaches to NanoEHS: Fundamental
Science Needs and identify opportunities for collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;5. Prepare
a manuscript to a journal that summarizes and highlights the workshop discussion
and findings.&lt;br/&gt;6. Disseminate workshop findings further in a symposium
at an upcoming Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization (SNO) Meeting or some
other appropriate meeting venue.