* 1441641
* Cincinnati Symposium on Probability Theory and Applications 2014, September 19-21, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Magda Peligrad, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,000.00

The Cincinnati Symposium on Probability Theory and Applications 2014 will take
place September 19 to 21, 2014 at the University of Cincinnati with a focus on
current research in limit theorems for dependent structures. Dependent
structures are ubiquitous in physical applications, yet present many
mathematical challenges. Several important breakthroughs have been made in
recent years by combining ideas from two or more of the Symposium focus areas.
The Symposium will provide a platform to showcase recent developments and
stimulate new cross-disciplinary investigations and collaborations. In order to
stimulate new ideas and assist with the professional development of young
probabilists, the Symposium will emphasize the participation of graduate
students and recent PhD recipients. Besides invited talks by senior researchers,
there will be ample opportunities for young investigators to present their
research in shorter talks and at a poster forum. By providing travel support,
especially to junior probabilists, this award will facilitate interactions and
potential collaborations between junior and more established researchers, and
encourage the infusion of new ideas across probability and related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, significant progress has been made in
understanding how classical limit theorems persist or break down when the
assumption of weak dependence is not valid. At the same time, models with
complex dependence structures, notably arising from random matrix theory and
mathematical physics, present new challenges to probabilists. The Symposium will
bring together experts and junior researchers working on &lt;br/&gt;1) almost
sure limit theorems via martingale approximations, &lt;br/&gt;2) long-range
dependence phenomena and infinite ergodic theory, and &lt;br/&gt;3) spectra of
large-dimensional random matrices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symposium
website: http://math.uc.edu/probability