* 1441057
* BPEC: Broadening Participation in Computing through a Community Approach to Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Nichole Pinkard, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2017
* USD 718,009.00

DePaul University will explore how to engage underrepresented youth in
computational thinking activities both in and out of school. The project staff
will explore how youth from different backgrounds engage in a citywide
initiative called Chicago City of Learning (CCoL). CCoL provides STEM learning
experiences both online and face-to-face with over 130 organizations. This
project seeks to understand what types of factors are most likely to engage
youth in computer science online learning opportunities. The project staff hope
to discern how to string together computer science learning opportunities that
lead to all youth developing the interest, knowledge and skills to take computer
science courses in high school and pursue careers in college.

DePaul University will implement a design-based research agenda to design,
implement and study the CCoL initiative. CCoL is designed to make visible to
students and parents a network of organization-led and self-paced learning
opportunities for youth. Students who participate in CCoL earn digital badges
that visually represent their learning, achievement, and skill development from
both face-to-face and self-paced learning opportunities. This project will
develop 1) a set of self-paced, online learning activities that can then be
shared and iterated upon by the larger community, 2) design principles around
how to issue digital badges to support community engagement for underrepresented
youth, 3) an anonymized dataset of the learning journeys of Chicago's youths
through a shared set of computation face-to-face learning activities that can be
analyze for patterns across gender, race, age, and geographic location and
learning outcomes (e.g. specific badges earned), and 4) the scaling of the City
of Learning initiative to other cities.