* 1441614
* 2014 Graduate Climate Conference; Eatonville, Washington; October 31-November 2, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2014,09/30/2015
* LuAnne Thompson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides support to the 8th annual Graduate Climate Conference, to be
held at the University of Washington's Pack Forest Conference Center, Octoberst
31 to November 2nd 2014. The goal of the GCC is to provide a discussion forum
for graduate students undertaking research on climate processes over an array of
disciplines, including atmospheric, biological, earth, and ocean sciences, as
well as human dimensions of climate variability and climate change. This is a
unique setting, bringing together graduate students in a environment organized
exclusively by graduate students to discuss current research in climate science.
The collegial, single-session format is designed to expose graduate students
studying a single aspect of the climate system to the research that other
graduates are doing in all aspects of the climate system. This opportunity
allows graduate students to familiarize themselves with the breadth of climate
science as well as the enormous range of tools available to help answer complex
questions. Through this interdisciplinary conference, we aim to better prepare
graduate students for scientific inquiry in a world that increasingly demands
interdisciplinary approaches. Approximately 90 graduate students selected
through a competitive process will attend the GCC. NSF funds will be used to
provide travel and subsistence for 40 students from US institutions.