* 1441479
* DIP: Connecting Idea Threads across Communities for Sustained Knowledge Building
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Mei-Hwa Chen, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,342,537.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help in envisioning the next generation of learning technologies and
advancing what we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments.
Development and Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work
that showed the possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology,
and project teams build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed
innovation that allows them to understand how such technology should be designed
and used in the future and to answer questions about how people learn with
technology. An important issue in education is encouraging learners to engage in
sustained inquiry around important content and helping them to continually
refine their understandings. Technology already exists to help communities of
learners (e.g., those in a class) keep track of the ideas they are generating
and refining. The innovation in this project will help groups of learners make
two kinds of connections: (i) between the different discussions they are having
across topical areas and (ii) between the ideas they are discussing and those
that groups in other classes are discussing. The project team's earlier
Cyberlearning Exploration (EXP) project showed that such connections gives rise
to curiosity and new learning goals as well as deeper understanding. It is
expected that technology that makes these connections easier to identify will
also make it easier for students to refer back to what they learned in previous
years' classes and to refine their earlier understandings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge building is the collaborative refinement of
ideas by a community. The goal in knowledge building is to engage learners in
sustained inquiry and progressive discourse through which ideas are continually
developed and refined, giving rise to higher-level learning goals. The aim in
this project is to design and build support for knowledge building across
communities and across time, connecting communities into a shared field in which
shared bases of knowledge co-advance with each other and across communities
(e.g., across classes addressing similar issues; across years of school).
Students kick off their inquiry by importing productive idea threads from other
classrooms as inquiry starters, then co-review with others, access others' ideas
as they move forward, and engage in live interactions with partnering
communities. The knowledge building platform being developed for use across
communities is called CITY (Connecting Idea Threads or Youth). Automated
analysis developed during the previous Cyberlearning EXP project helps groups
within a single class visualize their idea threads and thread idea threads with
each other. The automated process is being extended with language processing
algorithms that can identify conversations in other communities that have
potential to be useful in extending a group's understanding. The project team,
which includes experts in collaborative learning, computational linguistics, and
self-regulation, is aiming to learn how to make the technology work across
communities, to understand how to use such technology to sustain engagement with
and refinement of ideas, and the qualities the surrounding socio-technical
system needs to have for such sustained and distributed knowledge building to
happen.