* 1441352
* Collaborative Research:RIPS Type 2: Resilience Simulation for Water, Power &amp; Road Networks
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,949,788.00

The project will construct a new computer-based Resilient Infrastructure
Simulation Environment (RISE) to allow individuals, groups (including students),
and experts to test infrastructure network design configurations and crisis
response approaches in three socio-technical infrastructure systems: electric
power, water, and roadway networks. Researchers will link social and technical
analysis with human subject research to discover the adaptive actions, ideas,
and decisions that contribute to resilience. The project comprises of two major
parts. In Part I (Modeling), researchers will identify the structure, dynamics
(functionalities), and vulnerabilities of the networks that make up water,
roadway, and electric power systems in Phoenix, AZ and Indianapolis, IN.
Researchers will analyze the resulting US-based network models in conjunction
with those from international partners in Asia, Australia, and Europe to learn
and adapt global resilience principles . The results will be combined with
belief networks to develop realistic decision models for the RISE. In Part II
(Simulation), researchers will construct the RISE to study how different
experts, stakeholders, individuals, and groups act in simulated decision
scenarios. Through observation, researchers will identify the problem-solving
and response strategies that result in resilient action, and thus understandthe
organizational and social processes of sensing, anticipating, adapting, and
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, this project will result in two
principal research outcomes: 1) a measureable, testable description of
resilience that fuses social, behavioral, and engineered elements for
infrastructure system design, and 2) improved resilience among the students,
managers, stakeholders and other participants participating in the study. The
new knowledge will help policymakers design effective strategies to make
America's water, power, and road networks more resilient.