* 1441561
* DIP: Collaborative Research: STEM Literacy through Infographics
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Joseph Polman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2018
* USD 881,559.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advancing what we
know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that showed the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and project teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and answer questions about how people learn with technology. An important
issue in education is helping youth make sense of the scientific, technological,
socio-scientific, and health data that is available. Technology exists for
creating infographics to help others understand what data has to say, and this
team's Cyberlearning Exploration (EXP) Project showed that engaging high
schoolers in infographic-based data journalism has potential to pique their
interest in science and data analysis and to improve their scientific and
mathematical literacy. In this follow-on project, the project team, which
includes experts in educational technology, mathematics education, and learning,
is extending, refining, and evaluating different ways of using technologies for
infographic design to foster STEM engagement and learning. The end result will
be a set of social practices and technology tools to support learning through
data journalism, increased understanding of how to foster STEM literacy, a set
of professional development materials and infrastructure for helping teachers
and after-school facilitators learn to implement data journalism, and a set of
guidelines for data providers about how to make their scientific data usable by
teachers and youth and how to structure it to support youth's developing data
and science literacy skills. This work contributes to the emerging field of data
science education -- fostering learners' ability to analyze and make sense of
scientific, technological, and socio-scientific data and use it to solve
problems of scientific, individual, and community importance.

In their Cyberlearning EXP project, this project team showed the viability and
promise of using infographic-based data journalism as a way to support
engagement of young adults (high-school students) in STEM and improve their
scientific and mathematical literacy. In this follow-on project, they are
refining their approach and implementing the proposed socio-technical system in
a variety of different educational venues, some formal and some informal, and
including, over the set of venues, learners with a wide variety of different
capabilities and interests and from a wide variety of backgrounds and cultures,
teachers and facilitators with a wide variety of skills, allowing exploration of
issues across a variety of populations. The innovation is the socio-technical
system and tools for learning STEM content through infographic design. Tools and
practices are being designed to provide a meaningful and supportive context in
which youth can contextualize STEM in their own lives and the lives of others,
navigate the deluge of scientific data that is available, and learn through
authentic communication of their understandings. Research and development are
highly connected, and research focuses on how to arrange social processes and
tools to enable youth to move from personal interests to topics they can
research and make sense of, the barriers that m ay be encountered in moving from
personal interests to scientific pursuits and how to overcome those barriers,
and how to support youth so that they come to recognize connections between
their own lives and the world around them and the world of science. The effort
also contributes to the emerging field of data science education and will
extract insights about how to foster such learning, provide guidelines to data
providers about how to design data portals for the public, and suggest design
guidelines for data science tools.