* 1441423
* Carbides, Nitrides and Related Materials in Earth, Planetary, and Materials Science
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Alexandra Navrotsky, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Carbon, carbides, and nitrides are among the earliest crystalline phases in the
solar nebula. There is increasing interest in carbides and nitrides as minor
accessories in the Earth's mantle as retainers of refractory elements and as
participants in the global carbon and nitrogen cycles. At the same time,
amorphous materials containing Si, C, O, N and other elements (e.g. polymer
derived ceramics) are a promising new class of materials with possible
applications from spark plugs to batteries. A workshop on carbides, nitrides and
related materials in geological, planetary, and materials science, and solid
state chemistry could catalyze research in this field and establish the links
between these communities, bundled by their growing interest in these materials.

Until now, in spite of their importance, the diverse communities who work on
these materials have not communicated well with each other, especially across
the materials science-geoscience frontier. This team hopes to bring these
diverse communities together to promote longer-term collaboration and to
determine directions for future research. The workshop will give students and
postdocs a first-hand experience of nascent frontier research across borders of
disciplines. A short term outcome might be a scientific review in a broad
journal such as Science or Nature, summarizing exciting new commonalities,
findings and opportunities. A longer term outcome will be joint research and a
cadre of young people conversant in basic concepts of both materials science and
geoscience. Such crossover is needed to address broader problems of energy,
sustainability, critical resources, and climate change. Impact on new
technological materials could be substantial.