* 1441515
* 2014 Gordon Research Conf.on Nanostructure Fabrication:Nanostructures in Information Tech. Energy Conversion,&amp; Nanoelectromechanical Systems   Biddeford,Maine,July 13-18,2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Charles Black, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2015
* USD 9,650.00

This award will support participation of graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows in the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Nanostructure Fabrication,
which will be held in Biddeford, Maine, on July 13-18, 2014 on the campus of the
University of New England. The conference will bring together leading scientists
and engineers from around the world for discussions on the role of
nanofabrication in a wide and increasing number of scientific and technological
disciplines. The conference will promote international collaboration across a
broad, interdisciplinary scientific community, actively seeking speakers and
participants from underrepresented groups and from geographic regions around the
entire world. This format provides an ideal environment for younger scientists
to establish and grow their professional network, develop their presentation
skills by presenting their work to engage audiences at the poster sessions,
receive mentoring from their more established peers, and gain a broader
perspective on their discipline. Fostering graduate student participation and
encouraging future scientific leadership are vital for the future of the field
of nanofabrication. This award provides funds specifically to facilitate
graduate student/postdoc attendance and participation at this
GRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanofabrication has been integral to advances in all
areas of Nanoscale Science and Technology. This GRC program will be comprised of
invited oral presentations by international young and established researchers
employing innovative and world-class nanofabrication in pursuit of their
scientific programs. The weeklong GRC will give participants an excellent
overview of the diversity with which nanofabrication drives scientific discovery
and technology development. The meeting will include eight topical sessions,
four poster sessions, and one session composed of short presentations of
selected contributed posters. The meeting will be focused on advanced
lithography options, including their role in design of new materials; chemical
and bio-inspired methods for assembly of complex nanostructured materials;
nanomagnetics; polymer self-assembly and its application in semiconductor
electronics; high density magnetic storage; nanoelectromechanical systems; roles
for nanostructures in optoelectronic devices and materials; advanced
semiconductor electronic devices; and advances in devices for solid-state
quantum computation. Four poster sessions will run in the afternoons and
evenings during the entire weeklong meeting.