* 1441422
* New Perspectives on Neuroengineering and Neurotechnologies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Eric Chudler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 60,676.00

a technical description &lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a joint NSF-DFG workshop
titled "New Perspectives on Neuroengineering and Neurotechnologies" to foster
research collaborations with other researchers around the world. The NSF ERC
Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering (CSNE) was established at the
University of Washington in 2011, with the mission to forge both physical and
conceptual connections between neural systems and devices to develop integrated
systems that may help people with neurological and mobility deficits such as
stroke, traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy, paralysis,
and limb loss. The CSNE seeks to connect a mathematical understanding of how
biological systems acquire and process information with the design of effective
devices that interact seamlessly with humans. These devices take input from
implantable, wearable or interactive interfaces to build integrated systems that
provide sensorimotor solutions for the disabled and elderly population. The CSNE
research builds on expertise in computational neuroscience, brain-computer
interface, robotics, control theory, and microelectronics/wireless technology.
The confluence of neuroscience and engineering presents a unique set of
challenges to address. To contribute to the advancement of this
interdisciplinary field, the CSNE has partnered with the German Research
Foundation Cluster of Excellence BrainLinks-BrainTools to advance the field of
neural engineering. The CSNE and BrainLinks-BrainTools have common scientific
interests especially in the design of brain controlled interfaces and have
forged a working partnership including collaborative research projects and
student exchange programs. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the proposed project
focuses on a collaborative scientific workshop that will bring together experts
from around the world to discuss the questions, challenges and opportunities in
the field of neural engineering. The mission of the researchers involved with
the workshop is to develop innovative ways to connect a deep mathematical
understanding of how biological systems acquire and process information with the
design of effective devices that interact seamlessly with human beings. This
singular approach reverse engineers the nervous system?s sensorimotor functions
to develop engineering models that correct or compensate for neural deficits and
augment neural capabilities. Using these mathematical and structural models, it
is possible to design neural interfaces integrated with external control
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a non-technical explanation
&lt;br/&gt;Participants will gain valuable knowledge in areas of research that
have significant and growing global impact on the quality of life. Publication
of the workshop proceedings in leading scientific journals will help disseminate
the findings of workshop attendees. This effort will likely lead to new
collaborations and joint research projects that will benefit society by reducing
the emotional, physical and financial toll caused by sensorimotor disorders. The
workshop may identify key technologies according to market significance and
technical risk thereby impacting innovations over the near and long term.