* 1441068
* CS 10K: Computer Science:  Creating A Village for Educators (CS:CAVE)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Karen Flammer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,015,810.00

The University of California San Diego (UCSD) proposes a project "Computer
Science: Creating A Village for Educators (CS: CaVE)" to design, support, and
test the efficacy and sustainability of a district-based model for scaling and
providing sustained support for teacher professional development to teach the
new Advanced Placement (AP) Computer Science Principles (CSP) course. CSP
focuses on computer science principles, providing students with a foundational
understanding of the underlying logic, grammar, thinking and communication
skills, and problem-solving approaches of computational thinking. Courses and
curricula meeting the AP CSP learning objectives have been piloted at a number
of sites but a major obstacle persists: the lack of professional secondary
school educators capable of teaching CSP effectively. Using proven curriculum
and pedagogy developed through a UCSD CS Principles pilot project, CS: CaVE aims
to provide a model for building, growing and sustaining a regional community of
high school CS Principles teachers. It creates "villages" for educators, with
district- and peer-based supports for introduction of new curricular and
pedagogical content. This district-based "village" model prepares CS Principles
Master Teachers within each district and develops effective, sustainable
supports for new CS Principles teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic
educational change requires district-level support to be launched, incrementally
scaled, and sustained. For schools and teachers, districts translate curricular
change in the context of policy and administrative requirements at the local and
state level. The district-based "village" model being tested and evaluated in
this project develops district master teachers as well as local and distributed,
in-person and virtual peer support designed to persist after external funding
ends. If successful, the project will introduce and scale a new AP CS Principles
course through three major secondary school districts within San Diego County.
Equally important, it will create a university-connected, district-based
training structure for keeping the course (and related computing courses)
current as new technologies and global challenges place increasing demands on
the workforce skills and knowledge needed by high school graduates.