* 1441739
* 24th NSF EPSCoR National Conference
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Kevin Gardner, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 06/30/2017
* USD 402,678.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) holds National Conferences that bring
representatives from all EPSCoR jurisdictions together to discuss strategies to
promote EPSCoR goals of building STEM research and education capacity to
increase their national competitiveness. This biennial event is a forum for
EPSCoR project directors and participants to discuss opportunities and
challenges at the local, state, national, and international levels and how
EPSCoR efforts can collectively contribute to the advancement of science and
engineering research and education. This meeting also showcases results from
projects funded by NSF EPSCoR. The 24th National EPSCoR Conference will be held
in Portsmouth, New Hampshire from November 1-4, 2015 and is expected to have
about 300-400 attendees. This meeting is co-organized by New Hampshire and Maine
EPSCoR with a focus on building strong collaborations and effective
communications skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;The theme for the 24th National EPSCoR Conference is ?Collaboration:
Advancing the Role of Science in the Service of Society.? The conference aims to
identify effective collaboration strategies and advance the following
objectives: showcase collaborative efforts in EPSCoR jurisdictions and their
societal contributions; explore ways to build collaborations based on EPSCoR
Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII) projects? research themes; promote
collaboration across universities and K-12 schools in EPSCoR jurisdictions to
strengthen the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
workforce continuum; build capacity among faculty, staff, students and statewide
EPSCoR committees to better understand and communicate the value of research and
its broader impacts to diverse audiences. This conference will help build a
strong, collaborative EPSCoR community that contributes significantly and
competes well on the national arena in alignment with NSF EPSCoR
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference activities are aligned with the
objectives and consist of plenary and break-out sessions. A student poster
session will run through two days of the meeting and will highlight results from
the research and education facilitated by NSF EPSCoR RII awards. Unique
components that will be experimented at this meeting are: a pre-conference
workshop to discuss strategies and tools for strong collaborative efforts and
how to assess their success; communications workshops facilitated by Alan Alda
School of Science Communication at Stoney Brook University to learn about
strategies to effectively disseminate EPSCoR activities and impacts to broad
range of stakeholders; science caf√©s on topics related to the power of
collaboration; and an applied theater event on gender and racial biases in
faculty hiring process.