* 1441947
* EAGER:  Metasurface Wave Front Engineering for Detection and Sensing at THz Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Seongsin Kim, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 128,952.00

The objective of this research is to explore surfaces capable of producing
terahertz (THz) waves for novel detection and sensing applications. These
surfaces have micron scale patterns that produce changes in light beam reflected
from them. With proper design it is expected that these metasurfaces, will lead
to THz light waves. The THz portion of the electromagnetic spectrum represents a
frontier for multidisciplinary fundamental research in engineering, physics, and
materials science with enormous potential impact on imaging and sensing. The
proposed research will enhance the outreach programs that PI has built at the
University of Alabama. PI has been active in education program for under
representative minorities, veterans, and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research can potentially
lead to a new paradigm for imaging and sensing in the THz frequency region, by
enabling new classes of optics components, which can replace conventional bulky
counterparts for integrated optical devices. The proposed research will also
lead to a new class of metasurfaces and planar photonics with the ability to
operate in other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. In addition, the
proposed research will be able to disclose properties of optical orbital angular
momentum, and its direct application to the sensing and imaging that can open
whole new concepts of imaging and sensing technologies. The approach is to
investigate the role of helical waves in multiple different modes for sensing
biomolecules which have high chirality, and in imaging of complex media with
both far-field and near-field high resolution. Based on this research, the PI
will develop a new course, Metamaterials and Waves, for undergrads and
graduates.