* 1441963
* SI2-SSI: SAGEnext: Next Generation Integrated Persistent Visualization and Collaboration Services for Global Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 05/16/2014,09/30/2021
* Jason Leigh, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2021
* USD 5,204,441.00

Cyberinfrastructure runs the gamut - from computing, networks, data stores,
instruments, observatories, and sensors, to software and application codes - and
promises to enable research at unprecedented scales, complexity, resolution, and
accuracy. However, it is the research community that must make sense of all the
data being amassed, so the SAGEnext (Scalable Adaptive Graphics Environment)
framework is an innovative user-centered platform that connects people to their
data and colleagues, locally and remotely, via tiled display walls, creating a
portal, or wide-aperture "digital lens," with which to view their data and one
another. It enables Cyber-Mashups, or the ability to juxtapose and integrate
information from multiple sources in a variety of resolutions, as easily as the
Web makes access to lower-resolution images today.

SAGEnext expands on a vibrant partnership among national and international
universities, supercomputer centers, government laboratories and industry; 100
institutions worldwide use the current version of SAGE. For computational
scientists, from such diverse fields as biology, earth science, genomics, or
physics, SAGEnext will transform the way they manage the scale and complexity of
their data. For computer scientists, SAGEnext is a platform for conducting
research in human-computer interaction, cloud computing, and advanced
networking. SAGEnext capabilities, integrating visualization application codes,
cloud documents, stereo 3D, and new user-interaction paradigms, is unprecedented
and heretofore not available, and will have a transformative effect on data
exploration and collaboration, making cyberinfrastructure more accessible to end
users, in both the laboratory and in the classroom. SAGEnext, integrated with
advanced cyberinfrastructure tools, will transform the way today's scientists
and future scientists manage the scale and complexity of their data, enabling
them to more rapidly address problems of national priority - such as global
climate change or homeland security - which benefits all mankind. These same
tools can better communicate scientific concepts to public policy and government
officials, and via museum exhibitions, to the general public.