* 1441884
* Proposal to Support Organization of the 4th International Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing to be held on September 12, 2014 at Lexington, KY
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Haluk Karaca, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Proposal Number: CBET - 1441884&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Fazleena
Badurdeen&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kentucky Research
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Proposal to Support Organization
of the 4th International Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing to be held on
September 12, 2014 at Lexington, KY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 4th International
Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing, organized by the Institute for Sustainable
Manufacturing (ISM) at the University of Kentucky, will be held September 12,
2014 on the campus of the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky. This
forum will be a platform that brings together students, academic researchers and
industry professionals to discuss research and innovative industry practices
aimed at increasing product, process and system innovation for sustainable
manufacturing as well as a forum to discuss and examine challenges in these
areas. Through the incorporation of a round table discussion in this year's
Forum, attendees will have the opportunity to directly interact with some of the
leaders in the ever broadening field of sustainable manufacturing. The Forum
will provide a unique opportunity to foster close interactions and communication
between students, academic researchers and industry professionals involved in
sustainable manufacturing. It will contribute to scholarship in sustainable
products, processes, manufacturing systems and supply chains through
identification of the challenges to promoting economic, environmental and
societal sustainability in these domains across different industry sectors. The
intellectual exchange posited through this forum will inspire innovation in
research to develop viable and reliable solutions to sustainable manufacturing
issues. This forum will feature six invited speakers, eight technical talks and
a panel discussion. In addition, a poster session will be held to highlight
research achievements in sustainable manufacturing by students and young
faculty.