* 1441149
* EXP: Fostering Collaborative Drawing and Problem Solving through Digital Sketch and Touch
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Geoffrey Herman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 573,995.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project's technology innovation is a set of sketching tools
for multi-touch tablets and tables to allow collaborative sketching and sharing
between small groups and a whole class. Sketching is often a means of working
out and expressing one's understanding of how a mechanism works or how a process
develops over time. Collaborative sketching supports learners collaboratively
making sense of a mechanisms or processes. While technology exists for
collaboratively annotating sketches, support for collaboratively making sense
requires other mechanisms that are not available in current tools. Such sense
making is important in developing domain expertise across many different STEM
fields. Research goals include designing and exploring the benefits of different
sketching and sharing tools and better understanding the benefits of using
drawing and sketching for communicating and understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are designing and developing the next generation
of collaborative sketching tools, focusing on the functions those tools need to
support collaborative sketching and sharing in the context of sense-making.
There is also a focus on the introduction of such tools, i.e., the kinds of
activities that need to be embedded into classroom activities to foster joint
engagement and learning to be collaborative around sketching. The tools will
allow sketch creation, reversion to earlier versions, zooming for refinement,
selecting and changing sketch size, choosing pieces for elaborating, reference,
and combination with other parts; the tools will support part-whole
relationships of engineered products and allow both per-part and system-level
analyses, moving, and recombining. Three interaction conditions are being
trialed and their affordances for fostering learning and challenges to effective
learning compared: many users around one tablet with one input at a time, one
user per tablet working with others who also have tablets, and many users
working at a table that allows multiple inputs. Foundations for this work are in
the literatures around spatial reasoning, sketching for development of domain
expertise, representational fluency, collaborative learning, and computer
support for collaborative learning (CSCL). Important to understanding how to
best design collaborative sketching tools and the roles collaborative sketching
plays in joint meaning making is analysis of the discourse as learners are using
the tools. The team will analyze that discourse along with the sketching
behaviors of learners as they investigate how sketching tools impact learning
outcomes of group members, how they support collaborative problem solving and
sketching interactions, effects of collaborative sketching on understanding of
the potential breadth of solutions and solution paths while solving problems,
and principles for design of tools that support collaborative sketching.