* 1441827
* Fourth International IEEE Conference on Computational Advances in Bio and medical Sciences (ICCABS) - Travel Awards
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Broader Significance and Importance&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support the
travel of students and post-doctoral fellows (PDFs) to attend the 4th
International Conference on Advances in Bio and medical Sciences (ICCABS). These
students and PDFs will get to meet experts in Bioinformatics and listen to their
research results. Not only the attending students and PDFs but also their
friends will benefit since when the students and PDFs return to their schools
they will communicate their experience with their friends. The conference
proceedings will be of great use to students, researchers, and practitioners.
Portions of the proceedings could be used in different courses as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the
Project&lt;br/&gt;Computational techniques are revolutionizing the way in which
research is conducted in science and engineering. Unsurpassed advances have been
made in various areas. This is particularly true in the domains of biology,
medicine, and drug discovery. Given that these areas are of utmost importance to
the society at large, it is imperative that every effort be made to enable
research advances in them. It is not enough if advances are made in these areas
in isolation. These communities have to work together to help each other and
come up with the best possible diagnosis tools, treatment procedures, drugs for
various diseases, etc. Even though a number of conferences exist today in the
general area of bioinformatics, they focus on computational biology to a large
extent. The proposed conference has the goal of bringing together scientists in
all the three areas and hence serving as a platform for bridging the research
efforts in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in its goal of bringing together scientists in various areas of bio
and medical sciences and fostering collaborations among them.