* 1442370
* Index Theory of Hypoelliptic Fredholm Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/31/2013,12/31/2014
* Johannes van Erp, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 12/31/2014
* USD 45,059.00

This project will explore the index theory of hypoelliptic operators. The
principal investigator will apply and develop methods of noncommutative geometry
to study the index theory of hypoelliptic Fredholm operators associated to
various geometric structures (most notably contact structures and foliations).
His belief is that the results will pay off in two directions: hypoelliptic
operators provide examples of phenomena not exhibited by elliptic operators,
yielding new insights that further the development of index theory itself, and,
conversely, index formulas of hypoelliptic operators will lead to new results in
geometry. A specific aim of the project is to develop new applications of index
theory to contact geometry.

In the early 1960s the British mathematician Michael Atiyah and the American
mathematician Isodore Singer derived an important formula. The "Atiyah-Singer
index formula" established a deep connection between two central branches of
mathematics: analysis (the modern version of differential and integral calculus)
and topology/geometry (the study of higher dimensional curved space). The index
formula subsumed several important classical results and has subsequently led to
numerous applications and new developments in many areas of mathematics as well
as in theoretical physics. The continued relevance of index theory is evidenced,
for example, by the very recent proof of the celebrated "Weinstein conjecture,"
which says that (under certain mild hypotheses) every mechanical arrangement of
moving objects (a "dynamical system") can be configured in such a way that the
collective motion of the system will exactly repeat itself after a finite time-
interval. The proof of this theorem makes use, in crucial places, of the formula
of Atiyah and Singer. This project extends the applicability of index formulas
to a large new class of problems that were not covered by the original theory.
Ideas from the emerging area of noncommutative geometry (a recent and radical
revision of the foundation concepts of geometry inspired by quantum theory) play
a central role in this work. This project establishes substantial new
connections between separate branches of pure mathematics, and it opens up a new
area of application of the index formula that has been crucial to the
development of mathematics for the last fifty years.