* 1442597
* Collaborative Research: Blending Ecology and Evolution using Emerging Technologies to Determine Species Distributions with a Non-native Pathogen in a Changing Climate
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2022
* Amy Whipple, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2022
* USD 2,844,357.00

Predicting future distributions of plants on Earth is an urgent and daunting
challenge, given the combined effects of climate change and invasive species,
along with the fact that science does not fully understand how ecological and
evolutionary processes interact across large areas. Southwestern white pine
(SWP), a tree that occurs naturally from northern Arizona through central
Mexico, is the focus of this project. Understanding its future depends on
understanding biological processes at the molecular level, including the
movement of genes, adaptations to disease and drought, and other heritable
changes, interact in a changing environment interact to govern its overall
success. But in addition, sustainability of SWP is threatened by a non-native
tree disease called white pine blister rust. This project will develop tools to
help forecast and manage the future of SWP, including genomic analyses, common
garden trials where seedlings originating from different environments are
planted together, screening for disease resistance, engineering and technology
innovation to measure drought tolerance, and computer modeling that can
integrate landscape ecology and genomics. The approach will also provide a
prototype for forecasting complex system behavior that is more generally
applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will contribute to
the conservation of SWP and the ecosystems in which it occurs. White pine
blister rust causes widespread tree decline and mortality in western North
America, including the rapidly expanding area where it overlaps with SWP. It is
quite possible that the climate will change too rapidly for SWP to adapt,
causing widespread tree death and potential extinction. To help reach its goals,
this project will also involve a number of educational and outreach activities,
including exhibits and real common garden plantings at Flagstaff Arboretum in
Arizona and the U.S. Forest Service Dorena Genetic Resource Center in Cottage
Grove, Oregon. A number of postdoctoral scholars and graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained and participate in interdisciplinary science that
bridges genomics, tree disease resistance testing, landscape ecology, modeling,
engineering, remote sensing, and spatial analysis. An outreach website and
content will be developed in English and Spanish to provide results to the
public, including land managers. Postdoctoral researchers will collaborate on a
workshop for students in Mexico as part of their training. Workshops will also
be developed for conferences in the Southwest, one of which will be a major
cross-border meeting between Mexican and U.S. foresters. In short, this project
will strengthen cross-border research, management efforts in forest
conservation, and our understanding of how genetics shape life on Earth.