* 1442280
* Dimensions US-China:  Collaborative Research: How historical constraints, local adaptation, and species interactions shape biodiversity across an ancient floristic disjunction
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Eric Triplett, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,203,836.00

Biodiversity is multidimensional, composed of genetic, phenotypic, ecological,
and geographic variation within and among species. Understanding the sources and
patterns of Earth's biodiversity will lead to a better understanding of our
planet's ecosystems and new strategies on how to conserve them. Within forests,
plants grow in association with soil bacteria and fungi, but little is known
about how these associations vary within and among forests, or how these
interactions maintain or generate biodiversity. The forests of eastern Asia and
eastern North America were anciently connected and have a shared evolutionary
and ecological history; they therefore offer a unique opportunity to study the
drivers of biodiversity across geographical space and through evolutionary time.
This collaborative project among researchers at the University of Florida, North
Carolina State University, Chicago University and colleagues at the Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Zhejiang University investigates how the associations
among plant, fungal and soil bacteria shape biodiversity through space and time.
The research team has developed an extensive education and training program for
undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral researchers comprising both
field and lab components. Training will also include a cyber-enabled course for
Chinese and US participants that will promote international scientific
collaborations. This research will also contribute valuable information to
improve global climate change models that inform national and international
climate and energy policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project
integrates phylogenomics, biogeography, and plant and microbial evolution and
ecology to address novel questions on the origins and maintenance of
biodiversity. The research team will reconstruct phylogenies using next-
generation DNA sequencing methods to provide a robust framework for improved
dating and biogeographic analyses. Comparative community phylogenetic analyses
at six forest sites in eastern North America and four sites in China will
evaluate spatial patterns of phylogenetic diversity within and between
continents. Exploration of fungal and soil bacteria taxic and functional
diversity will yield new understanding of their biodiversity and interactions
with plants. Ecosystem function, inferred from analysis of plant functional
traits and remotely sensed canopy properties, will be computed at all sites and
linked to analyses of fungal and soil bacteria function. Innovative applications
of phylogenetic and comparative methodologies will lead to new discoveries in
phylogenetic and functional diversity of plants, soil bacteria and fungi at
community and regional scales. Integration of historical connections, current
patterns, and future species distribution models will lead to more holistic
views of the drivers of biodiversity and will enable future hypothesis-driven
research.