* 1442803
* I-Corps:  Smart Phone Accessible Low Cost Water Condition Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Kye-Shin Lee, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Complex hydroponic and contained water systems such as fish aquariums, swimming
pools, and spas must monitor water chemistry on a daily basis. Currently there
are more than 4,800 commercial hydroponic farms, 767,500 in-home hydroponic
gardens, 12.6 million fish aquariums, 10 million swim pools, and 21,000 spas in
the U.S. The water condition monitoring market is currently projected to be
around $200 million, with steady growth rate. Demand for hydroponic farm
products has been increasing as customers adopt more healthy eating patterns. In
addition, bad weather conditions are shifting food growers from field crops to
hydroponic farms. On hydroponic farms, water monitoring systems are critical for
ensuring plant growth and crop yield. The proposed technology will make
hydroponics crop growing cheaper and potentially ameliorate food shortage
issues. As an extension, this technology can also be applied to metal-solution
based water condition sensing technology for pollutant, nuclear waste, and toxin
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regular water monitoring is a cumbersome and
costly process, but without it, deviations in water chemistry can result in
damage to plants and fish as well as financial losses. This team has developed a
smart-phone based, low cost, water condition sensor. This product will measure,
record, notify and guide decision making for maintaining healthy water systems
and optimize growth of hydroponic plants and crops. The novelty of this
technology lies in being able to measure the pH, electric conductivity
(EC/nutrient concentration), temperature, and water level using only a single
electrode. Compared to today's more common multi-sensor water condition
monitoring systems, using a single sensor will significantly reduce cost and
complexity of operation. This single sensor senses changes in the electro-
chemical interaction (e.g. voltage and capacitance) between two different metals
as a result of changes in characteristics of the water conditions.