* 1442348
* Dimensions: Taxonomic, genetic and functional biodiversity of above-ground bacterial endophytes in subalpine conifers
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Lara Kueppers, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,567,416.00

Nitrogen (N) is essential to all life on Earth, but only select microbes can
reduce or 'fix' N to a form that plants can use. Typically, plants can only use
atmospheric N can when fixed by microbes that live in the soil or via a
symbiotic relationship with legumes, but recent findings indicate that bacteria
inside pine needles can also perform this critical function. In this research,
investigators at University of California, Merced will examine the symbiosis
between bacteria and limber pine (Pinus flexilis). The goals are to understand
the diversity of bacteria present in pine needles, calculate how much N microbes
fix and under what conditions, and infer how this fixed N is transferred to the
tree. The research could significantly improve our understanding of the N cycle
and help identify a currently unknown source of fixed N within coniferous
forests. A more complete understanding of the N cycle will also help improve
climate models, and a better characterization of the microbes that can fix
Nitrogen could lead to advances in crop development. This research will train
undergraduates. graduate students and post-doctoral researchers in both field
and lab techniques. Additionally, the research will include outreach to
teachers, administrators and students at a K-8 STEM school serving under-
represented groups, and will develop inquiry-based learning modules in line with
Common Core educational standards for incorporation within the K-8 STEM
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine how the
phylogenetic diversity and genetic potential of subalpine tree endophytes affect
N fixation within western coniferous forests. Their central hypothesis is that
across its broad geographic range, limber pine hosts a broad taxonomic, genetic
and functional biodiversity of mutualistic N fixing endophytes, shaped by the
local environment, and shared, in part, with neighboring trees. To test this,
investigators will examine the biodiversity of endophytes in limber pine and co-
occurring species across the limber pine range, identify the factors that
structure the patterns of diversity, and determine the relationship between
taxonomic diversity and N fixation. Cutting-edge methods in sequencing and
genome analysis will be integrated with established and highly sensitive methods
for detecting and visualizing N fixing activity in situ to understand how
endophyte diversity is shaped by the environment and shapes the N cycle in
subalpine forests.