* 1442056
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID - Integrated Precipitation and Hydrology 2014 (IPHEx) - Enhancing Coupled Observations of the Land-Atmosphere System and Educational Opportunities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2014
* David Genereux, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 10/31/2014
* USD 18,183.00

This project adds value to the ongoing 2014 Integrated Precipitation and
Hydrology Experiment (IPHEx) which designed in support of the Global
Precipitation Measurement (GPM) satellite mission and sponsored by NASA's PMM
(Precipitation Measurement Missions) Program. This project will conduct a field
campaign that will take place in the complex terrain region of the Southern
Appalachians to carry out intensive hydrological observations. The research will
advance our understanding of the critical pathway of water in several benchmark
watersheds across the transition from the Blue Ridge to the Piedmont. The
activities will extend and complement IPHEx data collection to include water
cycle processes in the lower troposphere, and in the subsurface. The project
will introduce 10 graduate and 12 undergraduate students from 14 different
academic institutions to use the vast array of instrumentation deployed during
IPHEx and provide students training and experience with the use of the
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study extends the ongoing study of the
2014 Integrated Precipitation and Hydrology Experiment (IPHEx) which designed in
support of the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) satellite mission and
sponsored by NASA's PMM (Precipitation Measurement Missions) Program. This
proposal is to conduct a field campaign that will take place in the complex
terrain region of the Southern Appalachians to carry out intensive hydrological
observations. The proposed research will advance our understanding of the
critical pathway of water in several benchmark watersheds across the
physiographic and hydrogeological transition from the Blue Ridge to the
Piedmont. The proposed activities will extend and complement IPHEx data
collection to include water cycle processes in the lower troposphere, and in the
subsurface. The project will introduce 10 graduate and 12 undergraduate students
from 14 different academic institutions to use the vast array of instrumentation
deployed during IPHEx and provide students training and experience with the use
of the instruments.