* 1442095
* DYNAmics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (DYNAMO) Legacy Data Products
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Steven Rutledge, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2017
* USD 788,836.00

This award supports the creation of a legacy dataset for data collected during
the DYNAmics of the Madden-julian Oscillation (DYNAMO) field campaign. The goal
of DYNAMO was to observe the initiation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO).
The MJO is a large-scale pattern of precipitation and atmospheric circulation
that forms in the Indian Ocean and propagates slowly eastward affecting weather
and climate across a large portion of the globe. The campaign took place in the
Indian Ocean from 1 October 2011 until 9 February 2012 and was a massive
undertaking involving ships, aircraft, sounding systems, and an island-based
radar "supersite". Several US agencies and international partners were involved,
as documented in the abstract for NSF award AGS-1022899. The campaign was a
success in that three MJO events occurred during the deployment, of which the
first occurred during the Special Observing Period when all the field assets
were deployed together. Overall about 10 terabytes of data were
collected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the success of the campaign and the large
investments made in it, a further investment is warranted to enhance the
accessibility of the campaign data and facilitate its used by the research
community. Three categories of data products will be developed on this award,
characterized by the type of instrumentation used to collect the observations:
radar-based, aircraft-based, and sounding-based products. A fourth category
consists of data products processed in ways consistent with specific interests
of the research community, for instance sounding data processed into variables
like precipitable water, convective available potential energy, convective
inhibition, lifting condensation level, and the level of free convection. The
entire collection will be hosted by the Earth Observing Laboratory at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
somewhat unusual in that the goal is to develop and serve a dataset for the
research community, rather than to conducted research to address a scientific
hypothesis. Thus all of the effort can be regarded as a broader impact to the
research community. It should also be noted that the MJO has a number of
societal consequences, as it is a dominant driver of weather in the tropics and
also affects on the US. Among other impacts, the MJO influences the number of
hurricanes that form in the Gulf of Mexico. Research leading to better
representation of the MJO in weather forecasting models is thus desirable. In
addition, the data products will facilitate research on tropical convection in
general, which will be of value for developing better models to predict weather
and make projections of future climate change.