* 1442246
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Microbial seed banks: processes and patterns of dormancy-driven biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Jay Lennon, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,335,176.00

Microorganisms are the most abundant and diverse taxa on Earth. Despite their
ecological and economic importance, it is unclear what maintains the diversity
of microbial communities, what adaptive traits allow microorganisms to contend
with novel or changing environments, and what accounts for their exceptional
spatial distributions. Recent studies suggest that the ability to enter a
reversible state of reduced metabolic activity or dormancy ('seed bank') may be
central to answering these questions. This project focuses on the seed bank
dynamics of microbial communities. In addition to elucidating key processes and
feedbacks that contribute to the maintenance of microbial diversity, the project
has practical implications for understanding challenges associated with
antibiotic resistance, pest outbreaks, and the restoration of managed
ecosystems. Broader impacts of the project include the development of a
capstone-research experience for undergraduate students at a Principally
Undergraduate Institution, a summer research program for high school students
from under-represented groups, an open-source individual-based modeling software
package, and public outreach via engagement with science museums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this research project are to
identify the key ecological and evolutionary processes that generate and
maintain microbial biodiversity, and to understand how this diversity in turn
influences ecosystem processes. These goals will be addressed by focusing on how
and why dormancy varies among microbes as a result of life history trade-offs.
Combined with novel insight into dormancy-driven communication networks, the
research will determine how seed bank dynamics affect the function and
geographic patterns of microbial diversity. Three major objectives pertaining to
dormancy and the diversity of microbial communities will be addressed: 1) Test
for life history tradeoffs between dormancy and physiological and genomic
characteristics by comparing survivorship during prolonged dormancy across a
phylogenetically diverse collection of soil bacteria using a traits-based
approach, 2) Test predictions regarding the nature of dormancy as a cell-cell
communicated response that affects pathogen suppression, plant-soil feedbacks,
and ecosystem processes using signaling molecules to directly manipulate
microbial seed banks, 3) Develop and test theoretical predictions regarding the
contribution of seed banks to geographic patterns of taxonomic and phylogenetic
diversity using communities of soil bacteria from systems with contrasting
disturbance histories.