* 1442735
* CyperSEES: Type 2: Integrative Sensing and Prediction of Urban Water for Sustainable Cities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Jean Gao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,196,295.00

Many cities face tremendous water-related challenges due to urban population
growth and climate fluctuations. Even moderate rainfall can quickly fill and
overflow urban water reserves. Urban areas are particularly susceptible not only
to excesses and shortages of water but also to variations in water quality. This
project protects urban areas from the shocks of extreme precipitation cycles and
urbanization by advancing our understanding of the urban water cycle through the
integration of advanced computing and cyber-infrastructure, environmental
modeling, geoscience, and information science. &lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes
high-resolution precipitation information from the network of Collaborative
Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA) radars available in the Dallas-Fort
Worth area, crowdsourced water observations for ubiquitous sensing of surface
water over a large urban area, and new innovative wireless sensors for water
quantity, water quality and soil moisture to close the observation gaps. Cloud
computing is then used for advanced high-resolution modeling, data optimization,
and predictive analytics to assess water quantity and quality in both the short
and long term. This project advances our understanding of urban sustainability
and the associated challenges through environmental, social and economic
responses of a large city as an uncertain dynamic system.