* 1442067
* Conference: 2014 Plant Cell Dynamics Meeting. June 4-7, Madison Wisconsin.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Simon Gilroy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2015
* USD 7,560.00

Conference: 2014 Plant Cell Dynamics Meeting. Madison Wisconsin, June 4-7 2014.
There is a need to develop the knowledge base that will enable the rational
design of improved crop species. The attainment of this goal requires an
understanding of how plant cells integrate the behavior of their cellular
components with their metabolism and with cell shape and size not only during
the growth and development of the plant but also in the response of the plant to
environmental challenges. This meeting emphasizes the participation of students
(including members of under-represented groups) at the undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral level and will provide support for 18
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting on plant cell dynamics seeks to
promote the use of innovative methods for live cell imaging, image
quantification, signal processing, and computational simulations in order to
gain a mechanistic understanding of plant cellular systems. The meeting will
advance this goal by providing opportunities for plant cell biologists to
discuss their latest research results, develop collaborations, gain hands-on
experience with current state-of-the art approaches, and by promoting the
development of new tools. The meeting will provide an open forum for oral
presentations and promote discussion and interaction between established
investigators and newcomers to the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Symbiosis, Defense and Self
Recognition Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.