* 1442054
* Mechanisms for Severe Wind Production in Nocturnal and Transitioning Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Karen Kosiba, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 497,192.00

The transition from surface-based to elevated convection and the subsequent
organization and evolution of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) as the
nocturnal stable boundary layer (NSBL) develops is not well understood,
complicating the forecastability of severe winds. During the transition from
discrete cells to an MCS, severe surface winds may be generated but the
processes responsible for the onset, intensification, and cessation of these
winds are uncertain. Likely the hydrometeor type, distribution, and evolution
within these MCSs, as well as the evolving properties of the NSBL, environmental
shear and other factors play important roles in the initiation and maintenance
of intense, surface-reaching downdrafts. The research will investigate how
intense-wind-causing downdrafts reach the surface in the presence of a NSBL
through characterization of the MCS and transitioning-to-MCS convective system
kinematics, thermodynamics and microphysics, and how these are influenced by the
local environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses data from the Plains
Elevated Convection at Night (PECAN) project, planned for 2015, in addition to
already collected but less complete data sets from the field programs. PECAN
kinematic, thermodynamic and microphysical data obtained from a large and
diverse array of observing data will enable the study of initiation/transition,
evolution, internal kinematics and microphysics of severe-wind-producing MCSs.
Multiple-Doppler analysis will be used to quantify the 3D winds through the
depth of the MCS. Internal microphysical processes will be inferred from the
radar reflectivity and dual-polarization fields and surface disdrometer data.
Sounding systems and wind profilers will be used to diagnose atmospheric
stability, depth of the NSBL, vertical wind structure and the location of the
nocturnal low-level jet (LLJ). Mobile mesonet and stationary weather stations
including Pods and PISAs, will be used to quantify the strength and horizontal
extent of the surface cold pool, and quantify severe winds at the surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The multi-platform
integrated observational study will result in a better understanding of the
microphysical, thermodynamic and kinematic processes underlying nocturnal MCS
evolution, transition from daytime to nocturnal/MCS organization, and how these
are influenced by the NSBL during severe wind events. The research will result
in a better understanding of the factors leading to the occurrence (or non-
occurrence) of severe nocturnal winds. This research will also provide analyses
fundamental to understanding whether severe-wind producing MCSs are elevated,
surfaced-based, or hybrid systems, the microphysical composition of these
systems, and the kinematics of these systems before, during, and after the
occurrence of severe surface winds, and how they are affected by the local
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Analyses, results,
and improved scientific understanding from the research will be made available
to the modeling and forecasting communities. Improvements to numerical models
and hence the forecasting of the occurrence, severity and timing of nocturnal
severe-wind producing MCSs will benefit from these fine-scale observational
analyses through comparison with model output and predictions. Better
understanding, leading to improved forecasts will aid in mitigating the impact
of these severe-wind producing events. Education of students through the
development of a PECAN-specific university course focusing on radar and
mesoscale observations, participation in the field phase of PECAN, and
subsequent analysis efforts will help train the next generation of scientists.