* 1442306
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: Coevolution of scleractinian corals and their associated microorganisms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Vega, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,095,956.00

Coral reefs are among the most biologically diverse marine ecosystems on the
planet, and provide substantial economic and ecological benefits to coastal
communities. Corals are composed of both the Cnidarian animal host and complex
communities of unique and underexplored microbial organisms. Today these natural
wonders are in global decline, threatened by the intersecting effects of
multiple stressors including overfishing, pollution, and climate change. These
stressors can alter coral microbial communities in ways that may contribute to
the susceptibility of corals to disease or overgrowth by algae. Therefore,
understanding the relationships between corals and their microbiota may be
useful for efforts to understand coral disease and preserve reef ecosystems. The
microbial diversity of coral species in many diverse and ancient groups of
corals remains unexplored, but understanding these communities will help to
extend the knowledge gained in well-studied corals to diverse reefs worldwide.
This project aims to describe microbial diversity across all major groups of
reef-building corals in each of several distinct ecosystems across the globe, to
determine the genome sequences and metabolic capabilities of key coral bacteria,
and to test whether the composition of coral microbial communities helps to
explain the overall vulnerability or resistance of different coral species to
stress or disease. The project includes plans for maximizing public access,
scientific community building, and training opportunities for early-career
scientists. The project will fund two hispanic principal investigators, two PhD
students, and two postdoctoral researchers in laboratory and field research -
and also in key computational techniques for managing "Big Data". Project funds
will support an extension of a program of collaborative, multilingual scientific
podcasts; establishment of recurring science cafes; K-5 coral reef educational
modules tested successfully for incorporation into the curriculum in the State
College School District; and educational video segments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral species differ in their susceptibility to bleaching
and disease, but these differences are only partially explained by coral
phylogeny. Therefore this project will test the extent to which incorporating
the microbiota (or their contributed genes) better predicts these and other
traits. Recent technological advances have broadened understanding of how
complex microbiomes shape the life history, physiology, and evolution of their
multicellular hosts (e.g., the human microbiome). The use of newly developed DNA
sequencing techniques will allow a more complete exploration of microbial
diversity in corals than has previously been feasible, while advanced
computational methods will help to maximize the value of sequenced bacterial
genomes. Improved predictive models that incorporate both coral phylogeny and
microbial function will help inform conservation strategies and yield predictive
biomarkers for coral vulnerability to disease or bleaching. Relating the
diversity of corals to the diversity of their microbes will also provide
important insights into how intimate symbiotic associations with microorganisms
arose and are maintained in diverse animals.