* 1442524
* Sustainable Nanotechnology Conference November 2-4, 2014 in Boston, Massachusetts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jacqueline Isaacs, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2015
* USD 47,000.00

1442524&lt;br/&gt;Isaacs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Sustainable Nanotechnology
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal is to
support a conference on Sustainable Nanotechnology. This is the third conference
on this topic, and it is expected to further expand the discipline. The
conference will bring together scientific experts from academia, industry, and
government from around the world to present and discuss current research
findings in sustainable nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
will address the critical aspects of sustainable nanotechnology such as life
cycle assessment, green synthesis, green energy, industrial partnership,
economic cost-benefit analysis, environmental and biological fate, environmental
health and safety, transport, persistence, transformation, exposure assessment,
recyclability, and the overall sustainability of engineered nanomaterials.
Plenary lectures and keynotes will address issues such as the development of
nanomaterials that, through their life cycle, properties, and material
efficiency, provide a framework for achieving more sustainable technologies,
while optimizing performance. In principle, this conference involves the
fundamental/applied research on the chemistry of producing new green
nanomaterials; eco-manufacturing processing of nanomaterials and products. Other
aspects include, life-cycle performance, modeling and theoretical analyses of
materials and their structures in nanomedicine, energy and industrial
applications, and life-cycle cost and economic impacts in real life practice.
The use of nanomaterials to alleviate adverse consequences from greenhouse
effect, exhaustion, or abundance of natural resources, and environmental health
and safety impacts due to the use of nondecomposable materials/composites are
also considered appropriate. Special focus will be given to toxicity,
transformation, and the interactions with the biological system. The conference
will also emphasize opportunities for nanotechnology in sustainability, as well
as the economic and societal aspects of nanotechnology.