* 1442444
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Defining Stream Biomes to Better Understand and Forecast Stream Ecosystem Change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2021
* USD 618,557.00

Biologists have used a well accepted classification system to identify regional
areas by the major or predominant vegetation biomes. This largely land-based
classification system has been very useful in conducting research and
understanding the environmental, geological, and biological features of those
regions. These factors influence how ecological systems within the biome are
structured and how they function. The classification scheme provides a framework
for site- specific research to be understood in a larger regional context and
scale the results to the larger region. A weakness or missing part of this
framework is streams and rivers. Most maps or lists of biomes of the world would
suggest that flowing waters are so similar to one another that all streams can
be lumped into a single category. They are generally lumped together regardless
of the regional geology, watershed vegetation, or climatic factors. This
research will develop a biome classification system for streams to better
understand how streams function and provide an ability to predict how streams
will change from human and environmental factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
continental scale project will address the deceptively simple question: is there
such a thing as a stream biome? From an ecosystem perspective we now know that
inland waters play critical roles in both global carbon (C) and nitrogen (N)
cycling. The physical diversity of lotic waters as well as their tendency is
more temporally dynamic than terrestrial systems. Ultimately the phenology of
stream ecosystem energetics will be a function of energy supply (light and fixed
terrestrial carbon) and fixed carbon removal (via hydrologic disturbance).
Watershed structure determines the route and rate at which water enters stream
channels while watershed vegetation determines the magnitude and timing of fixed
carbon inputs and the degree and temporal patterning of light availability. This
research effort will increase the measurements of annual metabolism by nearly
two orders of magnitude. At the present time there exist only two streams for
which annual metabolic rates have been calculated using continuous dissolved
oxygen measurements. By the conclusion of this project 55 years of high quality
metabolism data will have been generated for a total of 35 streams, and the
project PIs will have acquired (via leveraged funds and collaborations)
metabolism data for at least 196 additional streams. Metabolism metrics from all
of these streams will be used to build the first hierarchical classification of
stream ecosystems based on their seasonal and annual patterns of primary
productivity and ecosystem respiration. Stream biome delineation will facilitate
estimation of stream metabolic rates at timescales of days to years for spatial
scales from reaches to river networks. Simulation models, developed from first
principles and refined with empirical data specific to each biome, will forecast
changes in metabolic rates in response to likely climate and land use change
scenarios. The data management plan has been designed in collaboration with
informatics staff of the USGS Center for Integrated Data Analytics and USGS has
agreed to host and help develop a public data repository, modeling, and data
visualization platform specifically designed to collate long-term or high-
resolution metabolism and dissolved oxygen datasets for streams. By building,
refining and activating a community data platform this research program will
change the way individual streams are studied and will facilitate and encourage
near instantaneous cross-site synthesis. In addition to capacity building, this
project will directly support seven graduate students and 7 postdoctoral
associates over the funding period.