* 1442966
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Preserving the Privacy of Life Cycle Inventory Data in Distributed Provenance Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Amr El Abbadi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 09/30/2017
* USD 398,512.00

Life cycle assessment, used to estimate the environmental impacts of products
and consumption choices, requires extensive private data about industrial
processes. This project will address the question of how claims about the
environmental performance of products can be made and evaluated without
requiring disclosure of confidential data. First, the data privacy needs
associated with life cycle assessment will be articulated in terms of data
provenance and scientific workflow publishing. The project will then develop
methods for performing life cycle assessment computations that preserve the
privacy of input data, while also enabling validation and meaningful
interpretation of results. Techniques will be drawn from data anonymization,
secure multi-party computation, and homomorphic encryption. The work will
consider both scenarios in which private results are shared among collaborators
and in which results are made available for public queries. The work will lead
to the development of security schemes to address threats to private data used
in such computations; algorithms for performing life cycle assessment
computations under privacy restrictions; and data anonymization strategies for
publication satisfying data providers? privacy
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particularly in the policy arena, but also
among the general public, validation of claims about environmental performance
in a life cycle perspective is increasingly important. Life cycle assessment
enables industrial actors to improve environmental performance and it shows
promise for informing sustainability governance. The proposed research will help
to normalize the discussion of data privacy, with the intent of fostering a more
transparent exchange of information among stakeholders. In turn, this could
empower data providers to better maintain their own inventory information,
potentially leading to greater availability and quality of life cycle inventory
data. The application of privacy preserving computation schemes to environmental
informatics has potential to provide businesses with new operational knowledge
to guide decision making on sustainability.