* 1442103
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions US-Biota Sao Paulo: Chemically mediated multi-trophic interaction diversity across tropical gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2020
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,548,388.00

This research will examine the diversity and ecological complexity of plants and
associated insects in forests across a variable landscape in Brazil. Plants,
insects, and their predators make up over half of all known organisms, and their
interactions are essential to ecosystem health. This is especially true for
tropical forests, where ecologists are only beginning to understand the nature
and complexity of these interactions. In particular, little is known about: 1)
the diversity of plant chemicals that deter insect herbivory and affect other
plants and animals, 2) how diversity of these plant chemicals varies within and
between plant species, and 3) how plant chemistry can affect the diversity and
productivity of entire forests. Recent advances in chemistry and molecular
biology provide the opportunity to understand the diversity of plant-insect
interactions at three different levels (chemical, genetic, and taxonomic) with
unprecedented scope and depth. These new methods will be integrated and enhanced
by a unique team of U.S. and Brazilian scientists to investigate the diversity
of insect-plant food webs, how they are shaped by plant chemical defenses and
environmental gradients, and how this diversity affects forest stability and
productivity. The research will contribute to understanding how large global
changes in biodiversity and climate will affect plant-insect-predator
interactions, how plant genetic and chemical diversity influences plant-feeding,
and how taxonomic and genetic diversity of insect predators can affect control
of harmful insects. The comprehensive sampling and methods used in this project
will result in the discovery of new species of plants and insects, new
biologically active molecules, and are likely to deliver new tools and
approaches that have powerful applications in agriculture and medicine. This
international and multi-disciplinary research project will have broad impacts by
involving K-12 students, science teachers, and citizen scientists. Discoveries
will be widely communicated to the public via websites, and scientific and
popular publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on a highly
diverse system involving plants in the genus Piper (Piperaceae), associated
herbivores, and parasitic wasps and flies. The research will utilize cutting
edge approaches to studying biodiversity that link measures of interaction
diversity to genetic diversity, population genetic structure, and plant chemical
diversity involving the following components: 1) Large scale sampling of
herbivores and their parasitoids on diverse Piper species across an array of
sites to assess effects of abiotic gradients on community structure and
ecosystem processes, and to acquire specimens for taxonomic, genomic, and
phytochemical analysis. 2) Field experiments where taxonomic, genetic, and
functional diversity will be manipulated along with abiotic factors to
strengthen inferences from statistical analysis of field surveys, community
genetics, and measures of metabolite diversity. 3) Taxonomic and systematic
analysis of plants, herbivores, and parasitoids using traditional and novel
methods (genomics) to document and describe new taxa, understand their
relationships, and reveal cryptic diversity. 4) Population genomic analyses of
plants, herbivores, and parasitoids to understand how geography, plant phylogeny
and chemistry influence population structure and genetic differentiation across
trophic levels. 5) Characterization of metabolite diversity of Piper species;
how metabolite diversity varies with phylogeny, ecology, and herbivore pressure;
and the effect of phytochemical diversity on higher trophic levels. The
combination of quantitative sampling along elevational gradients, newly
developed metabolomics methods, population genomics, and a large scale
experiment will make possible tests of emerging hypotheses about relationships
between plant chemistry, and different dimensions of diversity, and will
represent the first large scale, among-site plant-herbivore-parasitoid food-web
comparison in the tropics.