* 1442199
* Dimensions: Collaborative Proposal: Molecular, ecological and evolutionary dynamics of carbon fixation and diversification in Agavoideae (Asparagaceae) and Oncidiinae (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2020
* James Leebens-Mack, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,521,281.00

Photosynthesis is a basic process supporting the vast majority of life on Earth.
However, for plants living under water-limited conditions, photosynthetic
productivity can be reduced by hotter and drier climatic conditions. To
counteract these conditions, some plants utilize forms of photosynthesis that
increase the efficiency with which they use water. One such innovation seen in
plants that grow in deserts or other water-limited habitats is referred to as
CAM (Crassulacean Acid Metabolism). The CAM innovation is found in a large
number of diverse plant lineages and typically associated with stem (e.g. cacti)
or leaf (e.g. agaves) succulence. The proposed research project will use several
approaches to address fundamental questions about how plants use CAM and how
genes involved in performing CAM are regulated in response to varying
environmental conditions. To achieve this, the project will focus on the
independent evolution of CAM in the orchid and agave plant families, both of
which have species known for their ability to thrive in water-limited
environments. This research will provide a foundation for understanding the
genetic basis of CAM pathways and potentially transfer to economically important
plants for improved water use efficiency under drought conditions leading to
improved productivity. Additionally, this project would result in the training
of undergraduate and graduate students, including individuals from under-
represented groups. There are also plans to integrate the results of the project
into classroom learning and broader outreach activities.

This project utilizes an integrated research program on two instances of CAM
photosynthesis to illuminate the mechanisms that link ecological, genetic and
molecular dimensions of the evolutionary processes that contribute to the origin
and maintenance of biodiversity. Photosynthesis is a fundamental process
supporting biodiversity in the vast majority of ecological communities on our
planet, while at the same time a physiological challenge for primary producers
living under water-limited conditions. The evolutionary history of
photosynthetic organisms has included repeated origins of carbon concentrating
mechanisms that increase water-use efficiency and productivity in extreme
environmental conditions. Crassulacean acid metabolism is one such innovation
that has facilitated diversification of vascular plant lineages in an array of
habitats. The proposed project will integrate ecological, physiological,
phylogenetic, genetic and genomic approaches to address fundamental questions
about how plants use CAM and how genes involved in performing CAM are regulated
in response to different environmental conditions. The study systems for this
project are the species-rich Agavoideae (Asparagaceae) and Oncidiinae
(Orchidaceae) lineages, both of which include CAM, C3 (typical form of
photosynthesis) and facultative or weak CAM species. These systems will aid in
inferring the phylogenetic and environmental context for multiple gains and
losses of CAM photosynthesis in both lineages. Comparative analyses of RNA will
illuminate the interacting molecular and environmental drivers of shifts between
C3 and CAM photosynthesis and the impact of these shifts on the origin and
maintenance of species diversity. Furthermore, shifts in gene function
associated with the gain and loss of CAM will be tested through genetic analyses
of a yucca hybrid, resulting from a natural cross between a CAM and C3 parental
species, and experimental manipulations of gene expression in the emerging
orchid model species, Erycina pusilla (Oncidiinae).