* 1442041
* Travel Grant for US Scientists to Attend the 14th Biannual International Symposium for Biopolymers (ISBP2014)in Santos, Brazil, Sep. 28 - Oct. 1, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Stevens Brumbley, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2015
* USD 12,842.00

1442041 Brumbley, Stevens M.

This award supports the participation of US investigators and graduate students
in the ISBP2014 to be held in Santos, Brazil, from Sep. 28 - Oct. 1, 2014. The
meeting has a primary focus on biopolymers and biodegradable plastics. The value
of this meeting is the discussion of the latest results in the field of
biopolymers from a perspective at the interface of microbiology, metabolic
engineering, polymer engineering and materials science. Bioplastics have the
potential to capture a significant segment of the petrochemical plastics market
offsetting green gas emissions. In addition, many are biodegradable. As such
they will help reduce the burgeoning waste problems from nonbiodegradable
plastics. These polymers can be made in biorefineries or in engineered plants or
algae and will create opportunties for economic development and new jobs.

NSF support will help ensure the success of the meeting by providing travel and
conference costs for US academic scientists and engineers with an emphasis on
underrepresented groups and graduate students. In the absence of NSF support,
many US academic scientists and graduate students would not be able to attend
and benefit from interactions with the international community in the field of
biopolymers.

The award from the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Bioengineering Program of the
CBET Division is co-sponsored by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of
Materials Research.