* 1442544
* Collaborative Research: Hierarchical Functioning of River Macrosystems in Temperate Steppes - From Continental to Hydrogeomorphic Patch Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2023
* Walter Dodds, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 02/28/2023
* USD 425,109.00

The need to understand and manage ecosystems at larger regional to continental
scale macrosystem levels is becoming increasingly crucial with global climate
changes and impacts of exotic plants and animals in freshwater rivers and lakes.
Macrosystem management requires an understanding of how different levels of
spatial complexity (within a stream reach to entire river valley scales) and
biotic organization (populations to ecosystems) affect the functioning of rivers
and lakes. The present study will provide this information for 18 rivers spread
equally between the two largest temperate steppe biomes of the world: the North
American Great Plains and the Euro-Asian Steppes (including those in Mongolia).
This project will provide research experiences for under-represented
participants (particularly rural and Native American students), stimulate STEM
program recruitment in largely under-represented (EPSCoR) states, support some
faculty and students at primarily undergraduate institutions, and contribute to
scientific education at both graduate and undergraduate institutions in two
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These rivers flow through 3 major types of
ecoregions within these temperate steppe biomes: mountain steppe shrublands,
short-to-tall grasslands, and semi-arid shrublands. Scientists and students from
the USA and Mongolia will sample the structure and functioning of these 18
rivers in a variety of hydrogeomorphic areas, such as constricted, meandering,
braided, and anastomosing channel sections. Despite their similarity in biome
and ecoregional types, the river macrosystems of the Great Plains and the
Mongolian steppes vary substantially in fauna, flora, and community through
ecosystem functioning. These variations result from differences in climatic
patterns, the degree of riverine landscape modification (e.g., by dams, levees,
and riparian modification), and the naturalness of the resident fauna. For
example, most rivers in the USA contain some dams and many exotic fauna have
been introduced, while the vast majority of Mongolian rivers contain no dams and
their aquatic fauna is almost exclusively natural and different from those in
the USA. Moreover, the Central Asian subcontinental area of Mongolia has one of
the strongest warming signals on earth, with air temperatures rising three times
faster than the overall northern hemisphere average. Consequently, riverine
macrosystems in the USA can help predict changes to Mongolian rivers as a result
of pending dam construction and possible species introductions to some rivers,
while knowledge of responses of Mongolian macrosystems to more rapid climatic
changes can help predict future effects in U.S. rivers. Therefore, this
project's goals are to: (a) compare and contrast hierarchical scaling
relationships and effects of system drivers and cross-scale interactions on
rivers in similar biomes and ecoregions of the two continents; and (b) evaluate
effects of climatic changes and anthropogenic disturbance to these river
macrosystems.