* 1442724
* ERASynBio: Synthetic biochemical pathways for efficient production of novel biofuels (SynPath)
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 06/30/2018
* USD 789,791.00

This project, funded jointly by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB
and the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the CBET,
aims is to contribute a synthetic biology workflow for the efficient production
of non-natural molecules in living cells. The specific aim is to produce novel
biofuels that match the performance of existing fuels, while overcoming their
limitations with respect to soot and nitrogen oxide formation. The outcomes will
propel the development of Synthetic Biology in Europe and the US, as it
contributes significantly to the development of a bio-refinery approach in the
chemical industry. On the educational side, the investigator is involved in
graduate education and research training. The project will also contribute to
established REU programs at the University of California, Berkeley. Results will
be disseminated broadly via publications in interdisciplinary international
journals. Long-term, the major potential benefits of the proposed activity to
society will be replacement of existing, petroleum-based fuels with fuels
derived from renewable resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multinational SynPath
project follows a classic engineering approach of design, synthesis and analysis
to explore metabolic pathways in microorganisms for production of drop-in
biofuels. The focus will be on developing novel metabolic pathways for
production of hydrocarbons and identify rate-limiting steps in biofuel
production so that sugars can be efficiently converted to advanced biofuels. The
proposed work will also create devices and modules that can be used to regulate
and optimize biofuel production pathways. The success of this project relies on
the integration of expertise in thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, microbial
physiology, metabolic pathway engineering, and enzyme engineering.