* 1442109
* Dimensions US-BIOTA-Sao Paulo: Collaborative Research: Integrating Dimensions of Microbial Biodiversity across Land Use Change in Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Brendan Bohannan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 608,603.00

Tropical forests are the largest reservoirs of biodiversity on Earth and are
under great threat due to deforestation. This project addresses the critically
important question of how microbial biodiversity responds to and recovers from
deforestation. Microorganisms are regarded as drivers of ecosystem processes and
have not been characterized as extensively as plants and animals. The US-Brazil
research team will focus on the potent green house gas methane and identify the
producers and consumers along gradients of land use in the Amazon rainforest.
The educational efforts for this project will build relationships between K-12
students in Brazil and US for biological conservation through live video
conferences for training of undergraduate students and research mentoring of
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. The microbial studies have
important conservation and technological implications for forest management.

Direct and real time measurements of the methane gas in the soil-atmosphere
interface will be combined with a targeted high throughput nucleic acid
sequencing of microbes involved in the cycling of methane to assess their
genetic, phylogenetic, and functional dimensions in two different regions of the
Amazon rainforest. This work will result in the most extensive survey to date of
the microbial diversity of any tropical ecosystem, the most comprehensive study
of microbial responses to land use change ever documented, and the development
of a novel approach for the integration of microbial biodiversity, allowing for
accurate prediction of the effects of deforestation on the methane cycle.