* 1442435
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Optimized Microbial Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Matthew Wallenstein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Phosphorus (P) is critical for maximizing crop yields because it is an essential
nutrient for plant photosynthesis and ATP production, but P availability is
limited in most agricultural soils. Rock phosphate mined for fertilizer is a
finite resource, and all current P application management strategies are highly
inefficient. For instance, 70-90% of P applied to soils can become almost
immediately unavailable for plant uptake. As a result, plant-available P can be
limiting even in soils that are relatively P-rich and/or heavily fertilized.
Farmers are also looking for ways to increase plant nutrient uptake and crop
yields with lower cost. The team?s proposed technology provides an innovative
approach that can meet these farmer?s needs by maximizing plant nutrient uptake
from the soil while allowing for reduced fertilizer inputs.

Microbes play a critical role in solubilizing mineral P so that it is available
to plants. While there is great potential to improve microbial P solubilization,
progress in developing microbial solutions has been largely limited to the
identification of single strains through outdated culturing techniques, despite
strong demonstrated evidence that microbial consortia are required to maximize P
solubilization rates. The primary objective of this project is to advance the
development and commercialization of optimized phosphorus (P)-solubilizing
microbial consortia. Specifically, the team will demonstrate that: their novel
approach rapidly identifies optimized consortia; and their proprietary selection
media yields novel P solubilizing microbes that are superior at making soil P
available to plants compared to previously identified strains. The project team
is interested in developing a start-up company to translate this discovery into
a commercial product. They will conduct market research, including extensive
interviews with potential users (crop producers) and clients (agricultural
corporations) to define value propositions, as well as explore business plan
options and potential funding sources.