* 1442366
* Transport, Entanglement and Topology in Correlated Many-Particle Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2015,10/31/2019
* Kun Yang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports integrated research,
education and outreach activities in theoretical condensed matter physics. The
PI will investigate unusual and subtle ways in which electrons in materials and
atoms trapped by laser light can organize themselves into unconventional states
of matter or phases using fundamental physical concepts from quantum mechanics
and mathematical concepts from the field of topology. The discovery and
understanding of new electronic states of matter contribute to the base of
knowledge that enables the understanding of how to manipulation quantum
mechanical states to achieve high performance information processing and new
electronic device technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop
theoretical models that capture the essential physical principles and advance
understanding of the properties unconventional phases of electrons, such as
those that appear when electrons are trapped at the interface between
semiconductors and exposed to a high magnetic field perpendicular to the
interface. The PI will also investigate transformations among unconventional
phases. The emphasis of the research is on calculating physical quantities that
can be measured experimentally, and finding experimental methods that can reveal
the exotic properties of such unconventional orderings most
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to educating graduate
students in physics and a postdoctoral fellow in theoretical techniques,
associated properties of materials, and in the use of computational modeling to
connect theory to the prediction of materials properties. The PI will also be
heavily involved in community service, including organizing national and
international professional conferences. In addition the PI has been working to
complete a new graduate textbook on Modern Condensed Matter
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
integrated research, education and outreach activities in theoretical condensed
matter physics. The PI will investigate unconventional phases and phase
transitions among them in strongly correlated electronic systems. The research
is motivated by the realization that strong interactions among electrons can
drive electronic systems into unconventional phases, which cannot be described
by standard paradigms like the Fermi liquid theory. Emphasis will be on
proposing ways to probe unconventional phases experimentally using transport and
related methods, and on characterizing them theoretically using entanglement and
topological quantum numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific areas of
investigation include: Unusual edge properties of fractional quantum Hall phases
that support quasiparticles with fractional charge and statistics; cold atom
systems that support fractional quantum Hall phases, and undergo quantum phase
transitions among them; exotic phases formed by mixtures of bosonic and
fermionic atoms or molecules that exhibit supersymmetry; and entanglement
properties of interacting systems. The research is focused on phases and phase
transitions that are currently under active study by experimentalists and
theorists. Theoretical methods that will be used in carrying out the research
include: bosonization, renormalization group, and particle-vortex duality
transformation methods. The emphasis is to calculate physical quantities that
can be measured experimentally, and to propose experimental methods that can
directly probe the exotic properties of proposed unconventional
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to educating graduate
students in physics and a postdoctoral fellow in theoretical techniques,
associated properties of materials, and in the use of computational modeling to
connect theory to the prediction of materials properties. The PI will also be
heavily involved in community service, including organizing national and
international professional conferences. In addition the PI has been working to
complete a new graduate textbook on Modern Condensed Matter Physics.