* 1442166
* The Dukha Ethnoarchaeological Project: An Archaeological Investigation of Seasonal Changes in Spatial Behavior among Nomadic Herders in Mongolia.
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Todd Surovell, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2018
* USD 393,521.00

The goal of the Dukha Ethnoarchaeological Project is to develop theoretical and
methodological tools to aid in the interpretation of the archaeological record.
The researchers are concerned with human use of space in a nomadic context to
understand how people decide where to do what they do, and how such decisions
are manifested spatially in the archaeological record. Within that framework,
the project is interested in how the spatial distribution of human behavior
changes seasonally in the campsites of Dukha reindeer herders in northern
Mongolia. The ultimate goal of the project is to develop methods for determining
the season of occupation of archaeological sites. Accordingly, the researchers
will generate detailed maps of human locations in interior and exterior spaces
that can be related to age, gender, activity, weather, time of day, and other
factors. The project has the potential to inform the reconstruction of season of
occupation for dozens if not hundreds of archaeological sites around the world,
which in turn will provide greater understanding of how season affected many
aspects of human behavior in prehistory and potentially provide new insights
into changing seasonal behavior among contemporary Arctic
peoples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Season is a major factor affecting variation in
human behavior. Particularly at high latitudes and altitudes, human lifeways
change dramatically from summer to winter. It would surprise no anthropologist
observing the same people during summer and winter if he or she were to see two
very different ways of living. That anthropologist might see, for instance,
changes in subsistence, mobility, activity performance, group size, site
location, clothing, shelter, time allocation, and maybe even ideology or ritual
practice. What may be surprising, however, is that although no one would doubt
that seasonality is a very important factor affecting human behavior, season of
occupation is a variable that is notoriously difficult to control in
archaeological contexts. Most if not all direct measures of seasonality are
dependent upon the preservation of organic or osseous remains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a two-year ethnoarchaeological study of
Dukha reindeer herders in northern Mongolia for the purpose of developing new
methods of determining the season of occupation at archaeological sites using
variation in the spatial distributions of artifacts. The Dukha
Ethnoarchaeological Project, initiated during the summer of 2012, differs from
prior spatial ethnoarchaeological research in that the research team has shifted
the empirical focus from the mapping of material refuse to the direct mapping of
human behavior. The scientists propose to examine the relationship between
season and the spatial distribution of activity performance in the interior and
exterior spaces of Dukha campsites, from which they will be able to build models
of artifact accumulation potentially allowing them to link the spatial
distribution of behavior in an ethnographic case to its potential archaeological
correlates.