* 1442106
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: The Macroalgal Microbiome in Space and Time---Maintaining Primary Producers in the Atlantic Rocky Intertidal Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Hilary Morrison, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 10/31/2018
* USD 492,214.00

Intertidal macro algae ('seaweeds') provide habitat, shelter and food to many
invertebrates and young fishes. Much is known about how intertidal algae react
to natural stresses, but little is known about the natural community of bacteria
associated with these algae. Past studies in the laboratory found that some
'seaweeds' disintegrate after removal of their bacteria with antibiotics
suggesting these bacteria are essential to the health of their hosts. This
research will examine the genetic, taxonomic, and functional aspects of
biodiversity of bacteria associated with several 'seaweeds' that are
particularly important to the general health of marine ecosystems. The research
will determine how these bacteria change with season, position within the
intertidal zone and latitudinal range. Stability or change in the bacterial
species associated with a host will be examined by studying the particular
bacterial genes that are present at different sampling times and by studying
host responses to inoculations with particular bacteria. The work will also
study whether any bacteria are inhibited by the environmental extremes found
across the intertidal zone or over latitude, especially at the southern borders
of a host's range where climate change may disturb the bacterial community on
the host. Researchers will deposit isolates and voucher specimens into public
collections, and, in collaboration with trained citizen scientists, will provide
digital access to all algal materials within the University of Maine Herbarium.
The multi-faceted data collected during this research will aid studies by other
intertidal ecologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; How macroalgal microbiomes change
in space and time is poorly known. Is there a 'cool, wet' versus a 'hot, dry'
macroalgal microbiome(s)? If so, how does this affect host function? Here,
microbiomes will be characterized over the vertical gradient of the intertidal
zone on the Maine shore in differentially zoned species within each of two
prominent genera, Fucus (rockweed) and Porphyra (laver). Contemporaneously, a
trans-Atlantic study of microbiomes of the mid-zone Porphyra umbilicalis and
Fucus vesiculosus will determine whether compositional changes found over an
intertidal stress gradient are mirrored over the latitudinal range of mid-zoned
species. If so, does this matter? This question will be answered by using
shotgun metagenomic analyses to compare the genetic composition with the
characterized taxonomic composition of the macroalgal microbiomes. Environmental
variation associated with microbiome collections will be measured with in situ
sensors and from archival and real time data available from government climate
services (e.g., NOAA). The potential to detect changes over historic time will
be assessed using herbarium specimens. To study bacteria that are likely to be
most critical to normal structure and function of Fucus and Porphyra, the
researchers will focus on bacterial isolations from spores and fertilized eggs,
aided by flow cytometry and single cell genomics. To establish the criticality
of these associations, microbiome-depleted embryos will be inoculated with such
bacterial isolates, and the resulting interaction will be investigated by
analysis of the host transcriptome with RNA-Seq. The temperature tolerance of
key bacterial species (operational taxonomic units) will be established in
laboratory experiments. This research will serve as an important trans-Atlantic
baseline of the biodiversity of macroalgal microbiomes.