* 1442495
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Data-driven approaches to managing uncertain load control in sustainable power systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 415,980.00

Integrating high penetrations of renewable energy resources into electric power
systems requires additional back-up capacity (reserves) to manage real-time
power imbalance. Load control can provide reserves, possibly at lower cost
and/or with less environmental impact than most power plants. However,
scheduling load-based reserves is challenging because of uncertainty -- the
availability of reserves is a function of stochastic factors including weather
and load usage patterns. This research project is therefore investigating data-
driven, distribution-free approaches to managing load control uncertainty in
power system scheduling problems. By generalizing distributionally robust
optimization algorithms, chance-constrained optimal power flow solution
techniques are being developed to manage the time-varying, correlated, and
complex uncertainty associated with load control. Furthermore, these new
techniques can be used to determine conditions under which load control becomes
a competitive option. Specifically, trade-offs between load control uncertainty
and profitability are being quantified in order to assess the impact of
uncertainty on environmental sustainability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The methods
being developed through this work form a basis for quantifying the net
environmental impact of using uncertain load control for reserves. In
particular, they enable more informed utilization of load control for supporting
the integration of renewable energy resources. The results will guide load
control program design, power system market design, and, more broadly, energy
policy that seeks to balance cost and environmental impact. Furthermore, the
optimization approaches being developed in this work are applicable to other
power system problems, and to stochastic problems in other fields.