* 1442642
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Collaborative Research: Tenable Power Distribution Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Xiuzhen Cheng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2017
* USD 227,738.00

This project advances modeling and computational frameworks to guarantee the
sustainability of power distribution networks from environmental, economic, and
social perspectives. Environmental sustainability is addressed by accounting for
the increased uncertainty associated with the rapid and ad-hoc integration of
renewable generation and elastic loads. With regard to economic sustainability,
computational and inference foundations are put forth to ensure effective and
secure market operations in the face of the imminent emergence of large-scale
distribution-level electricity markets. Lastly, social sustainability is
effected through cyber innovations focused on increasing economic utility and
enhancing cyber security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims for
broad socio-technical advances in electricity distribution networks. Successful
project completion will offer cyber innovations that enable the systematic
integration of stochastic renewable generation while improving end-user
satisfaction. Given the ubiquity of the suite of research tools and
methodologies, the utility of the proposed research goes well beyond the
envisioned application area to the broader fields of optimization, stochastic
processes, control systems, machine learning, statistical signal processing, and
cyber security. Broader transformative impact will result from pragmatic test
cases proposed for validation, involvement of undergraduates in research, and
outreach activities.