* 1442504
* CAREER: Computational Analyses of the Interactions between DNA and Chromatin Structure
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jun Song, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2017
* USD 507,175.00

In this project, the investigator will develop rigorous mathematical methods for
analyzing the recent high-throughput nucleosome mapping data in yeasts and
provide novel computational tools for studying the relations among DNA sequence,
nucleosome stability, and nucleosome positioning. Eukaryotic DNA has a
complicated three-dimensional structure called chromatin consisting of millions
of nucleosomes, the protein-DNA complexes that contain 146 base pairs of DNA
wrapping around eight histones. Nucleosomes play a critical role in regulating
gene expression by controlling the accessibility of DNA and modulating
transcription factor binding activities. Nucleosomes are thus of paramount
importance, but there currently do not exist rigorous computational tools for
studying the biological signals that regulate their positioning and stability.
This research will devlop spectral decomposition methods for analyzing
nucleosomal and linker DNA, including their physical properties derived from the
molecular measurements of DNA flexibility. Dr. Song will apply a statistical
theory for analyzing the maximal frequency spectrum of categorical time series
in order to answer a long-standing question of whether certain periodic DNA
properties preferentially exist in individual nucleosomes. Furthermore, wrapping
DNA around histones introduces superhelical stress, which we show to be often
countered by increased sequence-dependent stabilization of DNA. The developed
computational tools will help unravel new connections between DNA bendability
and stabilization energy and, thus, facilitate the discovery of novel nucleosome
positioning signals at important regulatory sites. We currently do not
understand how chromatin structure is faithfully inherited upon cell division,
and it is likely that the genetic information contained in DNA sequences may
significantly influence the process of epigenetic inheritance. Better
understanding the mathematical and physical properties of DNA will enhance our
understanding of chromatin structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
uniquely positioned to integrate Dr Song's research in computational epigenomics
with innovative educational programs that will significantly advance the
training of biology students in mathematics and statistics. The project will
help improve the infrastructure for education and research by synergizing
different graduate groups. The project will support vertical integration of
research and education, whereby the proposed research will constitute an
important theme for teaching epigenetics to quantitative scientists and for
teaching mathematics. The applicant will continue to teach a statistics course
that he has designed, drawing examples from genomics. Topical mini-courses on
high-throughput sequencing technology and systems biology will be also taught in
order to disseminate the applicant's current research activities and to help
prepare students and postdocs conduct their own research in genomics.
Undergraduate students will also have opportunities to participate in the
research, and Dr Song will involved local high school students. The project will
exemplify the rich possibility of applying mathematics and statistics to solving
biologically important questions. Computational tools will be implemented into
open source software that will be accessible to other researchers studying
chromatin structure. Further information about the project may be obtained from
the PI's lab website at http://song.igb.illinois.edu.