* 1442909
* Cybersees Type 2:  Cyber-Enabled Water and Energy Systems Sustainability Utilizing Climate Information
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Gnanamanikam Mahinthakumar, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,241,845.00

Continually increasing water demand (due to population growth) and fuel costs
threaten the reliability of water and energy systems and also increase
operational costs. In addition, climatic variability and long-term change
increase the vulnerability of these two systems. For instance, reservoir systems
primarily depend on monthly to seasonal precipitation; whereas power systems
demand depend on variations in diurnal temperature over the season. Currently,
both systems consider climatological averages for their short-term (0-3 months)
management, which ignores uncertainty in the climate resulting in reduced
hydropower (i.e., increased spill) from reservoirs and increased operational
costs for power systems from excessive fuel stockpiling. While seasonal climate
forecasts contain appreciable levels of skill over parts of the US in both
winter and summer, the uptake of these forecasts for co-optimization of water
and power systems has been limited due to lack of a framework to assimilate,
visualize and communicate probabilistic forecasts into management models. The
project will develop a prototype visual analytic simulation-optimization
framework for better communication and visualization of probabilistic
information on the decision space for improving water and power systems
sustainability utilizing monthly to seasonal multimodel climate forecasts.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this poject is to develop an
integrated cyber-enabled approach for improved water and energy sustainability
utilizing the monthly to seasonal climate forecasts by: A. Developing a
cyberinfrastructure framework using Optimus-PRIME that co-optimizes water and
power system allocations by incorporating precipitation, power demand and wind
power ensembles. B. Developing a visual analytic framework for interactive
exploration of multi-objective decision space and interaction with the
optimization engine by leveraging recent developments in visual analytics. C.
Developing fine-grained and coarse-grained resource utilization strategies for
targeting different parts of the computation on heterogeneous many-
core/accelerator based architectures. D. Analyzing risk management strategies
that include improved fuel stockpiling, scheduled plant maintenance and
reservoir operational schedules to minimize operational costs utilizing the
multimodel electricity demand, wind power, and streamflow forecasts available
for the pilot basin. F. Performing scenario analyses that consider increased
renewable energy availability -- hydropower and wind -- in the power generation
mix, reduced CO2 emission scenarios under current and increased water demand
potentials contingent on multimodel climate forecasts. F. Synthesizing the
findings from objectives (A-F) by considering various virtual water and power
system configurations that are typical across the country for generalization and
broader application. The fundamental contribution of the proposal lies in
developing a prototype cyberinfrastructure for improving water and power systems
management utilizing climate forecasts. Using the framework, the study proposes
to minimize the operational costs of these two interdependent systems by
considering various scenarios for maximizing the renewable energy potential
utilizing multimodel climate (precipitation, temperature and wind) forecasts. By
utilizing the streamflow and power demand forecasts, a paradigm shift in water
and power systems management is targeted that promotes various proactive
strategies such as forward purchasing of fuels, reducing emissions and meeting
target reservoir storage to ensure both systems reliability. To overcome the
computational challenges arising from probabilistic forecasts, an HPC-enabled
cyberinfrastructure will parallelize the computations across ensembles and
provide a seamless interaction between water and power stochastic optimization
models. For interactive exploration of multi-objective decision spaces in the
water and power sectors, new developments in visual analytics will be employed
that can lead to improved stakeholder facilitated solutions for the pilot basin
and promote learning and understanding through virtual
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developed research modules and findings will be
incorporated into various advanced graduate courses at NCSU in the water
resources and environmental engineering, computer-aided engineering and power
system engineering curricula. The developed climate information based risk-
management tools will also be used in the NCSU's Climate Change and Society
Professional Science Master's program, which exclusively draws professionals
with interdisciplinary background. The investigators will also work with the
State Climate Office of NC and federal agencies, PNNL and ORNL, to implement the
algorithms developed in the project for broader applications. The investigators
will also develop customized podcasts and modules on climate-water-energy nexus
and their significance to sustainability for high school students by
collaborating with the engineering place at NCSU.