* 1442039
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID - Integrated Precipitation and Hydrology 2014 (IPHEx) - Enhancing Coupled Observations of the Land-Atmosphere System and Educational Opportunities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Ana Barros, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 10/31/2014
* USD 19,496.00

Natural hazards such as flashfloods and landslides occur in response to large
precipitation. Flashfloods are associated with heavy rainfall rates, whereas
landslides are initiated in response to large subsurface runoff, and thus may
happen during the storm or long after rainfall stopped. Previous research in the
Great Smoky Mountains suggests that as rain falls through fog and low level
clouds, intensity of rainfall can increase by a factor of ten in a few minutes.
In this project, we will collect observations to investigate rainfall
enhancement processes that can be used to improve the estimation and prediction
of rainfall and the response-time of subsurface runoff and streamflows. The
measurements will include characterization of aerosols and CCN leading to fog
and low level cloud formation, and observations of the microphysics of fog,
light and heavy rainfall. Soil water and stream water samples will be collected
for future tracer analysis to determine how the subsurface water moves and how
the water in the streams travels within regional watersheds. Many graduate and
undergraduate students from multiple universities and colleges will work side-
by-side in the project. We will train the students to use a variety of novel
instruments, and to collect high-quality measurements that can be used for
scientific research. This project will be coordinated with the Integrated
Hydrology and Precipitation Experiment (IPHEx) 2014.