* 1442605
* American Chemical Society Symposium Advancing the Chemical Sciences Through Diversity in Participation, August 10-14, 2014
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Larry Dalton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

Support is provided for the American Chemical Society Symposium on Advancing the
Chemical Sciences Through Diversity in Participation through the Division of
Chemistry (CHE), the Division of Materials Research (DMR), the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET), and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). This symposium is to be held at
248th National Meeting of the American Chemical Society, San Francisco, CA,
August 10-14, 2014. It is being held in conjunction with the Award Symposium for
the ACS Award for Encouraging Disadvantaged Students into Careers in the
Chemical Sciences Honoring 2014 Award Recipient Professor Rigoberto Hernandez.
The primary sponsor of this symposium is the American Chemical Society Committee
on Minority Affairs and the symposium is co-sponsored by the ACS Diversity and
Inclusion Advisory Board, the ACS Division of Analytical Chemistry, the ACS
Division of Chemical Education, the ACS Division of Computers in Chemistry, the
ACS Division of Physical Chemistry, the ACS Division of Polymeric Materials:
Science & Engineering, the ACS Division of Polymer Chemistry, the Chemist with
Disabilities Committee, the Women Chemists Committee, the Young Chemists
Committee, and the International Activities Committee. The featured speakers at
this symposium come from Chemistry, Chemical Engineering,Psychology and the
Research Corporation for Scientific Advancement. These speakers will report
scholarly studies on factors influencing careers in the STEM workforce and STEM
education and will share personal experiences related to both the intellectual
merit of science and broader impacts. The symposium program committee consists
of Drs. Larry Dalton (University of Washington), Robert Lichter (Merrimack, LLC;
formerly Director of the Dreyfus Foundation), and Charles Liotta (Georgia
Institute of Technology).