* 1442454
* Student travel support for BIRS workshop on programming with chemical reaction networks
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* David Doty, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Broader significance and importance. This is a proposal requesting $5,000 for
student travel support for the Programming with Chemical Reaction Networks,
workshop to be held at the Banff International Research Station (BIRS). The
primary purpose of the proposal is to give travel assistance to students who
will participate in this workshop. Their participation will include oral
presentations and collaborative research with experts on topics related to the
programming and implementation of chemical reaction networks. Approximately 7
students and postdocs, from US institutions, will be funded for travel, with an
expected average award of $720 per recipient. By funding travel to students and
postdocs, we are actively encouraging and incentivizing a new generation of
researchers to contribute to the study of chemical reaction networks. The travel
awards will foster the creation of the next generation of molecular programmers,
by encouraging students to attend and interact with others in the field. In the
long term, this has clear benefits for the field as a whole. Unlike a
conference, where the majority of the time is devoted to formal, prepared talks,
the majority of the workshop will be interactive, encouraging communication and
participation of all attendees. Because there will be only twenty attendees,
active participation from students and postdocs will be not only encouraged but
expected. Furthermore, the informal nature of the discussions will allow younger
researchers to witness research in its earliest stages, before concrete problems
have even been formulated, teaching them by example the creative process of
research. Finally, the organizers have made an explicit effort to invite women
and under-represented minorities to the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description. The study of chemical reaction networks dates back 150 years, when
Guldberg and Waage first formulated the Law of Mass Action. The 1970s saw a
surge of interest from the mathematical community, particularly the foundational
work of Horn, Jackson, and Feinberg in characterizing subclasses of networks
with guarantees on the existence and/or uniqueness of steady states. A more
recent mathematical community has arisen, also studying chemical reaction
networks as formal mathematical objects, but concerned principally with
understanding their ability to carry out computation. Although theoretical in
nature, this line of research is informed directly by recent experimental
endeavors in programming the behavior of matter at the molecular level, using
DNA, enzymes, and other biochemical molecules as engineering tools re-purposed
from their biological function to serve as computational primitives. The
intention of this workshop is to bring together experts in different aspects of
chemical reaction networks, from the computational perspective studying the
abilities and limitations of engineered chemical systems, the mathematical
analysis of natural chemical systems, and experimentalists who deal with real
chemicals. Our goals are to help these different communities learn the main
results, techniques, and perspectives of each other, to identify unifying
conceptual principles that underlie the different projects, and to generate
novel research directions for the future based on this interdisciplinary
interaction.