* 1442355
* Core Support for the Board on Environmental Change and Society (BECS) of the National Research Council (NRC)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Toby Warden, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 02/28/2019
* USD 525,000.00

This award will continue support for core operations of the Board on
Environmental Change and Society (BECS) of the National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences. This board has functioned under its current and
previous names since 1990 to advance science and environmental decision making
by promoting integrated analysis of the human interactions with the natural
environment. It works with project sponsors to develop products that are
problem-focused and that demonstrate a clear role for the social and behavioral
sciences in identifying and informing solutions to environmental challenges.
BECS will clarify environmental research needs and opportunities for the social
and behavioral science research community in order to facilitate the involvement
of scientists in these fields to engage in research that will have yield new
information and insights of scholarly and practical value as society faces
increasingly complex environmental issues. BECS will pay particular attention to
the integration of the social and behavioral sciences with the natural sciences
in helping ascertain the natural and social contexts of problems faced by
environmental decision makers. It will help assess the utility of insights from
the social and behavioral sciences to address, and it will help to sharpen the
scientific underpinning for analytic and decision-support tools to be developed
and applied by governmental agencies and others. In addition to working with
sponsors to conduct special problem-focused studies whose findings are widely
disseminated, BECS will conduct problem-focused symposia in conjunction with its
semi-annual meetings. These symposia will be webcast to enable scholars and
practitioners unable to attend to benefit from these discussions during the
symposia and afterwards. Benefits from the webcasted symposia and from other
BECS products will include insights to help advance fundamental research on
environmental topics in the social and behavioral sciences and to assist in the
use of those insights by federal agencies and other governmental entities, non-
governmental organizations, private firms, and educational
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the core activities undertaken by the
Board on Environmental Change and Society are the maintenance of capacity at the
National Academies to respond to requests for integrated analyses of human-
environment issues. BECS also will continue nurturing collaborative links
between natural scientists and social and behavioral scientists to improve
scientific contributions to basic knowledge and applications of that knowledge
in environmental settings. BECS also will promote discussions regarding current
and future research directions through the conduct of problem-focused symposia
in concert with its semi-annual meetings. Finally, BECS will serve as an
oversight body for the conduct of focused studies and activities undertaken at
the behest of other federal agencies.