* 1442256
* Dimensions: Identifying how the ecological and evolutionary interactions between host and symbiont shape holobiont biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Scott Powell, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 316,339.00

Although individual animals have long been considered a fundamental unit of
evolution, we now know that each is really a co-dependent collection of host
animal and microbes. This co-dependency reaches from ancient times through to
the present day. Many animals depend on gut bacteria to process food and
incorporate essential nutrients into the host's own tissues. To untangle the
importance of this partnership for hosts and symbiotic gut bacteria, this
project will study a diverse and ecologically important social animal group, the
turtle ants. As social organisms, ants and humans share ways for acquiring
helpful and harmful bacteria. State-of-the-art molecular and genomic methods
will be used to investigate ancient and modern influences on the symbiosis, the
function of the bacteria for host health, and the means of passage and
maintenance of the bacterial symbionts over millions of
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explaining global patterns of biodiversity and their
drivers have long been central challenges in the fields of ecology and
evolution. Increasingly, it is becoming apparent that biodiversity is itself a
function of interactions across different levels of biological organization.
Among the metazoans, symbioses with microbes are a defining feature, and
individuals are integrated collections of host and symbiont cells, together
defining the "holobiont". By studying the diverse and tractable turtle ant
system, this research will address the relationships between symbiosis and the
dimensions of holobiont biodiversity with unprecedented clarity. Specifically,
this research will address: 1) the roles of time, biogeography, and habitat in
host diversification (host taxonomic dimension); 2) variation in gut communities
across host ant phylogeny, geography, habitat, and ecological niches (symbiont
taxonomic dimension integrated with host taxonomic and functional dimensions);
3) the extent of codiversification for ~10 core, host-specific symbiont
lineages, and the impacts of host phylogeny, geography, and ecology on symbiont
transfer (symbiont taxonomic dimension integrated with host taxonomic and
functional dimensions); 4) variation in genome evolution and innovation across
symbionts with varying degrees of codiversification, and across genes with
varying function (taxonomic, genetic, and functional integration of hosts and
symbionts); and 5) symbiont function in light of symbiont genome evolution,
host-symbiont codiversification, and host phylogeny, geography, and ecology
(taxonomic, genetic, and functional integration of hosts and symbionts).