* 1442059
* DIMENSIONS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: GENETIC, PHYLOGENETIC, AND FUNCTIONAL MICROBIAL DIVERSITY IN PERMANENTLY FROZEN AQUATIC SEDIMENTS OVER GEOLOGICAL TIME
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Tullis Onstott, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 452,071.00

Permafrost (permanently frozen soil) may provide snapshots of ancient life and
represent fossil archives of plant, animal and microbial communities. Microbes
are of particular interest because, unlike most animals and plants, they can
survive very long periods of extreme conditions. Therefore, it is possible that
some microbes in permafrost are not fossils but are still alive -- essentially,
living fossils. This research addresses an unresolved question of whether
microbes embedded in permafrost are extinct, representing ancient terrestrial
surface or marine communities preserved through time, or actively living
communities that have been evolving since being buried. To determine how long
microbial communities can live in permafrost, this project will study permafrost
collected from the oldest known sediments of the Northern Hemisphere, which
occur in Siberia. These intriguing marine and lake sediments are five thousand
to three million years old and are found in stratified cliffs. This project will
help scientists understand how biological communities respond to large changes
in the environment, and its results will be shared with university students and
high school teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five year project
will document evolution of taxonomic, genetic and functional biodiversity over
time using state of the art "omic" approaches combined with single cell genomic,
cultivation studies and physical-chemical characterization of permafrost
sediments. One of the key challenges of this project will be the application of
evolutionary models to the DNA sequence datasets to distinguish between
permafrost strata containing fossil archive models versus contemporary community
models. The data will elucidate evolutionary mechanisms that shape taxonomic,
genetic and functional diversity, providing insight into genome evolution and
microbial adaptation to low temperatures. Functional, population genetic and
phylogenetic approaches will be integrated. The international nature of this
project provides a platform to expand a network of collaborative permafrost
research with open system data management and sharing. This project will train
scientists at the undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral levels, and engage
high school teachers through molecular biology workshops. Interaction with
Russian collaborators and travel to the Siberian study sites will promote
international cooperation and provide training to students in how to conduct
research with colleagues from different cultures.