* 1442027
* EAGER: Enabling Discovery and Scientific Collaboration on Human Memory via the Web-Based Atlas and Tissue Bank for Patient H.M.'s Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Jacopo Annese, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 11/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Knowledge of a specific neural network supporting memory function in the human
brain stems from the case of patient H.M. who, in 1953 underwent an experimental
medial temporal lobectomy in the hope of reducing the frequency and severity of
his epileptic seizures. The operation was successful in that respect, but it
unexpectedly left him incapable of creating new memories. For more than five
decades, H.M. participated in hundreds of experiments and his case was discussed
in thousands of scientific publications. His brain contained the clues to
understand how memory works; however, determining with precision which
structures were damaged was not possible because even the latest neuroimaging
could not clearly resolve the anatomy of the temporal lobes. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Jacopo Annese will complete an 'open
source', web-based microscopic atlas of H.M.'s brain which was donated to
science post-mortem. The tools-embedded atlas will support the creation of
teaching curricula that will expose students to raw neuroimaging data from
multiple modalities, cutting edge brain mapping algorithms, web-based
exploration tools, all within the clinical and biographical context of H.M. as
an individual. The cyber infrastructure created through this project is expected
to enable discovery neuroscience by participants world wide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Dr. Annese and his research team will (1)
provide a dedicated support infrastructure to maintain and manage the web atlas
for H.M.'s brain; (2) significantly increase the accuracy of the atlas by
increasing the number of digitized histological slices to achieve 1 mm per slice
interval (from 3mm interval); (3) acquire and deliver image stacks to enable
remote quantitative studies; (4) implement new web tools to enable the handling
of remote request and curation of results from different laboratories; (5)
convert the images into formats that can be 3-D printed using consumer products.
Such cyber infrastructure will make the valuable H.M. data available for new
retrospective studies that may further change our current view of how memory is
established in the human brain and enable quantitative analyses at the cellular
level using a 'virtual microscope'. The resulting atlas will be used by
researchers worldwide to re-interpret, based on clear anatomical evidence, the
results from hundreds of neuropsychological exams conducted when H.M. was alive.