* 1442672
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Meghdoot: A Multi-Cloud Infrastructure for Enhancing Sustainability via Effective Monitoring of Inland Waters and Coastal Wetlands
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Suchendra Bhandarkar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 399,912.00

The overall goal of the project is the design and prototype implementation of a
multi-cloud computing framework that seamlessly integrates community
observations, remote sensing measurements, and advanced multimedia analytics for
effective environmental monitoring. This infrastructure, called Meghdoot, will
be employed for early detection of salt marsh stress in coastal areas and
cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms in inland waters. This framework will
harness multiple clouds including community clouds, sensor clouds, and
computational clouds to develop efficient and timely event detection strategies.
In addition, efficacious mechanisms for motivating and enabling community
members to contribute high-quality content for enhanced environmental monitoring
will be investigated. The first research thrust of the proposed project is to
invent mechanisms to effectively leverage community clouds for monitoring lakes
and salt marshes. In this community-as-sensors paradigm, data produced by
individuals of the community (i.e., blogs, images, tweets) in online social
media platforms (Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, etc.) will be used to generate
trustworthy, actionable information. This, in turn, will act as the initial
trigger for activating the traditional sensing infrastructure. The data from
sensor clouds comprised of high resolution cameras and hyperspectral radiometers
will be processed through the computational cloud using specialized techniques
such as segmentation, feature extraction, registration, indexing, and spectral
models for producing estimates of the cyanobacteria concentration and marsh
biophysical characteristics from the study sites. The final research thrust of
this project will focus on the optimization of the deployment and operation of
the sensor cloud based on the information from the community cloud and the
results from the computational cloud.

This project addresses two environmental issues important to coastal states in
southeastern United States, namely, harmful algal blooms and marsh browning
events. Over the last decade the frequency and magnitude of these
environmentally detrimental events have gone up primarily because of drought as
well as sea level rise. Therefore, accurate, cost-effective, and targeted
monitoring of these events is indispensable to sustainable management of the
environment. The proposed cyber-infrastructure-based warning system will enable
early detection and timely implementation of preemptive measures to reduce the
frequency and severity of future events while ensuring environmental
conservation and sustainability. The project plans to engage students, community
leaders, resource managers, and the general public via training, workshops, and
social media in various aspects of the research starting from crowd sourcing to
environmental sensor deployments, data acquisition, processing, and
interpretation. The success of the proposed project will pave the way for a
state-wide automated early detection, warning and rapid response system that can
be adopted by state-level environmental agencies to alert restoration officials
and lay citizens of impending risks associated with these events.