* 1442586
* SHF:  Small:  A Hierarchical Symbolic Framework to Verify Logic, Timing, and Probabilistic Properties of Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Gianfranco Ciardo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2016
* USD 125,718.00

A symbolic framework for the analysis of logic, timing, and probabilistic
properties of computer systems is developed, using decision diagrams for the
storage and manipulation of large data structures. Decision diagrams have been
enormously effective in verification, but their potential has not been explored
much in other settings. The framework includes symbolic solutions for Markov
models based on efficient classes of edge-valued decision diagrams to represent
rate matrices, using under- and over-approximations to obtain bounds when an
exact numerical study is infeasible, relying on aggregation or partial
exploration of states at the logic level, computing probability bounds at the
numerical level, and exchanging numerical values between hierarchical submodels.
The framework also addresses non-Markov settings, general distributions, and
nondeterministic interval ranges for the timing of events by exploring the
limits and potentials of symbolic encodings, hierarchical composition, and
bounds, including hybrid techniques that integrate traditional discrete-event
simulation with symbolic algorithms.

The research results will positively affect several areas of computer science
and engineering, by providing researchers and engineers with the ability to
study the logic, timing, and probabilistic properties of much larger and more
general system models than currently possible. The software packages developed
during this project will be an excellent hands-on tool for students and
practitioners in need to model, verify, or analyze the logic and timing behavior
of computer systems.