* 1442051
* Support for the 2014 Gordon Research Conference on Catalysis:  From Art to Science
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* John Regalbuto, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,500.00

ABSTRACT TITLE&lt;br/&gt;Support for the 2014 Gordon Research Conference on
Catalysis: From Art to Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This
award will be applied to the registration costs for participants of the 2014
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Catalysis, with preference given to post-
doctoral associates and graduate students. The theme of this year?s conference
is ?From Art to Science?. The conference will be held June 22-27, 2014, at
Colby-Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire. The PI for the award is Prof.
John Regalbuto of the University of South Carolina. The goal of this award is to
support the attendance of up to 18 exceptional early career scientists and
engineers from the catalysis research community. Special emphasis has been taken
to increase the visibility and participation of women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
field of catalysis plays a key role in the nation?s economy and standard of
living. Fundamental research in catalysis produces materials (i.e., catalysts)
that significantly improve the manufacturing process for many products. Many of
these products find application in improving the quality of human life, reducing
the adverse impact of human activities on the environment, and securing the
nation's energy supply. Research in the field of catalysis also has major
economic impact since a majority of the products used by a modern society
requires catalysts at some point in their manufacture. The Gordon Research
Conferences have a long tradition of bringing together leading experts from
around the world to discuss their latest, most exciting work in catalysis and
future directions for the field. The agenda for the conference allows for
extended discussions amongst the participants from academia, industry, and the
national laboratories. At least a third of the participants are graduate
students and early career scientists. The conference is a unique learning
environment for early career participants because the format combines informal
presentations and discussions, group meals, and external activities to encourage
collaborative discussions between early career and advanced-career catalytic
scientists from academia, industry, and national labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2014 GRC on Catalysis will continue the tradition of bringing together leading
researchers from around the world to discuss their latest, most exciting work in
catalysis and future directions for the field. The extended discussions that
arise in this collection of outstanding thinkers from academic, industrial, and
national laboratory research, including post-doctoral associates and graduate
students, is a unique learning environment for early career participants and a
great opportunity for synergistic advances in research by the established
community of scientists and engineers. The conference has a materials synthesis
bias. The conferences sessions cover: (1) Science in Catalyst Development, (2)
Understanding and Designing Oxides and Carbon, (3) Rational Synthesis of
Supported Metal Nanoparticles, (4) Computations for Mechanistic Understanding
and Catalyst Design, (5) State of the Art Characterization Methods, (6) The Art
of Surface Science, (7) Understanding Catalytic Reactivity, (8) Continuing the
Transformation of Catalysis Art into Science. Late-afternoon poster sessions for
graduate students and post-doctoral associates are an integral and
intellectually vigorous part of the meeting. These poster sessions are given
substance by a best-poster competition judged by a panel of industrial
participants. Additionally, a significant diversity impact this year is that 50%
of the speakers are women.