* 1442773
* CyberSEES: TYPE 2: Sustainably Unlocking Energy from Municipal Solid Waste Using a Sensor-Driven Cyber-Infrastructure Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Dimitrios Zekkos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,199,600.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Our nation's practices in managing the growing amounts of
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) that are generated every year are unsustainable. The
majority of MSW generated every year is still disposed of in landfills despite
national and international efforts aimed to increase recycling. In modern
landfills, MSW is treated as a material to be isolated and contained. Current
MSW management strategies cause sub-optimal degradation of landfill waste
resulting in the generation of biogases (primarily methane and carbon dioxide)
that are mostly flared, vented or leaked to the atmosphere where they remain as
greenhouse gases (GHG). As a result, landfills represent the second largest
anthropogenic source of methane in the US. Fortunately, MSW has high energy
potential that remains virtually untapped as a national energy resource. The
overarching goal of this research is to revolutionize how MSW is managed to
provide a transformative means of extracting utility-scale energy from waste
using next-generation facilities to be termed Sustainable Energy Reactor
Facilities (SERFs). This paradigm-shift is only recently possible through the
adoption of innovative computing technologies such as high-performance computing
for multi-domain process modeling, low-cost autonomous sensor networks, and
unmanned autonomous vehicles (UAVs), all synergistically integrated within a
customized cyber-environment. This integration of in-situ SERF observation with
high-performance computing allows the energy generation capacity of SERF to be
maximized resulting in lower cost energy production with a dramatic reduction in
GHG and carbon footprint compared to traditional dry-tomb landfills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SERFs will be designed with two objectives: maximize
energy recovery and minimize environmental impact. The explicit objective of
maximizing energy generation will necessitate a significant deviation from
modern MSW management practices which are based on empirical methods. SERFs are
only possible through environmental sensing and modeling of physical-chemical-
biological processes occurring within a landfill. At the core of the SERF
technology will be complex, multi-domain computational performance models (CPMs)
that require execution in near real-time and consider these processes over
varying spatial and temporal scales. CPM is enabled by high-performance
computing platforms that can update and execute the CPMs using in-situ
observations of MSW processes collected by field deployed wireless sensor
networks. Model uncertainty can be further reduced through the introduction of
ground-based and aerial mobile sensing platforms whose paths are optimally
planned using CPM model uncertainty and platform constraints (e.g., energy)
within the same minimizing objective function. With CPM models updated, energy
generation can be predicted by SERF owners with energy extraction maximized by
the injection of septage and leachate into the SERF. A multidisciplinary team of
researchers with expertise in landfill design and modeling and researchers from
computer science will work in close collaboration with an Industrial Advisory
Board (IAB) of major waste industry stakeholders (i.e., waste management
companies, industry consultants, and government regulators). Research,
educational and outreach activities are integrated through a virtual "hub". The
IAB will provide guidance on decisions pertaining to the project's research and
education activities. Activities are planned to promote education of the
society-at large, integrate undergraduate and graduate education and research,
and nurture a well-equipped future domestic workforce to manage and advance SERF
technology. An award-winning journalist will also be engaged in training
engineering students in efficiently communicating with broad audiences complex
engineering matters, and in evaluating the proposed web-based resources (videos
and animations). In addition, the research team will partner with a team of
Chinese researchers leading to international technology, education and cultural
exchanges.