* 1442971
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Collaborative Research: Connecting Next-generation Air Pollution Exposure Measurements to Environmentally Sustainable Communities
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Michael Hannigan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 698,765.00

Ambient exposure to ground-level air pollution is linked to adverse health
effects in many populated areas of the world. However, advances in relating air
pollution exposure to sustainable communities are hindered by limited direct
observations of exposure and the coarseness of regional and global air quality
models used for decision making. As a result, existing models do not resolve the
scales of variability in either pollutant concentrations or population
distributions necessary to accurately assess exposure nor provide the type of
probabilistic uncertainty bounds required for policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to assimilate comprehensive cyber information for use in air
quality management. It advances the interdisciplinary field of cyber-
environmental research through investigation into (1) cyber-scale data analysis
to harness and distill valuable cyber information to support community-scale air
pollution modeling; (2) micro-environment targeted sensing to augment community-
scale studies with accurate, on-demand, and in situ sensing capabilities; and
(3) scalable exposure modeling and analysis by solving a complex,
spatiotemporally varying problem with high-dimensional data containing cyber,
sensing, and model outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in cyber-environmental
research have the potential to improve government policy making, regulations,
and personal choices with regard to environmentally sustainable community
development. Results of this project can apply across a wide spectrum of sectors
including energy, transportation, and healthcare. This project broadens vertical
research and education integration across information technologies and
environmental science and engineering, to both graduate and undergraduate
students. Through in-field trials, this project offers unique real-world
education and research opportunities to attract students from underrepresented
groups and industrial professionals.