* 1442065
* Workshop: Connecting the Biological and Physical Principles of Mammalian Aging; Arlington, VA; May 15-16, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2015
* USD 49,881.00

Loss of functionality is ubiquitous across Nature, from aging in organisms to
the decay of human engineered systems. With time, plants and animals lose
functionality and die, mountains erode, buildings and devices structurally fail
and decay. In many nonliving systems general principles have been articulated
that govern this loss of functionality and these may be applicable to aging. In
biological systems, however, a multitude of scenarios and myriads of mechanisms
have been proposed to explain the deterioration of the architecture and function
of organisms. Looking at mammalian aging from a systems level viewpoint is a
critical component in the search for general principles and "levers" that
control the system, including the paths to alter the processes leading to aging.
A vast amount of experimental data has been accumulated and, with the
development of better experimental techniques during the past 20 years,
quantitative data is being collected that can be used to design further
experiments and develop quantitative theories of aging. The experience in
physics is that when one integrates the details of sub-system dynamics into a
more holistic systems level approach and search for underlying principles that
govern physical processes we gain deeper insight into developing falsifiable
theoretical understandings of Nature. This methodology could provide new and
important insights into understanding biological aging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop: "Connecting the Biology and Physical
Principles of Mammalian Aging" will bring together approximately 25 scientists.
Approximately half of them will be biologists and half physicists. The meeting
will focus on model systems relevant to mammalian aging. The workshop will have
discussion of the current understanding of aging, the relevant data, and future
directions. Topics of interest to the discussion, but not limited only to these,
are centenarian aging, premature aging, cancer and aging, etc. Other questions
that could be of interest are the aging of species as a whole. It seems that the
human gametes have not aged for millions of years, that Life as a whole on Earth
has not aged, and that perhaps the principles of information copying, death of
the individual carriers of information, and evolutionary processes together defy
the aging of Life. Young scientists who are open to presenting and discussing
new, possibly speculative, ideas that will lead to a new perspective on aging
will participate at the workshop. The mixed composition of the participants will
stimulate new research ideas. The talks and discussions at the workshop will be
recorded and made available to the public.