* 1442131
* RAPID: Responses of different tree species to a severe ice storm in the southeastern United States.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Geoff Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 98,625.00

This project looks at how representative tree species in forests of South
Carolina and Georgia were affected by the major ice storm that occurred on
February 11-13, 2014. While ice storms periodically strike southern forests,
their role in affecting ecosystem composition, structure and function is poorly
understood, because they are currently rare (10-15 years apart), are hard to
predict, and because their frequency decreases across the region towards the
coast. As a result, previous studies are largely anecdotal and limited to ad-hoc
assessments of losses in commercial timber. In the case of this storm, there was
a major economic impact, with an estimated direct timber loss of $360 million
from about 1.5 million affected forested acres in South Carolina alone. The
frequency and magnitude of weather extremes is predicted to increase in many
regions and such changes may pose a greater threat to ecosystems than simple
changes in average conditions. By studying ice storms in southern forests, this
project will help scientists better predict the effects of such storms. This in
turn could be very useful to forest managers, municipalities and other property
owners for adapting to and mitigating damage. For example, knowledge and
understanding of how different tree species respond could improve predictions of
how tree species may adjust their future ranges in response, while also leading
to better forestry practices to mitigate the impacts on southern
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, scientists will document levels
of local ice accumulation, measure the damage caused by ice accumulation on
individual trees, record other characteristics of the trees themselves, and
record other important variables that may affect ice accumulation and damage
patterns across the landscape. This particular storm was unique in that its
impact area extended much farther into southern and coastal locations than
previous ice storms, which provides a rare opportunity for studying differential
species responses to ice damage, including many species that have never been
studied before. The specific objectives of the project are: (1) to characterize
tree responses to different levels of ice accumulation so that the potential
role of periodic ice storms on their distributions and overall forest
composition can be better understood, and (2) to study mechanisms underlying
differential species responses so that new computer models can be developed to
predict tree damage and mortality in response to different levels of ice
accumulation in the future. There are no standardized methods for assessing the
ecological impacts of ice storms and no models for predicting damage and
mortality. This limits tests of relevant hypotheses and comparisons across
regions. This project will fill several important knowledge gaps and, by testing
specific hypotheses that relate current distributions to species-level
responses, should enable better understanding of ice storms as an ecological
factor limiting tree species distribution and diversity.