* 1442630
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Collaborative Research: Real-time Ambient Noise Seismic Imaging for Subsurface Sustainability
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2016
* WenZhan Song, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 12/31/2016
* USD 525,025.00

This project creates a real-time Ambient Noise Seismic Imaging system, to study
and monitor the subsurface sustainability and potential hazards of geological
structures. Understanding and addressing the subsurface sustainability has
significant impact on the natural, social, and economic issues of the region and
across the globe. The system is comprised of a self-sustainable sensor network
of geophones that can autonomously perform in-network computing of the 3D
shallow earth structure images based on ambient noise alone. The project will
study the subsurface sustainability of Long Beach, California and Yellowstone
using their existing seismic array datasets and design the imaging system
accordingly. In the late stages of the project, a field demonstration of the
prototype system in Yellowstone expects to image the subsurface of some geysers.
The techniques developed find further utility in monitoring and understanding
the dynamics of subsurface oil, mine and geothermal resources, alongside
concomitant hazards in oil exploration, mining, hydrothermal eruption, and
volcanic eruption). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time imaging of shallow earth
structures is essential to assess the sustainability and potential hazards of
geological structures. The ability to deploy large wireless sensor arrays in
challenging environments is significant for any real-time hazard monitoring and
early warning system. The new approach taken is general, and can be implemented
as a new field network paradigm for real-time imaging of highly dynamic and
complex environments, including both natural and man-made structures. Results
from this research will be shared with Yellowstone National Park management
(NPS), rangers, and staff. The real-time subsurface images can be used in
visitor education centers, official handouts, ranger led field trips, and for
public safety management. The educational activities of this project include
enhancing undergraduate and graduate curricula and research programs at the
three collaborative universities, and the project provides many opportunities
for a collaborative cross-disciplinary exchange of ideas among them.