* 1442034
* Student Travel Support for the IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking (SECON) 2014
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Andreas Terzis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

IEEE SECON is a premier research conference on wireless networking that has been
the venue for presenting the latest research on sensor networks and the Internet
of Things. It is one of the top four conferences in this space, the others being
ACM Mobicom, ACM Sensys, and IEEE Infocom. The current conference scope is to
focus on sensors, sensor networks and their applications, with its large and
varied application domains. SECON 2014 will be held in Singapore in July 2014.
By supporting 15 graduate students to attend SECON 2014, this proposal will
increase the dissemination of the conference research results to a larger and a
more diverse audience, which otherwise would not have been able to attend. In so
doing, this proposal will contribute to the strength and inclusiveness of the
research community, and will lead to the long-term health and vitality of SECON.

By giving preference in grant awards to women and under-represented students,
the organizers hope to increase the participation among these groups. By
advertising to a wide range of colleges and universities, participants from a
more diverse set of institutions should be able to attend and benefit from the
conference. A broad and diverse population is vital to the health of the
research community.