* 1442749
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Fostering Non-Expert Creation of Sustainable Polycultures through Crowdsourced Data Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2018
* William Tomlinson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 12/31/2018
* USD 398,838.00

This project integrates research in computing and sustainability science with
the goal of enabling a new approach to sustainable food security. The PIs
propose to combine cyber-human systems and crowdsourcing research with the
science of agroecology with two main research goals: 1) to develop an
understanding of how online design tools may contribute to sustainability
through enhanced local food production, and 2) to utilize the population of a
plant species database as an instance of a class of problems amenable to
intelligent crowdsourcing, and pioneer new knowledge in crowdsourcing
optimization. As part of this project, the research team will design, build,
deploy, and evaluate the Sustainable Polyculture Composer, an online software
tool to aid in the design of small-scale plant-based agricultural ecosystems
(e.g., back yard food forests). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term food security is
central to sustainability. US food supply chains contribute to global change and
are vulnerable to its impacts. Large numbers of small-scale, sustainable, local
food production systems could help ensure food security in the face of global
change, and could help reduce the environmental impacts of the US food supply.
Unfortunately, many efforts at local food production (e.g., back yard gardens)
require significant inputs such as water and fertilizer. Effective tools and
techniques to encourage novices to begin growing their own food in sustainable
ways are lacking. The work will contribute to long-term food security and offer
lessons, concepts, methods, and software tools that may be transferable to other
sustainability challenges. In addition, the computing research will provide an
example that can be generalized to other efforts to more effectively integrate
knowledge that is distributed across many people.