* 1442726
* CyberSEES: Type 1: A New Reliability-Assuring Computational Framework for Grid Operations under High Renewable Penetration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Xiaojun Lin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

While renewable electricity generation is considered key to a sustainable
future, the variability and uncertainty of wind/solar generation at high
penetration levels pose unprecedented challenges to grid reliability. In today's
power systems, reliability is assessed by analyzing a set of contingency events,
such as the loss of generators or transmission lines. However, these
contingency-based methods are insufficient under large wind/solar ramping
events, which become increasingly frequent and significant at high renewable
penetration. Specifically, a large wind/solar ramping event should not be
treated as a single contingency event. Rather, it must be modeled as an
uncertain event-sequence that is sequentially revealed in time; yet the system
operator must take immediate actions in the midst of such an event-sequence
despite significant future uncertainty. Due to this critical difference,
traditional contingency-based methods can no longer accurately quantify the
resource requirement for reliability at high wind/solar penetration, leading to
more costly dispatch of resources to offset poorly-managed uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this open challenge, this CyberSEES project
develops a new and mathematically rigorous computational framework for procuring
and dispatching constrained grid resources, which aims to provably ensure
reliable and economic grid operations under high renewable penetration. The
project integrates reliability analysis at both the min/hour time-scales (for
balancing demand and supply) and the second/sub-second time-scales (for dynamic
security assessment). Specifically, the project team develops reliability-
assuring online algorithms for day-head unit commitment and real-time economic
dispatch at the min/hour time-scales, which provably balance demand and supply
under large and uncertain wind/solar ramping events. Further, the online
algorithms are tightly integrated with computationally-efficient set-based
reachability analysis for assessing dynamic system security at the second/sub-
second time-scales, which provides guaranteed bounds for dynamic system states
in the presence of wind/solar uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of
this project will lead to paradigm-shifting advances in our ability to ensure
power system reliability under high renewable penetration. At a broader scale,
the results will contribute to the increased adoption of renewable energy
sources worldwide, and will enable a smooth transition path to a sustainable
future grid. The developed computational framework will also be applicable to
small-footprint power systems, such as remote microgrids. Further, the results
are expected to contribute to computation by advancing online algorithm design
and reachability analysis, which will also be useful to other disciplines. The
results of this work will be widely disseminated through conference and journal
publications and actively shared with industry.