* 1442116
* EAGER: A Systems Approach for Identification and Evaluation of Nanoscience and Nanomanufacturing  Opportunities and Risks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Catherine Larson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2018
* USD 247,884.00

Since the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) was announced in 2000,
significant progress has been made in understanding the unique physical
phenomena that occur at the nano-scale and in designing and making new nano-
scale materials, structures and devices. To realize the benefits of
nanotechnology, research efforts have increased in the area of
nanomanufacturing, which is the pathway to commercialization. Large-scale
manufacturing of nano-enabled products brings opportunities and challenges. This
project will conduct a systematic study of nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing
and identify and evaluate opportunities for research and risks associated with
production of large quantities of nanomaterials. A systems approach to collect
and analyze bibliographic and patent data will be used. The project will examine
new methods of gathering the information and study new models to assess it. It
will identify emerging topics and sub-topics and identify the environmental,
health and safety (EHS) risks during the manufacture and use of nanomaterials.
The results of this study will guide the government and researchers in
determining what research gaps exist and how their resources and investments
could be directed to address important areas in nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this EArly Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is to develop new analytical models and frameworks to analyze
the outputs of research and innovation nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing.
Nanotechnology publication and patent data records from ISI Web of Science and
US Patent and Trade Office (USPTO) will be mined. The project will employ topic
modeling and clustering, trend analysis, and visualization techniques to develop
a monitoring system that will classify and characterize a vast array of
nanotechnology topics and subtopics, track their evolution, and identify
emerging areas of research. In addition, various text mining techniques will be
used to extract and analyze EHS data associated with nanomanufacturing processes
and large-scale nanomaterial production. Appropriate social media, books,
magazines and journal articles will be the sources for this analysis. Since
nanotechnology is a rapidly developing field tracking it has to be at a much
faster pace than before. In the new framework, nanotechnology domain knowledge
in topic modeling will be incorporated and the topics updated dynamically in
shorter time intervals. This is a challenge because it requires collecting
denser data in a short period of time. Also, the project is a first attempt to
include wider public participation in identifying EHS risks of nanotechnology.
Conventional risk evaluation approach is based on expert knowledge in certain
subfields. The new approach will incorporate the perspectives and knowledge of
various stakeholders, including researchers, inventors, opinion leaders, and
end-users.