* 1442728
* CyberSEES: Type 2: SEA-MASCOT: Spatio-temporal Extremes and Associations : Marine Adaptation and Survivorship under Changes in extreme Ocean Temperatures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Aidong Ding, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,199,617.00

This proposal develops novel computational and statistical models to address a
science question in marine ecology: How will marine organisms adapt and survive
under extreme climate stressors, in particular, rising ocean temperatures and
their extremes? Addressing this marine ecology question requires prediction of
extreme climate temperature variables at scales of one to a few meters; whereas,
current global climate models only yield credible insights at 100 kilometers.
Key to addressing these science questions is to develop computational models for
discovering associations and predictive models from nonlinear and relatively
non-stationary systems, where the dependence structures can be complex in space
and time. In this project, we propose novel statistical dependence measures that
capture nonlinear dependencies and non-stationary properties common in extremes
and spatio-temporal applications. In particular, we investigate dependence
measures based on copulas that satisfy the equitability property (a new concept
in statistics describing measures that are invariant to transformations) and
develop computational models that utilize this dependence measure to perform
feature selection to identify relevant variables and remove redundant ones on
high-dimensional climate and marine ecology data. We then develop novel
prediction models, leveraging on advances in sparse models, Bayesian
nonparametrics, and knowledge of the physics and science of climate and marine
ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the novel computational methods on feature
selection and prediction will enable the discovery of associations and
prediction of climate extremes at finer resolutions relevant for marine ecology
survivorship prediction. Besides broader impact to society through better marine
ecology prediction models, we also provide broader impact to education by
leveraging our multi-disciplinary team in offering cross-discipline education
and encouraging mentoring of women and minority students into our research
program.