* 1442646
* RAPID: Attitudes and beliefs in Russian-supported 'de facto' states and Eastern Ukraine in the wake of the Crimean annexation
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2014,07/31/2016
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 156,633.00

The project is designed to scientifically study public opinion in contested
areas of the former Soviet Union to address important theoretical questions in
international relations and comparative politics, and to inform US policymakers
on matters crucial to US security interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent events
in Ukraine -- violent protests in Kyiv, the collapse of the Yanukovych
government, installation of an interim pro-Western regime, and the rapid
annexation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia-- have altered Europe's political
map and profoundly challenged the geopolitical settlement agreed after the
collapse of the Soviet Union. Speculation abounds that the strongly Russophone
regions of eastern Ukraine (specifically, the large oblasts of Donetsk and
Kharkiv) and nearby post-Soviet separatist "de facto" states (Abkhazia, South
Ossetia and Transnistria) are potential future targets for Russian expansionism.
To term all these places "pro-Russian" is an over-simplification. Russia's
annexation of Crimea may have created what the Kremlin hopes are "new realities"
on the ground but it is not clear how the new geopolitical context and its
uncertainties are viewed by both residents in these de facto states and in
regions of Ukraine traditionally held to be "pro-Russian". Documenting and
analyzing these evolving attitudes in conflict regions is the project's research
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Three important research
questions about the international system have been thrown into sharp relief by
recent events. The first concerns the geopolitical challenge to the legitimacy
of the post-Cold War settlement in Europe. In the wake of a rupture from the
1970s agreement that post-war European boundaries should not be altered, are
post-Soviet de facto states about to be "gathered up" by Russia? Second,
contemporary geopolitical events are re-focusing attention on the crucial
importance of ongoing intellectual debates about territory and sovereignty in
international relations. Over twenty de facto states have been created in recent
decades. The current political crisis in Ukraine and its attendant questions
about the future territorial status of its eastern oblasts that are dominated by
a Russified population offers an opportunity to examine a possible territorial
modification through the views of the residents in these regions. A third broad
research topic is, while Russia's actions may not enjoy legitimacy in the UN
General Assembly, they appear to enjoy considerable popular support within
Russia and Crimea. After working strenuously for two decades to establish
"stateness", are residents of de facto states and similar minority regions
willing to abandon their nominal state identity to acquire a new one? To answer
these questions, the Principal Investigators, in collaboration with Russian
colleagues, will conduct large representative public opinion surveys in five
regions (three de facto states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria, and
two oblasts, Donetsk and Kharkiv, in eastern Ukraine) to document and analyze
current attitudes in the wake of the Ukrainian government crisis and subsequent
Crimea annexation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Events over the first
months of 2014 have shaken assumptions about Russia's adherence to post-Cold War
agreements to respect the territorial integrity of post-Soviet states. The US
focus is to ensure the continued transition to successful governance in Ukraine
and support Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova in their efforts to reclaim control of
territories. Post-Soviet de facto states are quite successful in promoting state
identity and internal state legitimacy. Given this, it is not at all clear that
communities in these territories have uniform aspirations for annexation by
Russia, though prevalent attitudes are strongly pro-Russia. The project will
provide critical information for US foreign policy by acquiring information
about current conditions inside de facto states and nominally pro-Russian
regions of Ukraine, their level of legitimacy with their own populations, the
extent and nature of their contacts with Russia, the willingness of the
populations to accept territorial and political changes, the relative level of
inter-ethnic social distances, and the conditions of border interactions.