* 1442208
* Workshop: Doctoral Consortium for HCOMP 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Matthew Lease, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2015
* USD 24,966.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of promising
doctoral students and distinguished research faculty to be held in conjunction
with the HCOMP 2014 Conference on Human Computation &amp; Crowdsourcing,
sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI). The Consortium will enhance the scientific workforce in this emerging
research area by developing a group of promising young researchers interested in
human computation and crowdsourcing. The award will also enable these young
researchers to attend the HCOMP 2014 conference, thus allowing them to interact
with other researchers and conference events; to learn of potential career paths
within academia and industry; to access an international network of researchers
who can support their professional development; and to observe the
interdisciplinary nature, diversity and interrelationships of research in human
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HCOMP 2014 Doctoral Consortium will be a
research-focused meeting of an international group of selected Ph.D. candidates
with a panel of distinguished research faculty. The Doctoral Consortium Chairs
will select six additional distinguished researchers to serve as faculty
mentors; this group also will serve as the review committee for student
applications. Students will be selected based on a paper giving an overview of
the student's dissertation research, an explanation of why the students wants to
participate in the Doctoral Consortium, a CV, and an advisor's letter of
support. The PIs will give preference to students who are most in need of
mentoring and joining a peer group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full-day workshop
event will include activities to guide the research of these promising young
researchers. The Consortium will allow participants to interact with established
researchers and with other students, through presentations, question-answer
sessions, panel discussions, and invited presentations. Each participant will
give a short presentation on their research and will receive feedback from at
least one faculty mentor and from fellow students. The Consortium will include
activities led by the faculty, such as a panel discussion, to give students more
information about the process and lessons of research and life in academia and
industry. To further integrate the Doctoral Consortium participants into the
conference itself, students will have a chance to present their work as posters
in an interactive poster session and their papers will be posted online on the
workshop webpage. These activities will benefit the participants by offering
each fresh perspectives and comments on their work from researchers outside
their own institution, both from faculty and other students; providing a
supportive setting for mutual feedback on participants' current research and
guidance on future research directions; and enabling participants to form a
cohort of new researchers.