* 1442858
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Ocean Wave Energy and the Power Grid: Optimization and Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2015,09/30/2020
* Rick Blum, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 900,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop sensing, prediction, optimization,
and control techniques for arrays of ocean wave energy conversion devices, known
as wave farms, to make them reliable, efficient, economical, and environmentally
benign. The project focuses on operational questions about the cyber-
infrastructure required to control and coordinate a wave farm's many autonomous
sensing and decision-making functions. Research topics include designing
computational tools to assess real-time hydrodynamic interactions of wave energy
converters; developing short-term and long-term wave prediction algorithms;
using wave condition forecasts to dynamically control arrays of wave energy
converters and energy storage systems within wave farms; enabling rapid fault
detection tests that use wave sensor data to assess system state; and automating
these decision-making processes within a wave farm with a multi-agent control
system. The project also assesses and optimizes the sustainability and
electricity market potential of wave farms by quantifying the opportunities and
gains that wave power producers may avail in the electricity market due to the
predictability and consistency of waves, and the effect of optimal wave farm
design and control on CO2 emissions. The project includes an educational and
workforce development plan to develop and administer an in-ocean course for high
school students from the Lehigh Valley, PA at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean
Sciences on the topic of wave energy; and to engage in community outreach via
educational modules and a unique exhibit on wave energy for patrons of the Da
Vinci Science Center in Allentown, PA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
project will optimize and estimate the extent to which wave energy can provide
green, predictable, dispatchable power to the electricity grid. The results will
yield models, algorithms, control strategies, and system architectures to
improve the output power of wave farms, reduce operating costs, maximize their
environmental benefits, and provide guidance for farm operators in pursuing
market opportunities. The project will validate the economic and environmental
feasibility of wave power and drive forward the significant research and
development efforts currently underway to bring the potential of wave energy
conversion to grid-scale fruition. Efficient and economic harvesting of the
kinetic energy in ocean waves offers an electricity future with a more diverse
supply portfolio, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and higher sustainability
impacts. The educational and workforce development components of this project
will broaden understanding of the technical and environmental aspects of wave
energy among a new generation of engineers and scientists, as well as among the
general public.