* 1443577
* Calibration of a Novel Nutrient Paleoproxy in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Phoebe Lam, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2019
* USD 388,639.00

Human observations of Earth's climate span only a narrow window of Earth
History. Understanding how and why Earth's climate changed before human
observations can be overcome through the measurement and interpretation of the
chemical composition of marine sediments. Accurate interpretation of these
records -- also known as "proxy" records, because they stand in for direct
measurements of environmental conditions in the past -- first requires that the
behavior of the proxy be properly calibrated against direct observations in
modern environments. This project will develop a novel proxy for marine nutrient
utilization based on a comprehensive characterization of the chemical
composition of particulate organic matter in the Southern Ocean. The formation
and export of organic matter in the ocean requires nutrients, consumes carbon,
and can influence the global air-sea balance of carbon dioxide. New proxies and
calibrations offer novel ways of looking at Earth's climate history and can
potentially illuminate interactions within marine
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of the biological carbon pump
depends critically on the availability and utilization of marine nutrients,
particularly in the Southern Ocean. However, ambiguity in, and disagreement
between current nutrient utilization paleoproxies renders reconstruction of past
nutrient regimes uncertain. Cadmium -- a known proxy for phosphate -- offers a
means to circumvent many of the known limitations of existing nutrient proxies,
but requires a full isotopic characterization before its application. In this
project, researchers will trace the stable isotopic composition of cadmium
recorded in organic matter using multiple collector inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry. The researchers will make isotopic measurements across
numerous surface nutrient regimes in the Southern Ocean, with a focus on three
critical geochemical transitions: the formation of organic carbon at the sea
surface, its transit and decomposition through the ocean's interior, and its
behavior during burial on the sea floor. This sea surface-to-sea floor
calibration will thus comprehensively determine the utility and fidelity of a
novel nutrient proxy, allowing a more accurate view of how Earth's climate was
related to ocean biogeochemistry in the past.