* 1443710
* Collaborative Research: Inert Gas and Methane Based Climate Records throughout the South Pole Deep Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 411,517.00

Gases trapped in ice cores have revealed astonishing things about the greenhouse
gas composition of the past atmosphere, including the fact that carbon dioxide
concentrations never rose above 300 parts per million during the last 800,000
years. This places today's concentration of 400 parts per million in stark
contrast. Furthermore, these gas records show that natural sources of greenhouse
gas such as oceans and ecosystems act as amplifiers of climate change by
increasing emissions of gases during warmer periods. Such amplification is
expected to occur in the future, adding to the human-produced gas burden. The
South Pole ice core will build upon these prior findings by expanding the suite
of gases to include, for the first time, those potent trace gases that both
trapped heat and depleted ozone during the past 40,000 years. The present
project on inert gases and methane in the South Pole ice core will improve the
dating of this crucial record, to unprecedented precision, so that the relative
timing of events can be used to learn about the mechanism of trace gas
production and destruction, and consequent climate change amplification.
Ultimately, this information will inform predictions of future atmospheric
chemical cleansing mechanisms and climate in the context of our rapidly changing
atmosphere. This award also engages young people in the excitement of discovery
and polar research, helping to entrain the next generations of scientists and
educators. Education of graduate students, a young researcher (Buizert), and
training of technicians, will add to the nation?s human resource base. This
award funds the construction of the gas chronology for the South Pole 1500m ice
core, using measured inert gases (d15N and d40Ar--Nitrogen and Argon isotope
ratios, respectively) and methane in combination with a next-generation firn
densification model that treats the stochastic nature of air trapping and the
role of impurities on densification. The project addresses fundamental gaps in
scientific understanding that limit the accuracy of gas chronologies,
specifically a poor knowledge of the controls on ice-core d15N and the possible
role of layering and impurities in firn densification. These gaps will be
addressed by studying the gas enclosure process in modern firn at the deep core
site. The work will comprise the first-ever firn air pumping experiment that has
tightly co-located measurements of firn structural properties on the core taken
from the same borehole.

The project will test the hypothesis that the lock-in horizon as defined by firn
air d15N, CO2, and methane is structurally controlled by impermeable layers,
which are in turn created by high-impurity content horizons in which
densification is enhanced. Thermal signals will be sought using the inert gas
measurements, which improve the temperature record with benefits to the firn
densification modeling. Neon, argon, and oxygen will be measured in firn air and
a limited number of deep core samples to test whether glacial period layering
was enhanced, which could explain low observed d15N in the last glacial period.
Drawing on separate volcanic and methane synchronization to well-dated ice cores
to create independent ice and gas tie points, independent empirical estimates of
the gas age-ice age difference will be made to check the validity of the firn
densification model-inert gas approach to calculating the gas age-ice age
difference. These points will also be used to test whether the anomalously low
d15N seen during the last glacial period in east Antarctic ice cores is due to
deep air convection in the firn, or a missing impurity dependence in the firn
densification models.

The increased physical understanding gained from these studies, combined with
new high-precision measurements, will lead to improved accuracy of the gas
chronology of the South Pole ice core, which will enhance the overall science
return from this gas-oriented core. This will lead to clarification of timing of
atmospheric gas variations and temperature, and aid in efforts to understand the
biogeochemical feedbacks among trace gases. These feedbacks bear on the future
response of the Earth System to anthropogenic forcing. Ozone-depleting
substances will be measured in the South Pole ice core record, and a precise gas
chronology will add value. Lastly, by seeking a better understanding of the
physics of gas entrapment, the project aims to have an impact on ice-core
science in general.