* 1443920
* US-Iceland Workshop: The Neural Basis of Icelandic Language Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Alan Beretta, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 02/28/2017
* USD 44,793.00

Organized by Alan Beretta of Michigan State University, this workshop on the
"Neural Basis of Icelandic Language Processing" aims to catalyze a suite of
follow-on research collaborations to enhance our basic understanding of how
human brains process language. Held in Reykjavik, the workshop will bring
together scholars from U.S. institutions with their counterparts from the
University of Iceland and its Institute of Linguistics to study the neural
processing of Icelandic sentences. Together, the partners will focus on the
relatively rare and complex linguistic constructions found in the Icelandic
language with the goal of gaining new insights into the language-brain
relationship. Based upon initial progress at the workshop, the U.S. and
Icelandic researchers and participating U.S. graduate students plan to begin
designing follow-on electrophysiological experiments to examine how the normally
functioning brain responds, within milliseconds, to such rare Icelandic language
phenomena. A significant body of research related to complex wording has
provided us with a solid platform for understanding how brains process language.
However, questions remain and these unusual Icelandic structures may allow
scientists to go deeper into the remaining fundamental questions. If successful,
results from new research also may have long-term implications for understanding
language impairment caused by brain damage.

By investigating singular aspects of the neural processing of Icelandic, the
researchers hope to enhance theoretical understanding of the language-brain
relation. Conspicuously unusual constructions used in Icelandic language
processing have the potential to reveal more specifically how brains process
complex words, for example, noun-noun compounds. New insights are expected to
contribute to the design of future experiments with aphasic subjects to
determine how processing these language phenomena is affected in damaged brains.
Furthermore, deeper theoretical understanding in this domain can have the
longer-term benefit of suggesting more focused treatment regimes for people
suffering from language impairments following brain damage.