* 1443141
* CAREER: Microfluidic Separation Technologies for Cell Sorting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Palaniappan Sethu, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,890.00

Name:Sethu Proposal#:1149059

Research targeted at developing miniaturized, portable cell sorting technologies
for isolation of white blood cells (WBCs) containing analytic, diagnostic or
therapeutic value with minimal isolation process induced changes (activation) is
proposed. Commonly used sorting techniques for isolation of WBCs, rely on the
use of antibody and centrifugation -based methods which are associated with cell
activation. This project introduces two new techniques that exploit physical and
charge based attributes of cells in conjunction with fluid flow phenomenon that
develop in microfluidic channels to sort and separate cells. The first technique
exploits differences in cell mass density in conjunction with inertial forces
using density mismatched fluids in high-aspect ratio microfluidic channels. This
technique is suitable for sorting sub-populations of WBCs (i.e.) peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from polymorphonuclear cells (PNMs) in an
automated format. The second technique relies on differences in cell surface
energy to cause initial sorting via phase partitioning and then amplifies this
separation using inertial forces in microchannels. This technique will be used
to sort specific cellular populations like activated WBCs and circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) in circulation. Exclusive reliance on flow phenomenon and
physical/charge attributes for discrimination into subpopulations ensures
minimal cell loss or artifactual activation. Both of these techniques are fast,
reliable, require minimal user intervention and are suitable for use in medical
or resource limited settings.

Integral to the success of this project are education and outreach activities
seeking to stimulate the interest and increase the participation of minorities
and underrepresented groups in STEM fields. This will be achieved through the
expansion and enrichment of a partnership previously established with Central
HS, a historically minority institution with 87% minority enrollment and 60%
female enrollment. Outreach goals will be accomplished through long-term efforts
focused on engaging underrepresented students early, during their HS and
undergraduate training. Students within the medical magnet program at Central HS
will be introduced to bioengineering and career opportunities through seminars;
intellectually engaged via research demonstrations and hands-on activities;
motivated through interactions with successful professionals in academia and
industry (role models); introduced to scholarship and financial aid programs and
offered opportunities to participate in paid research activities. During their
research experience, students will receive individual mentorship from
undergraduate students from the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) and
the Society of Women Engineers (SWE) to establish a supportive peer community.
Undergraduate research positions will be offered to incoming freshman from
underrepresented groups, with priority given to students from Central HS
enrolling at the University of Louisville. Complimentary to these activities,
the PI will work with two local HS science teachers to create STEM modules on
microfluidics as learning tools to enhance understanding of fundamental concepts
in science. These learning modules already validated at Walden School will be
implemented at Central HS and other schools within the Jefferson County Public
School System (JCPS). Research-based learning will also be integrated into all
courses taught at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Finally, a laboratory
website will be maintained to expose activities in the lab to the local
community and others, serve as a recruitment tool and disseminate research and
outreach outcomes