* 1443315
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Role of Mesoscale Processes and Ice Dynamics in Carbon and Iron Fluxes in a Changing Amundsen Sea (INSPIRE)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,996.00

The Amundsen Sea, in the remote Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean, is one of
the least well studied Antarctic continental shelf regions. It shares
characteristics in common with other Antarctic ice shelf regions, but exhibits
unique aspects also. The Amundsen Sea Polynya (ASP), an open region at the base
of several of the terminal glaciers draining the West Antarctic Ice sheet
exhibits: 1) large intrusions of heat delivered from the warming modified
circumpolar deep water (mCDW) rising up onto the continental shelf, 2) the
fastest melting ice sheets in Antarctica, 3) the most productive coastal polynya
(161 g C m-2) together with a significant atmospheric CO2 sink, and 4) some of
the most rapidly declining regions of seasonal off-shore sea ice on Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following on from an earlier oceanographic field program,
the Amundsen Sea Polynya International Research Expedition (ASPIRE; 2011), this
study seeks to better synthesize and model the relative contributions of both
physical ocean-ice linkages and biological production and carbon export terms
and to compare these with other circumpolar Antarctic regions. A central feature
will be the use of a regionally coupled physical-biogeochemical model to follow
the dynamics of the large phytoplankton blooms that occur annually in the
Amundsen Sea Polyna. This study will provides a means to locate the Amundsen Sea
properties along the continuum of Antarctic ice shelf systems, and to understand
how these system might change in response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pedagogical techniques will be used to provide
educational outreach for three distinct target populations: secondary students,
pre-service science teachers, and in-service science teachers. Partnerships will
be developed with science teacher educators to implement the STEM career-
development lessons in undergraduate and graduate level science
teacher&lt;br/&gt;education courses.