* 1443730
* Continental-Scale Studies of Mesospheric Dynamics using the Antarctic Gravity Wave Instrument Network (ANGWIN)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* P-Dominique Pautet, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Moore
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

People are mostly aware of waves that are seen over water surfaces or felt from
winds. Similar waves exist in abundance in the atmosphere, affecting many air
layers and transporting enormous amount of energy and momentum over large
distances; they also affect and sometimes trigger many weather related
processes. These waves are called "gravity waves"; they are key drivers of the
air general circulation and temperature distributions throughout the middle and
upper atmosphere. Studying gravity waves, their sources, generation mechanism
and propagation properties, and dynamic characteristics is a matter of high
importance for many scientific disciplines including atmospheric science,
meteorology, climatology, space weather, and others. Developments in our
knowledge and modeling of weather prediction and climate dynamics are of a
highest societal importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the most significant
effects of these gravity waves are best noticeable in the middle- and low
latitudes, their generation and initial drivers are better studied from the
polar regions. This research continues continent-wide observations of gravity
waves in the upper atmosphere over Antarctica through the multinational research
effort named ANGWIN (ANtarctic Gravity Wave Instrument Network) that uses state-
of-the-art wide field cameras and Advanced Mesospheric Temperature Mappers
(AMTM) deployed at various Antarctic stations. The proposed research adds new
imagers to the U.S. stations at Palmer and at McMurdo, augmenting already
existing instrumentation strategically distributed around the Antarctic
continent at stations Halley and Rothera (UK), Comandante Ferraz (Brazil), Syowa
(Japan), Davis (Australia), and at the U.S. stations McMurdo and South Pole.
This will create an unprecedented capability for the pan-Antarctic
investigations of gravity waves dynamics and their effects on the upper
atmosphere. The project will bring new knowledge and better understanding of the
continental-scale effects on the general air circulation of the middle and upper
atmosphere, quantifying characteristics of mesospheric gravity waves, their
dominant sources, propagation, and dissipation over the Antarctic continent and
surrounding Southern Ocean. This research is a cost-effective investment that
will advance the state of knowledge of the Geospace domain as the arrangement of
installed and planned instrumentation will form a powerful observing system with
a high potential for advancing this science field. The coordinated analysis of
obtained images and data will be performed by the U.S. and international
collaborator; data and results will be shared via a series of open workshops,
facilitating discussions and assuring progress in understanding of important
atmospheric phenomena.