* 1443317
* RAPID: GPS and InSAR Observations in Bolivia and Chile of the Co-seismic and Post-seismic Deformation Associated with the 1 Apr, 2014 Mw 8.2 Pisagua, Chile, Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* James Foster, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2018
* USD 105,469.00

An unusual sequence of earthquakes began in the northern Chile subduction zone
on March 16, 2014 with a 10-day long swarm of earthquakes that migrated to the
north ? a pattern similar to the swarm of earthquakes that presaged the 2011
magnitude 9.0 Tohoku Japan earthquake, which provoked concern in Chile because
this megathrust zone last failed in a magnitude 8.8 earthquake in 1877 and is
thought capable of producing a magnitude 9 earthquake again. So far, the largest
event in the sequence is the April 1, 2014 magnitude 8.2 Pisagua, Chile
earthquake. The ground deformation caused by this large earthquake will persist
long after the earthquake and decay over a period of years. Measurements of the
surface deformation during and after the event can provide important information
about the properties of the earth in the region, improve understanding of
deformation processes, and aid in determining regions with a high likelihood of
producing large aftershocks. Large dense GPS networks installed by U.S., German,
French, Peruvian, and Chilean groups in Chile will record this deformation close
to the earthquake epicenter but significant deformation is expected farther away
in Bolivia, a very poorly instrumented region. This rapid response project will
install new GPS networks in Bolivia, collect data from existing GPS sites in
Chile and Bolivia, and analyze satellite synthetic aperture radar data in order
to fully capture the ground motion associated with this event. These data will
contribute to understanding the physics and hazard potential of large megathrust
earthquakes in Chile and elsewhere, such as Cascadia, Alaska, and Japan.

The April 1, 2014 Mw 8.2 Pisagua, Chile earthquake was the largest event in an
unusual sequence of earthquakes, which began in the northern Chile subduction
zone on March 16, 2014. Based on the USGS preliminary teleseismic and surface
wave inversion, slip occurred along a 250 km along-strike and about 150 km down-
dip section of the Chile megathrust that last failed in an M 8.8 earthquake in
1877. U.S., Chilean, Peruvian, German, and the French groups have built
relatively dense continuously operating GPS (CGPS) and survey mode GPS (SGPS)
station networks in this region, thus the near-field inter-, co- and post-
seismic transient signals will be well observed in northern Chile. However,
there will be significant co-seismic and post-seismic transient motion up to 700
km from the main event, incorporating nearly all of the Altiplano and at least
much of eastern Cordillera in Bolivia, and the Puna of northwestern Argentina.
Measuring the mid- and far-field co- and post-seismic signals in the Altiplano
and beyond will be critical to any geodynamic modeling effort. The Bolivian
Altiplano, nevertheless, is very poorly instrumented and so cannot, at present,
provide the observations required for accurate inversions of afterslip and
lithospheric relaxation. In rapid response to the April 1, 2014 Mw 8.2 Pisagua,
Chile earthquake, the research team will: (1) install 10 new CGPS stations in
Bolivia; (2) reoccupy SGPS sites in Bolivia and Chile; (3) retrieve data from 5
CGPS stations within the PLUTONS network in Bolivia and Chile; and (4) acquire
and analyze about 100 SAR scenes from Radarsat-2 and TerraSAR-X. Data will be
made immediately available to the international earth science community through
the UNAVCO Facility Archive. SAR data will be tasked and made available to the
community with the password-protected restrictions required by the foreign space
agencies through the WinSAR archive hosted by the UNAVCO Facility. Low latency
geodetic data processing could be critical in determining regions with a high
likelihood of producing large aftershocks and for hazard mitigation efforts
because the largest aftershock (M 7.7 on April 3) was larger than expected,
potentially indicating continued unusual activity with the neighboring segments
thought to retain a large slip deficit.