* 1443406
* GPG: Collaborative Research: REU Pilot: Synthetic Biology Bootcamp
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Roecklein-Canfield, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 33,689.00

An award has been made to Simmons College in Boston, MA and Carthage College in
Kenosha, WI to pilot a summer "boot camp" in synthetic biology. This award will
support training of eight students at each site during the summer of 2015.
Students trained in the program will gain skills in lab research, develop their
critical thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the process of science,
and be able to communicate their research results to their peers and the general
public. Students will have an opportunity to present their results at a national
conference. Students from schools with limited opportunities for research and
from underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative proposal will test the effectiveness of intensive instruction in
the interdisciplinary area of synthetic biology and ask if the boot camp
prepares students to participate in future research experiences in synthetic
biology. The other goal of this proposal is to determine if a dispersed,
collaborative effort between two primarily undergraduate institutions can serve
as a model for a future REU Sites proposal. The focus of the boot camp will be
lecture, computer lab and "wet-lab" research to design genetic circuits in
living organisms. The PIs participated in a GCAT Synthetic Biology workshop
during the summer of 2013, and they will model their program after this
workshop. The main research question will be to design organisms that can sense
hydrocarbon contaminants in water from different sources. During the four week
program, students will participate virtually in activities including bio-ethics,
lab meetings, journal clubs, and career opportunities. At the end of the
program, students will present their research in a virtual poster
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond
to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is
available by contacting either of the PIs, Dr. Jennifer Roecklein-Canfield (at
jennifer.canfield@simmons.edu) or Dr. Deborah Tobiason (at
dtobiason@carthage.edu).