* 1443285
* EAGER: SwitchOn - Exploring and Strengthening US-Brazil Collaborations in Future Internet Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 01/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This project funds the U.S. side of an exploration of potential collaborations
between the U.S. and Brazil on Future Internet Architectures and the GENI
project. By having US grad students, early career faculty, and research
scientists working closely on innovative and transformative research projects
with Brazilian counterparts through short-termvisits and face-to-face meetings
at workshops the SwitchOn project will enhance international collaborations on
Future Internet research and development between US and Brazil. The project will
leverage the ongoing GENI project in the US and various Brazilian efforts such
as FIBRE (Future Internet testbeds/experimentation between BRazil and Europe) to
explore possibilities for new research collaborations. Especially for GENI,
there is significant advantage in having both countries collaborate to further
establish a global GENI presence capable of connecting researchers, end-users,
and all interested stakeholders at international scale through a fully federated
infrastructure. Brazilian researchers are also interested in collaborating in
research into global SDN networks, a topic of significant interest to the US.

The project's specific activities will include: 1) two focused workshops,
bringing together collaborative researchers conducting high-impact Future
Internet research as well as research in GENI-like systems in the US and Brazil,
and 2) international research experiences, which will allow US researchers to
have short-term visits to their Brazilian partners in order to strengthen their
research collaboration. Results from the joint research teams will be gathered
and synthesized as concrete evidence supporting, and practical guidelines for,
future large-scale research collaborations between US and Brazil.