* 1443140
* Probing Mechanisms of New Particle Formation and Growth: A Combined Experimental, Theoretical and Modeling Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* R. Benny Gerber, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 873,026.00

A series of laboratory and modeling studies will be conducted to study the
process of new particle formation and growth (NPFG) in the atmosphere. This
research will benefit society through improved air quality and climate
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory studies will focus on the reactions of
methanesulfonic (MSA) acid with amines in the presence of water, a mechanism
that has been shown to form new particles very efficiently. Once particles form,
their growth is limited despite the presence of excess water vapor and either
MSA or amine, suggesting that the growth of the seed nuclei in air requires the
uptake of other organic species. Organic compounds with different structures and
functional groups that are representative of atmospheric species have been
carefully selected for the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
objectives are: (1) to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms and kinetics of NPFG
from the reactions of gas phase acids, amines, water vapor, and a suite of
representative atmospheric organic compounds; and (2) to develop a
parameterization of these processes that accurately describes NPFG in complex
mixtures that is appropriate for use in atmospheric models. The NPFG
parameterization developed through this project will be incorporated into a
regional air quality model and used to assess the impacts of new particle
formation on a regional scale.