* 1443887
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Intelligence Measure of Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,11/30/2014
* Kai Zeng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 11/30/2014
* USD 225,139.00

Research on spectrum sharing has generated a large amount of spectrum
measurement data and many spectrum sharing techniques. Most of the techniques
are based on cognitive radio networks (CRNs) because the cognition capability is
necessary for optimizing spectrum efficiency and guaranteeing safe coexistence
in the presence of the spectrum uncertainty. Such cognitive capabilities
collectively defines the intelligence of CRNs. Although cognition and
intelligence are vital for CRNs, their quantitative specification is largely
open. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses this open question by
developing a framework for investigating quantitatively the cognitive
capabilities and the intelligence of CRNs. This project develops both a
theoretical approach and an empirical approach to construct a CRN intelligence
model. This model is inspired from the Cattell-Horn-Carroll human intelligence
model. On the other hand, the pioneering theoretical approach is in sharp
contrast to conventional human intelligence research that is mainly empirical.
In addition, this project develops a CRN testing battery to measure the
intelligence as CRN IQ (intelligence quotient) following psychometric practices.
Finally, this project initiates innovative research in IQ-based multi-hop
routing and IQ-based immunity to Denial-of-Service attacks, where innovative CRN
techniques are developed with the aim of enhancing important cognitive
capabilities. This project adopts a big data approach to exploit the vast amount
of existing spectrum measurement data and CRN research results. Psychometric
techniques are exploited to resolve challenges involved in this big data
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project impacts society by expediting the
commercial success of spectrum sharing technology. It integrates three
traditionally disparate areas: wireless communications, psychology, and big
data. The framework for constructing intelligence measure is useful to many
other systems such as cognitive computing, cognitive control and cognitive
radar. This project enhances the value of the spectrum measurement data and
leads to a new direction for big data utilization. This project impacts
education in many aspects, such as stimulating student research via the human
intelligence analogy, supporting hands-on curriculum with the CRN testing
battery, setting up CRN IQ competition projects, and outreaching to under-
represented students and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
impacts society by expediting the commercial success of spectrum sharing
technology. It integrates three traditionally disparate areas: wireless
communications, psychology, and big data. The framework for constructing
intelligence measure is useful to many other systems such as cognitive
computing, cognitive control and cognitive radar. This project enhances the
value of the spectrum measurement data and leads to a new direction for big data
utilization. This project impacts education in many aspects, such as stimulating
student research via the human intelligence analogy, supporting hands-on
curriculum with the CRN testing battery, setting up CRN IQ competition projects,
and outreaching to under-represented students and high school students.