* 1443431
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Craft Production And Population Movement Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Tanya Chiykowski, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 21,508.00

In an increasingly global society archaeologists are uniquely positioned to
examine cross-cultural exchange along an extended timescale. Tracking how new
ideas spread has broad implications for understanding how artisans respond to
technologies, accept skilled producers and learn new ways of doing. Whether
populations accept, reject, or modify these new technologies depends on how they
are introduced, and what these new technologies represent. Changes in craft
production becomes a case study of how ideas are transmitted (or fail to be
transmitted) in contact situations, bringing together concepts of self, identity
and cultural belonging. Specifically, this dissertation addresses how American
and Mexican indigenous groups interacted and introduced new pottery
manufacturing technologies across a cultural frontier. The modern international
border artificially divides current research on these prehispanic cultures,
creating an inaccurate image of how indigenous population exchanged ideas and
goods. Additionally, both the border and language divide prevent communication
between researchers. The researcher's conference presentations and publications
on these data will bring northern Mexican archaeological research to an English-
speaking audience, diminishing the effect of the modern boundary on cultures
that were once continuous. The research will be conducted by Tanya Chiykowski, a
graduate student at SUNY Binghamton and will provide data for her doctoral
dissertation thesis. Thus it will further her intellectual and professional
advancement.

The late prehistoric Southwest US was a landscape of warfare, migration and
identity formation. Archaeologists study the movement of potters, materials and
techniques to understand this period of upheaval, by tracking ceramic styles,
using geologic sourcing to map exchange, and recording the history of
technological style. American ceramicists have developed extensive methods and
databases to address questions of identity and craft production in the U.S.
Southwest; however, Northwest Mexico presents an abrupt termination to these
research questions. In Sonora, archaeologists have clear evidence of population
upheaval after AD 1300. Southern Arizona Hohokam groups migrated into the Altar
Valley in Sonora, Mexico, bringing with them new ceramic technologies and
displacing a resident Trincheras population to the Middle Magdalena valley.
While the presence of large amounts of Hohokam ceramics at Cerro de Trincheras
in the Middle Magdalena valley suggests that Trincheras and Hohokam populations
interacted, neither how the process occurred nor the impact of those linkages is
well understood. What processes caused such a large percentage of "foreign"
ceramics at Cerro de Trincheras? The investigators will use ceramic petrography
and GIS analysis to address the likelihood of trade, community migration and the
movement of women, all hotly debated mechanisms of introducing new technology.