* 1443268
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Suite of Proxies to Detect Past Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Brian Beard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,002.00

Collapse of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) could raise global sea level by
up to 3 meters, at a rate of up to ~1 meter per century, yielding major societal
impacts. The goal of this project is to determine if such a collapse occurred in
the recent past. This will include development of new geochemical tools to
evaluate the sedimentary geologic record around the WAIS to evaluate WAIS
behavior during past warm periods. The primary activities to be carried out by
the research team are to: 1) characterize the chemistry and magnetic properties
of sediments being discharged from different portions of the WAIS and use these
properties to ?fingerprint? inputs from different sources on the continent; 2)
measure these same properties in a marine sediment core to document major
changes in the WAIS over the last 150,000 years. Determining if the WAIS has
collapsed in the recent past can provide important information on WAIS potential
to grow unstable in the future. The tools to be developed here can then be used
on older records around the WAIS to examine the frequency of ice sheet
instability in the past. The project will support a postdoctoral researcher as
well as undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
sediment provenance proxies to trace the sources of sediment discharged by the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) to the continental rise. Specific questions to
be addressed are: 1) the degree that sediment from different WAIS terranes can
be geochemically and magnetically differentiated; 2) the ability of terrane
provenance proxies to detect WAIS collapse in the late Quaternary. The WAIS
erodes sediments from various West Antarctic geologic terranes that are
deposited in adjacent drift sites. The geochemistry and magnetic properties of
drift sediments reflect the tectonic and metamorphic history of their source
terranes. Deglaciation of a terrane during WAIS collapse should be detectable by
the loss of the terrane?s geochemical and magnetic signature in continental-rise
detrital sediments. Continental shelf late-Holocene sediments from near the
current WAIS groundling line will be analyzed for silt- and clay-size Sr-Nd-Pb
isotopes, magnetic properties, and major-trace elements. The suite of cores
includes the eastern Ross Sea to the northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula and
will establish provenance signatures of the Ross and Amundsen Provinces of Marie
Byrd Land, Pine Island Bay, Thurston Island/Eight Coast Block, Ellsworth-
Whitmore Crustal Block, and Antarctic Peninsula terranes. Many of these terranes
have similar tectonic and metamorphic histories but Sr-Nd isotope data from
detrital sediments suggest at least 3 distinct provenance signatures. An initial
down core study of Ocean Drilling Program Site 1096 in the Bellingshausen Sea
will be conducted to detect if the WAIS was unstable during the last
interglacial period.