* 1443252
* Collaborative Research:  Multidimensional Curve Estimation for Diffusion MRI
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Owen Carmichael, Pennington Biomedical Research Ctr
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 24,026.00

Integral curves are natural models for a variety of biological phenomena, from
neuron fibers in brain imaging data to jet streams in atmospheric data.
Traditionally they have been modeled as solutions to differential equations
defined on fields of direction vectors that are observed with noise in a 3D
domain. But advances in imaging technology now provide much more complex
directional information--functions defined on the 3D sphere-at each location in
the domain. Integral curves traced from this enhanced directional data have the
potential to dramatically increase our understanding of biological phenomena
such as brain connectivity, but the statistical properties of integral curve
estimators for this cutting-edge data are not well understood. Therefore in this
project the investigators will provide a solid theoretical foundation for
integral curve estimation in 3D fields of complex directional data and apply it
to large corpuses of real data sets from ongoing scientific studies. The primary
plan will be to model directional data locally using high-order supersymmetric
tensors, and pose integral curve estimation in terms of ODEs defined on the
field of their pseudo-eigenvectors. The investigators will show that the
proposed integral curve estimators enjoy optimal convergence rates in a minimax
sense, and prove that balloon estimators of the pseudo-eigenvector fields will
lead to improved convergence. Then integral curve estimators will be linked to
accompanying random processes to allow construction of uniform confidence bands
around point estimates for curves; and adaptive estimation of these confidence
bands will be explored to make them practically useful. The investigators will
then study whether estimation may be improved further by selecting arbitrary 3D
measurement locations, possibly using enhanced imaging techniques. Finally, a
test for branching of integral curves will be constructed, for example at
locations where axon fibers diverge or
cross.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to
dramatically increase the usefulness of diffusion magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) data, a technology with tremendous potential to probe the "wiring diagram"
of the brain-- its connectivity-- in living people. Currently, brain
connectivity measurements are widely regarded as brittle, complicated, and
difficult to validate. For each individual receiving a diffusion MRI scan, the
investigators will estimate curves describing the trajectories of axon fibers,
the electrical "wires" of the brain. These fibers connect brain regions into
distributed networks that give rise to thought; the evolution of this brain
wiring in response to normal development, gene expression, aging, disease,
drugs, and environmental factors is of primary interest to a broad swath of
neuroscience. Simply providing scientific end-users with a sense of whether or
not they should believe the estimated fiber trajectories provided to them by
computer programs will greatly enhance their ability to make confident decisions
about relations between such trajectories and other scientific data. In
addition, the proposed methodology is also relevant in meteorology. There,
isolines, fronts, jetstreams, and pressure troughs in weather data can be
modeled by similar curve trajectories that can be used to enhance existing
weather maps. Finally, this proposal has an exciting educational impact. The
investigators, a statistician and a computer scientist with neuroscience
training, envision building an interdisciplinary team of promising young
researchers in statistics and neuroimaging who gain exposure to both the
mathematical and neuroscience aspects of curve estimation through joined group
meetings, graduate courses, and web resources related to theory and
applications. This unique cross-pollination will prepare the trainees to
contribute to the broadly interdisciplinary research teams that are ascendant in
the sciences.