* 1443306
* Collaborative Research: Window into the World with 40,000-year Glacial Cycles from Climate Records in Million Year-old Ice from the Allan Hills Blue Ice Area
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrei Kurbatov, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 151,529.00

Bubbles of ancient air trapped in ice cores permit the direct reconstruction of
atmospheric composition and allow us to link greenhouse gases and global climate
over the last 800,000 years. Previous field expeditions to the Allan Hills blue
ice area, Antarctica, have recovered ice cores that date to one million years,
the oldest ice cores yet recovered from Antarctica. These records have revealed
that interglacial CO2 concentrations decreased by 800,000 years ago and that, in
the warmer world 1 million years ago, CO2 and Antarctic temperature were linked
as during the last 800,000 years. This project will return to the Allan Hills
blue ice area to recover additional ice cores that date to 1 million years or
older. The climate records developed from the drilled ice cores will provide new
insights into the chemical composition of the atmosphere and Antarctic climate
during times of comparable or even greater warmth than the present day. Our
results will help answer questions about issues associated with anthropogenic
change. These include the relationship between temperature change and the mass
balance of Antarctic ice; precipitation and aridity variations associated with
radiatively forced climate change; and the climate significance of sea ice
extent. The project will entrain two graduate students and a postdoctoral
scholar, and will conduct outreach including workshops to engage teachers in
carbon science and ice cores.

Between about 2.8-0.9 million years ago, Earth's climate was characterized by
40,000-year cycles, driven or paced by changes in the tilt of Earth's spin axis.
Much is known about the "40,000-year" world from studies of deep-sea sediments,
but our understanding of climate change during this period is incomplete because
we lack records of Antarctic climate and direct records of atmospheric
greenhouse gas concentrations. We propose to address these issues by building on
our recent studies of ancient ice from the Main Ice Field, Allan Hills,
Antarctica. During previous field seasons we recovered ice extending,
discontinuously, from 0.1-1.0 million years old. Ice was dated by measuring the
40Ar/38Ar (Argon) ratio of the trapped gases. Our discovery of million year-old
ice demonstrates that there is gas-record-quality ice from the 40,000-year world
in the Allan Hills Main Ice Field. We have identified two different sites, each
overlying bedrock at ~ 200 m depth, that are attractive targets for coring ice
dating to 1 million years and older. This project aims to core the ice at these
two sites, re-occupy a previous site with million year-old ice and drill it down
to the bedrock, and generate 10-20 short (~10-meter) cores in areas where our
previous work and terrestrial meteorite ages suggest ancient surface ice. We
plan to date the ice using the 40Ar/38Ar ages of trapped Argon. We also plan to
characterize the continuity of our cores by measuring the deuterium and oxygen
isotope ratios in the ice, methane, ratios of Oxygen and Argon to Nitrogen in
trapped gas, the Nitrogen-15 isotope (d15N) of Nitrogen, and the Oxygen-18
isotope (d18O) of Oxygen. As the ice may be stratigraphically disturbed, these
measurements will provide diagnostic properties for assessing the continuity of
the ice-core records. Successful retrieval of ice older than one million years
will provide the opportunity for follow-up work to measure the CO2 concentration
and other properties within the ice to inform on the temperature history of the
Allan Hills region, dust sources and source-area aridity, moisture sources,
densification conditions, global average ocean temperature, and greenhouse gas
concentrations. We will analyze the data in the context of leading hypotheses of
the 40,000-year world and the Mid-Pleistocene Transition to the 100,000-year
world. We expect to advance understanding of climate dynamics during these
periods.