* 1443047
* CIF21 DIBBs: Domain-Aware Management of Heterogeneous Workflows: Active Data Management for Gravitational-Wave Science Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Ewa Deelman, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,078,712.00

Analysis and management of large data sets are vital for progress in the data-
intensive realm of scientific research and education. Scientists are producing,
analyzing, storing and retrieving massive amounts of data. The anticipated
growth in the analysis of scientific data raises complex issues of stewardship,
curation and long-term access. Scientific data is tracked and described by
metadata. This award will fund the design, development, and deployment of
metadata-aware workflows to enable the management of large data sets produced by
scientific analysis. Scientific workflows for data analysis are used by a broad
community of scientists including astronomy, biology, ecology, and physics.
Making workflows metadata-aware is an important step towards making scientific
results easier to share, to reuse, and to support reproducibility. This project
will pilot new workflow tools using data from the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), a data-intensive project at the frontiers
of astrophysics. The goal of LIGO is to use gravitational waves---ripples in the
fabric of spacetime---to explore the physics of black holes and understand the
nature of gravity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient methods for accessing and
mining the large data sets generated by LIGO's diverse gravitational-wave
searches are critical to the overall success of gravitational-wave physics and
astronomy. Providing these capabilities will maximize existing NSF investments
in LIGO, support new modes of collaboration within the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration, and better enable scientists to explain their results to a wider
community, including the critical issue of data and analysis provenance for
LIGO's first detections. The interdisciplinary collaboration involved in this
project brings together computational and informatics theories and methods to
solve data and workflow management problems in gravitational-wave physics. The
research generated from this project will make a significant contribution to the
theory and methods in identification of science requirements, metadata modeling,
eScience workflow management, data provenance, reproducibility, data discovery
and analysis. The LIGO scientists participating in this project will ensure that
the needs of the community are met. The cyberinfrastructure and data-management
scientists will ensure that the software products are well-designed and that the
work funded by this award is useful to a broader community.