* 1443228
* ERASynBio: Establishment of a Fully Synthetic, Mirror-Image Biological System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Philip Dawson, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 07/31/2017
* USD 550,001.00

Synthetic Biology and Systems Biology have become key research areas in the
quest for understanding living cells. What is missing is an experimental system
in which the knowledge from system-wide analyses could be artificially
reproduced and studied. The goal of this project is to create a mirror-image
synthetic biology: that is, to mimic, entirely independent of nature, a
biological system and to re-create it from artificial component parts. The
project will influence -omics sciences, Systems Biology and Synthetic Biology
and bring about a close contact of life sciences and chemistry. The artificial
system will create new lines of science and may alter the way biology is done.
At the same time, it will yield molecules of unique properties and
characteristics for biotechnology and medicine. By using a biosynthesis from
mirror components, a high-quality biosynthesis of larger mirror-image proteins
might become a reality. Importantly, once the basic components are in place, the
machinery itself can be used to create further components. This will eventually
allow the high-quality synthesis of larger mirror image proteins. Such proteins
should be non-immunogenic, and thus a potentially important source of new
protein therapeutics and a new biomanufacturing platform.

Technical Abstract: In this project, investigators will create a novel mirror-
image synthetic biology platform from enantiomeric L-nucleotides and D-amino
acids, which will be used to synthesize functional mirror-image biological
system. Several basic DNA-DNA, DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions as
well as the functions of few enzymes will be copied from nature into a totally
synthetic artificial system based on L-DNA and D-proteins. This will require a
few D-form enzymes (DNA-ligase, DNA- and RNA-polymerase) and L-DNA sequences
plus co-factors that would form a basic enantiomeric system. In addition,
particular binder molecules Designed Ankyrin Repeat Proteins (DARPins) and
transcription factors, or DNA-binding domains thereof, will be generated and
studied in comparison to their natural partners. Next to the establishment of
components for artificial biology, there are immediate practical utilities that
will be pursued within this project, such as the protection of therapeutic
DARPins from degradation as they will not be substrates of natural proteases,
permitting oral application for example, or the creation of a SELEX selection
process for the isolation of specific L-DNA aptamers from a molecule library. In
the long run, the aim is to set up a self-replicating system, eventually
including D-protein production. While this is still way off and will not be
achieved within this project, it would offer major advances in biomanufacturing,
by creating a platform for the development of mirror image therapeutic proteins
that are potentially non-immunogenic.