* 1443504
* Antarctic and Conjugate Research using SuperDARN
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Roman Makarevich, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Moore
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,914,635.00

The Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) is composed of high-frequency
radars that can observe far reaches of the Earth's ionosphere, its features and
irregularities, and monitor its dynamics. The ionosphere is an ionized layer in
the upper atmosphere (at and above ~110-km altitude) where electrical currents
can flow in response to the coupling between the Earth's magnetosphere and solar
wind plasma flow in the Earth's neighborhood (geospace). Many geospace phenomena
are caused by solar flares and coronal mass ejections that have their effects
transmitted to ionospheric layers, which are especially strong in the polar
regions. The ionospheric plasma convection (that carries ionospheric currents)
becomes strong during geomagnetic storms when it moves as a whole over both
polar caps from dayside to nightside and then returns to the dayside via
respective auroral zones. Polar ionospheres are also electrically connected via
the Earth's magnetic field lines in conjugate points. The ionospheric connection
plays a very important role in transporting currents and electric fields between
the magnetopause and both polar regions, but these processes are still
insufficiently studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large network of SuperDARN
radars already observe ionospheric convection in the northern and southern polar
regions on a regular basis. Data from these radars are used to study responses
of ionospheric convection to solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field
changes, the relation of central polar cap convection to that of the cusp and
midnight regions, and to the state of the coupled magnetosphere-ionosphere
system. The NSF-funded Antarctic SuperDARN radars at McMurdo and South Pole
contribute to the studies such as relationships between wave structures observed
in the solar wind and respective responses in the polar caps, motion of plasma
density structures, ion-neutral coupling, and thermospheric winds. This research
effort will continue developing the NSF-funded radars, help addressing
fundamental questions of the Geospace research that have not yet thoroughly
examined.