* 1443894
* Collaborative Research: Overcoming Technological Challenges for Spectrum Trading
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Xingxing Yu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 455,000.00

The dynamic and uneven wireless network traffic load at different time instants
and geographical locations has led to substantial underutilization of some
spectrum bands while severely crowding others. This project investigates a
number of fundamental and challenging technical issues that arise from broadband
spectrum trading for achieving superior technical, economic, and social values
of spectrum use. The project is an interdisciplinary research effort across
mathematics and wireless network technologies. With respect to wireless
technologies, this research project outcomes can significantly improve spectrum
efficiency and user experience, while benefiting many real-life needs, such as
public safety, telemedicine, and social services. On mathematics, the research
effort will lead to the formulation of more interesting problems with real world
applications and the discovery of new tools for solving such problems.

As a comprehensive investigation to overcome technical challenges that arise
from broadband spectrum trading, the project tasks focus on three inter-related
key research directions: 1) new graph theory problems, 2) new graph-based
resource allocation and utility optimization, and 3) physical layer techniques
and utility design. Specifically, the project considers new problems on
judicious partitions of graphs and new problems on optimal disjoint paths in
weighted graphs using minimum-edge-weight path utility. New solutions and tools
developed for such problems can then be applied and generalized for solving
various resource allocation and utility optimization problems in broadband
spectrum trading. Furthermore, the project addresses new fundamental physical
layer issues that arise from spectrum trading. These implementation issues
include broadband channel estimation, dynamic pilot placement, interference
limited pilot power control, and low complexity broadband spectrum sensing. To
establish utility functional curves and to develop means for modeling parametric
effects in fine-granularity for more effective broadband spectrum trading, the
project applies group-theory-based methodologies to design and carry out
detailed tests and analysis in order to fine-tune effective utility functions
that incorporate user experience and satisfaction. The research results are also
expected to lead to strong social impacts and to provide better technical
insights and effective guidelines on governmental regulatory policymaking and
technological development regarding broadband spectrum trading for wireless
communications.