* 1443522
* Magma Sources, Residence and Pathways of Mount Erebus Phonolitic Volcano, Antarctica, from Magnetotelluric Resistivity Structure
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 468,657.00

General Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project is intended to reveal the magma
source regions, staging areas, and eruptive pathways within the active volcano
Mount Erebus. This volcano is an end-member type known as phonolitic, which
refers to the lava composition, and is almost purely carbon-dioxide-bearing and
occurs in continental rift settings. It is in contrast to the better known
water-bearing volcanoes which occur at plate boundary settings (such as Mount St
Helens or Mount Fuji). Phonolitic volcanic eruptions elsewhere such as Tamboro
or Vesuvius have caused more than 50,000 eruption related fatalities. Phonolites
are also associated with rare earth element deposits, giving them economic
interest. To illuminate the inner workings of Mount Erebus, we will cover the
volcano with a dense network of geophysical probes based on magnetotelluric (MT)
measurements. MT makes use of naturally occurring electromagnetic (EM) waves
generated mainly by the sun as sources to provide images of the electrical
conductivity structure of the Earth's interior. Conductivity is sensitive to the
presence of fluids and melts in the Earth and so is well suited to understanding
volcanic processes. The project is a cooperative effort between scientists from
the United States, New Zealand, Japan and Canada. It implements new technology
developed by the lead investigator and associates that allows such measurements
to be taken on snow-covered terrains. This has applicability for frozen
environments generally, such as resource exploration in the Arctic. The project
supports a new post-doctoral researcher, and leverages imaging and measurement
methods developed through support by other agencies and interfaced with
commercial platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose to test magmatic evolution models for Mount Erebus
volcano, Antarctica, using the magnetotelluric (MT) method. The phonolite lava
flow compositions on Mount Erebus are uncommon, but provide a window into the
range of upper mantle source compositions and melt differentiation paths.
Explosive phonolite eruptions have been known worldwide for devastating
eruptions such as Tambora and Vesuvius, and commonly host rare earth element
deposits. In the MT method, temporal variations in the Earth's natural
electromagnetic (EM) field are used as source fields to probe the electrical
resistivity structure in the depth range of 1 to 100 kilometers. This effort
will consist of approximately 100 MT sites, with some concentration in the
summit area. Field acquisition will take place over two field seasons. The main
goals are to 1) confirm the existence and the geometry of the uppermost magma
chamber thought to reside at 5-10 kilometer depths; 2) attempt to identify, in
the deeper resistivity structure, the magma staging area near the crust-mantle
boundary; 3) image the steep, crustal-scale, near-vertical conduit carrying
magma from the mantle; 4) infer the physical and chemical state from geophysical
properties of a CO2-dominated mafic shield volcano; and 5) constrain the
relationships between structural and magmatic/ hydrothermal activity related to
the Terror Rift. Tomographic imaging of the interior resistivity will be
performed using a new inversion platform developed at Utah, based on the
deformable edge finite element method, that is the best available for
accommodating the steep topography of the study area. The project is an
international cooperation between University of Utah, GNS Science Wellington New
Zealand (G. Hill, Co-I), and Tokyo Institute of Technology Japan (Y. Ogawa,
Co-I), plus participation by University of Alberta (M. Unsworth) and Missouri
State University (K. Mickus). Instrument deployments will be made exclusively by
helicopter. The project implements new technology that allows MT measurements to
be taken on snow-covered terrains. The project supports a new post-doctoral
researcher, and leverages imaging and measurement methods developed through
support by other agencies and interfaced with commercial platforms.