* 1443190
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating Retreat in the Amundsen Sea Embayment: Assessing Controlling Processes, Uncertainties, and Projections
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* David Pollard, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 460,057.00

Accurate reconstructions and predictions of glacier movement on timescales of
human interest require a better understanding of available observations and the
ability to model the key processes that govern ice flow. The fact that many of
these processes are interconnected, are loosely constrained by data, and involve
not only the ice, but also the atmosphere, ocean, and solid Earth, makes this a
challenging endeavor, but one that is essential for Earth-system modeling and
the resulting climate and sea-level forecasts that are provided to policymakers
worldwide. Based on the amount of ice present in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
and its ability to flow and/or melt into the ocean, its complete collapse would
result in a global sea-level rise of 3.3 to 5 meters, making its stability and
rate of change scientific questions of global societal significance. Whether or
not a collapse eventually occurs, a better understanding of the potential West
Antarctic contribution to sea level over the coming decades and centuries is
necessary when considering the fate of coastal population centers. Recent
observations of the Amundsen Sea Embayment of West Antarctica indicate that it
is experiencing faster mass loss than any other region of the continent. At
present, the long-term stability of this embayment is unknown, with both theory
and observations suggesting that collapse is possible. This study is focused on
this critical region. We will test an ice-sheet model against existing
observations, improve treatment of key processes in the model, and make
projections with uncertainty assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a three-
year modeling study using the open-source Ice Sheet System Model in coordination
with other models to improve projections of future sea-level change. Project
goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. hindcast the past two-to-three decades of evolution
of the Amundsen Sea Embayment sector to determine controlling processes,
incorporate and test parameterizations, and assess and improve model
initialization, spinup, and performance;&lt;br/&gt;2. improve the model by
utilizing sensitivity studies with regional process-oriented models to create
numerically efficient parameterizations for key sub-grid-scale
processes;&lt;br/&gt;3. project a range of likely evolutions of the Amundsen Sea
Embayment sector and their respective contributions to sea level in the next
several centuries;&lt;br/&gt;4. attribute sources of errors in the hindcast and
provide an assessment of the uncertainties in the projections, including a range
of likely outcomes given various forcings and inclusion or omission of physical
processes in the model.&lt;br/&gt;At present, the long-term stability of the
Amundsen Sea Embayment is unknown, with both theory (the "marine ice sheet
instability hypothesis") and observations (rapid thinning and grounding-line
retreat approaching regions where the bed deepens inland) suggesting that
collapse is possible. But incompletely understood physical processes (e.g.,
basal hydrology, rheology, and sliding; tidal effects; ice-ocean interaction
along the shelf and within the grounding zone) and lack of resolution in basal
topography datasets making the ultimate outcome uncertain. Thus, there is a
pressing need for high-resolution simulations of this region that include
numerical representations of controlling physical processes (many of which are
applicable elsewhere) within a higher-order ice-sheet model capable of
assimilating recent observations and providing uncertainty analyses associated
with model and data limitations. By focusing on the Amundsen Sea Embayment as a
connected region across the 10-10,000-meter scales using a hierarchy of one,
two, and three-dimensional models along with the sensitivity analysis tools
built into the Ice Sheet System Model, this project aims to produce (1) the most
reliable results to date when compared with studies that consider only one ice
stream or the entire ice sheet and (2) estimates of differing dynamic responses
arising from errors in data, model parameterizations, and forcings. Given the
uncertainties, the project will produce a range of predictions with
characteristic trends that can be recognized within future observational data
sets. As new data become available, some predicted rates of change could be
culled from the predictive paths generated by this study.