* 1443912
* EAGER: Work Integration through Work Exchange Network Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 07/31/2017
* USD 60,000.00

Over the past decade, accelerated natural resource depletion, greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, the consequences of climate change, and economic globalization,
among other factors, had industries reviewing their practices with a greater
focus on sustainability. The results have been improvements in their operations
evidenced by energy savings, waste reduction, and gains in productivity. But,
according to the DOE Industrial Technology Program (ITP), the energy loss in the
manufacturing sectors is still high (approximately 57% of the total energy
consumed), and total combustion emissions have reached approximately 1,260
million metric tons of CO2e (carbon dioxide equivalents). The chemical process
industries (CPI) account for approximately 20% of the total energy consumed in
the U.S. This research project is aimed at improving energy conservation in
chemical plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Heat and
work are two common forms of energy in chemical plants. Heat integration, using
heat exchanger networks (HENs), is a technique used for thermal energy recovery
in the CPI. While process work is more expensive than process heat, using and
reusing process work effectively has not been seriously studied. The research
goal here is to develop work exchange networks (WENs) that are similar to HENs.
From a thermodynamics point of view, heat flow, with temperature as the state
variable, is directly related to thermal energy efficiency, while work flow,
with pressure as the state variable, can be used to evaluate mechanical energy
efficiency. The key mechanism of work integration is work exchange among coupled
process streams due to pressure differences. This study is an investigation of
using work integration in process systems engineering. The proposed
thermodynamic analysis on work exchange under isothermal, non-isothermal, and
adiabatic conditions will be used in the work exchange regions for
thermodynamically feasible and economically justifiable mechanical energy
recovery. Since a WEN is operated in a hybrid mode, the WEN synthesis
methodology will be different from those for heat and mass exchanger networks,
which are operated in a continuous mode. The methodological novelty will be also
demonstrated by the approaches for pinch point identification, energy-cost
target setting, and optimal process stream
matching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;In a variety of
chemical manufacturing systems, process streams need to be pressurized, which
requires work for compression, while other processes can produce work through
expansion. Ammonia synthesis, reverse osmosis, and freezing purification are
among well-known examples. Another example is the gas processing industry, where
high-pressure natural gas needs to be cooled with liquid CO2 and then expanded
to a lower pressure to exchange heat with liquid N2, and it is then further
depressurized in a turbine to reach its storage pressure. If the available
mechanical energy in the high-pressure streams is utilized to pressurize the
lower pressure streams, the mechanical energy recovery can greatly reduce
operating cost. This is of not only economic significance but also has
environmental implications, as energy efficiency improvement could help reduce
CO2 emission.