* 1443037
* CIF21 DIBBs: Collaborative Research: Cyberinfrastructure for Interpreting and Archiving U-series Geochronologic Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* James Bowring, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 579,762.00

Uranium-series geochronology plays a critical role in understanding the time-
scales and rates of climate change, sea-level change, and volcanic activity.
There are no standardized data-handling protocols or community-based open data
archives for raw isotopic data and reduced results. The U-series geochronology
community wants to change this and is encouraged by NSF's vision for 21st
century cyberinfrastructure. In this pilot demonstration project, software
engineers and geochronologists collaborate to build open-source
cyberinfrastructure that standardizes and facilitates U-series data analysis,
reporting, and archiving and analysis and re-processing of the vast amounts of
legacy data. The project uses the NSF-funded EarthChem-Geochron data repository
that archives results from many dating schemes, stimulating inter-domain sharing
and discovery. This cyberinfrastructure supports teaching and training at all
levels and provides non-experts access to new knowledge.

This collaborative effort applies modern software engineering practices to
solving the cyberinfrastructure problems of the U-series geochronology
community, making the calculation, archiving, access, and interpretation
activities of U-series geochronology as rigorous, seamless, and simple as
possible. Currently, isotopic dates from U-series data are calculated and
analyzed using legacy, platform-dependent software, and dates are difficult to
synthesize because they have been published with disparate decay constants and
reporting norms. This pilot project includes new software to calculate,
visualize, and interpret U-series dates from new and legacy data, and new schema
for data archiving at Geochron.org. Importantly, this project advances the
sustainability of NSF's software ecosystem by building upon the
cyberinfrastructure architecture already developed for the U-Pb geochronology
community under the EARTHTIME umbrella.