* 1443033
* ABI: Toward Advanced Understanding in Biological Systems - Support for Training at the Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology Conference, Boston, MA, July 11-15, 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Theresa Gaasterland, International Society for Computational Biology
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 40,000.00

Funds will support student training at the 2014 Intelligent Systems for
Molecular Biology (ISMB) conference, which will be held in Boston,
Massachusetts, July 11-15, 2014. The ISMB conference is the largest and most
high profile annual meeting of scientists working in computational biology and
bioinformatics. The program presents the latest research methods and results
developed through the application of computer programming to the study of
biological sciences. A broad range of sub-disciplines covering the field is
represented at the meeting. Each year novel research output using cutting-edge
technologies is presented. The conference serves as a forum for the presentation
of novel algorithmic methods and new ways to apply bioinformatics tools to the
most important current challenges in biology and the biomedical sciences.The
conference has a rigorous focus on computation and methodology coupled with
outstanding biology. Leading experts conduct training sessions at ISMB and
provide participants with opportunities to learn new tools and techniques not
easily gained elsewhere. Students have opportunities to interact with senior
scientists on the forefront of technology development. Students and scientists
return to their labs from ISMB equipped to apply what they have learned, advance
their own research efforts, and initiate investigations in new
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will gain the latest skills in
bioinformatics and computational biology. Individuals trained in the latest
techniques in these fields are in extremely high demand in a diverse range of
research centers and industries including pharmaceutical, agricultural,
environmental, consumer products, biotech, software, hardware, and service
companies. Bioinformatics skills have become integral to the analysis of the
large volumes of biomedical and agricultural data currently being generated in
the life sciences, and to understanding complex biological systems. ISMB has
become a forum for reviewing the state-of-the-art advances in the many fields of
the growing discipline of computational biology, for introducing new directions,
and for announcing technological breakthroughs. ISMB and ISCB continue to
contribute to the advancement of biology and build the bridges necessary to
support research developments in life sciences. For more information about the
conference, visit http://www.iscb.org/ismb2014.