* 1443296
* Petrologic Constraints on Subduction Termination From Lamprophyres, Ross Orogen, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Cottle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 257,128.00

Subduction takes place at convergent plate boundaries and involves sinking of
one tectonic plate underneath another. Although this process is a key aspect of
plate tectonics that shapes the planet over geologic time, and is a primary
cause of earthquakes, it is not known what causes subduction to cease, and what
effect it has on the deepest portions of the crust and the upper part of the
mantle. By studying the age and composition of igneous rocks emplaced at the
very end of the subduction cycle, this project seeks to understand what causes
subduction to cease, and how this changes the composition and structure of the
crust and upper mantle. Because this process occurs deep within the earth, the
project will focus on rocks in the root of an ancient subduction zone, now
exposed in the Transantarctic Mountains of Antarctica. In addition, Antarctica
remains relatively poorly understood, and this project will contribute directly
to increasing our understanding of the geologic history of this region. The
project will focus on training graduate and undergraduate students -
incorporating hands-on experience with an array of state-of-the-art analytical
instrumentation. Students will also gain a range of more general skills
including Geographic Information Systems (GIS), written and oral communication,
and data management - strengths that are highly relevant to careers both in the
academic and Geosciences industry. Each summer, high school students will be
incorporated into aspects of the laboratory-based research through the UCSB
research mentorship program. The PI and graduate students will engage the
general public through a purpose-built iPhone App and multimedia website.
Activities will include live phone and video conversations from the field
between elementary school students and members of the team in Antarctica.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms by which the deep crustal delaminates or
"founders" and is returned to the mantle remains a fundamental problem in earth
science. Specifically, little is known about the temporal and spatial scales
over which this process occurs or the mechanisms that trigger such catastrophic
events. Igneous rocks highly enriched in potassium, called lamprophyres, are
often emplaced during, and immediately after, termination of subduction and
therefore potentially provide direct insight into foundering. These enigmatic
rocks are important because they represent near-primary mantle melt compositions
and therefore their age, geochemistry and petrologic evolution reveal key
information on both the composition of the upper mantle and its thermal state.
Of equal importance, they reveal how these key parameters vary through both
space and time. By evaluating lamprophyres along a subduction zone margin it is
possible to extract: 1) local-scale information, such as the timing and duration
of melting and the role of igneous crystallization processes in generation of
isotopic heterogeneities; 2) along-strike variations in mantle source
composition, temperature, and depth of melting 3) the plate-scale forces that
control foundering and termination of subduction. This project will study a
suite of lamprophyres along the axis of the Transantarctic Mountains, emplaced
during the latest stages of the Neoproterozoic - Ordovician Ross orogeny,
Antarctica (roughly 505 to 470 million years before present). High-precision
geochronology (age determinations) will be combined with geochemical
measurements on the rocks and minerals to understand the mechanisms and timing
of deep crustal foundering/delamination.