* 1443149
* International Workshop on Science Gateways (IWSG 2014 )
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Sandra Gesing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 04/30/2015
* USD 27,002.00

This project will support 1) international travel of 10 US scientists to attend
the 6th International Workshop on Science Gateways (IWSG 2014) that will take
place 3-5 June 2014 in Dublin, Ireland and 2) the cost of publishing the
proceedings in the IEEE Xplore Digital Library. IWSG 2014 is the 6th workshop of
the successful IWSG workshop series and the partner workshop of the US workshop
Science Gateway Institute Workshop (SGIW). It is an interdisciplinary workshop
that brings together researchers and industry partners from various scientific
domains, e.g. life sciences, chemistry, physics, digital media, along with
science gateways developers&#8232;and science gateway providers. It forms an
international platform for discussing problems and solutions in the area,
identifying new issues, shaping future directions for research; fostering the
exchange of ideas, standards and common requirements, and pushing towards the
wider adoption of science gateways in e-Science. The resulting proceedings as
well as abstractsand talks will be made publicly available. Additionally,
authors of best papers will be invited to submit significantly extended and
updated version of their papers to a special issue on science gateways in the
journal "Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience". The special
issue will be jointly organized with SGIW.

New technologies, simulations and experimental methods have enabled researchers
to create huge amounts of data in extremely short times. The demand for compute
power and storage is met with a rise in provision of distributed computing
infrastructures (DCIs), such as grid and cloud infrastructures. Despite the
increasing availability of resources, the broad uptake of these facilities and
infrastructures is not following the same pace. The main reasons for this lie in
the complexity of the human interface to these infrastructures. A science
gateway is an approach to offer easy and intuitive access to computing
infrastructures irrespective of their location. Science gateways are community-
specific sets of tools, applications, and data collections that are integrated
together via a web portal or a desktop application, providing access to
resources and services for distributed data management and DCIs. They offer the
potential to open the utilization of DCIs to wider audiences by providing a
customized and intuitive user interface to access large computational and data
resources. The complexity of the underlying infrastructure can be completely
hidden from the end-users by a suitably tailored interface. As interest in
science gateways has accelerated in the past few years, an increasing number of
new user communities can utilize grid or cloud computing resources in a
convenient manner. An important factor for creating successful science gateways
is the collaboration between users, science gateway developers, and science
providers. This meeting will bring together international experts from research
domains and experts representing DCIs such as XSEDE, EGI, OSG, PRACE and others.