* 1443105
* Collaborative Research: Record of the Triple-oxygen Isotope and Hydrogen Isotope Composition of Ice from an Ice Core at South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 524,918.00

This project will develop a record of the stable-isotope ratios of water from an
ice core at the South Pole, Antarctica. Water-isotope ratio measurements provide
a means to determine variability in temperature through time. South Pole is
distinct from most other locations in Antarctica in showing no warming in recent
decades, but little is known about temperature variability in this location
prior to the installation of weather stations in 1957. The measurements made as
part of this project will result in a much longer temperature record, extending
at least 40,000 years, aiding our ability to understand what controls Antarctic
climate, and improving projections of future Antarctic climate change. Data from
this project will be critical to other investigators working on the South Pole
ice core, and of general interest to other scientists and the public. Data will
be provided rapidly to other investigators and made public as soon as possible.

This project will obtain records of the stable-isotope ratios of water on the
ice core currently being obtained at South Pole. The core will reach a depth of
1500 m and an age of 40,000 years. The project will use laser spectroscopy to
obtain both an ultra-high-resolution record of oxygen 18/16 and deuterium-
hydrogen ratios, and a lower-resolution record of oxygen 17/16 ratios. The high-
resolution measurements will be used to aid in dating the core, and to provide
estimates of isotope diffusion that constrain the process of firn densification.
The novel 17/16 measurement provides additional constraints on the isotope
fractionation due to the temperature-dependent supersaturation ratio, which
affects the fractionation of water during the liquid-solid condensate
transition. Together, these techniques will allow for improved accuracy in the
use of the water isotope ratios as proxies for ice-sheet temperature, sea-
surface temperature, and atmospheric circulation. The result will be a record of
decadal through centennial and millennial scale climate change in a climatically
distinct region in East Antarctica that has not been previously sampled by deep
ice coring. The project will support a graduate student who will be co-advised
by faculty at the University of Washington and the University of Colorado, and
will be involved in all aspects of the work.