* 1443069
* CIF21 DIBBs:  An Infrastructure Supporting Collaborative Data Analytics Workflow Design and Management
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Shiyong Lu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 999,900.00

The need for collaborative data analysis increases significantly when confronted
with the challenges of big data. Although workflow tools offer a formal way to
define, automate, and repeat multi-step computational procedures, designing
complex data process workflow requires collaboration from multiple people with
complementary expertise. Existing tools are not suitable to support
collaborative design of comprehensive workflows. To address such a challenge,
this project aims to design and develop a software infrastructure with the
capability of supporting collaborative data-oriented workflow composition and
management, adding a key component to existing NSF cyberinfrastructure that will
support big data collaboration through the Internet. Reproducibility and
scalability are two major targets. The project extends an existing open-source
workflow tool, VisTrails, by adding system-level facilities to support human
interaction and cooperation that are essential for an effective and efficient
scientific collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce five
outcomes:&lt;br/&gt;1) A collaborative provenance data model equipped with a
graph-level provenance querying formalism;&lt;br/&gt;2) A type-theoretic
approach for addressing format transformations;&lt;br/&gt;3) Hypergraph theory-
based algorithms for provenance management and mining;&lt;br/&gt;4) A software
tool supporting (a)synchronous collaborative scientific workflow design,
composition, reproduction, and visualization; and &lt;br/&gt;5) Principles,
methodologies, experiences, and lessons that support the development of a
generically applicable collaborative scientific workflow composition
tool.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting tools will explore the potential for using
scientific workflows to accelerate scientific discoveries that require a
collaborative effort on big data analytics. The design of the tools is targeted
toward use cases in the civil engineering discipline, but has the potential to
broadly impact other areas of science and engineering. Partnership with
VisTrails enables usage and evaluation of the techniques in the VisTrails end
user community.