* 1443546
* Collaborative Research: Permian and Triassic Icehouse to Greenhouse Paleoenvironments and Paleobotany in the Shackleton Glacier Area, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Edith Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 398,700.00

The focus of this collaborative project is to collect fossil plants, wood, and
sedimentary and chemical information from rocks in the Shackleton Glacier (SHK)
area of Antarctica. This information will be used to reconstruct plant life and
environments during the Permian and Triassic (~295-205 million years ago) in
Antarctica. This time interval is important to study as Antarctica experienced a
large glaciation in the Permian followed by deglaciation and recovery of plant
and animal life, only to be subjected to the largest extinction in Earth history
at the end of the Permian. After the extinction events, the climate in
Antarctica continued to warm extensively and there were forests growing close to
the paleo-South Pole. These ancient environments provide a natural laboratory in
which to study the effects of climate change on plant life. The results of this
project will advance the field in the areas of changing sedimentary patterns
during global cooling and warming, as well as plant evolution during times
following glaciation and during global warmth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study the extent of the Gondwana glaciation in the SHK area, the
invasion and subsequent flourishing of life following glacial retreat, and the
eventual recovery of plant life after Late Permian extinction events. Only in
Antarctica does a complete polar-to-near-polar succession occur across this
climatic and biologic transition. The SHK area is an important one as it is one
of the few regions in the world where the Permian-Triassic boundary (PTB) is
exposed within terrestrial rocks. The field and lab work for this project is
organized around three hypotheses that address fundamental issues in Earth
history, including changes in the extent and diversity of flora during the
Permian build up to the Late Paleozoic Ice Age, the possible diachronous nature
of the PTB, and that poor fossil preservation during the Early Triassic has
given a false impression that Antarctica was devoid of plants during this time.
The hypotheses will be tested by integrating various types of paleobotanical
approaches with detailed sedimentology, stratigraphy, and geochemistry.
Compression floras and petrified wood will be collected (constrained by
stratigraphy) both quantitatively and qualitatively in order to obtain
biodiversity and abundance data, and as a data source for paleoecological
analysis. Standard sedimentologic and stratigraphic analyses will be performed,
as well as paleosol analyses, including mineralogic and major- and trace-element
geochemistry. Collections will also be made for U-Pb zircon geochronology to
better constrain geologic and biotic events through time. Results of the project
will be incorporated into educational and outreach activities that are designed
to include women and under-represented groups in the excitement of Antarctic
earth sciences and paleontology, including workshops in Kansas and Wisconsin, as
well as links to science classes during fieldwork.