* 1443339
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Research Into The Origins Of Human Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Craig Feibel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 22,669.00

Sarah Hlubik of Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, will undertake a
research project to investigate when human ancestors first began using fire on a
regular basis. This study addresses a crucial topic in understanding the
evolution of the genus Homo. The physical changes from Australopithecus/early
Homo to Homo erectus are striking, with Homo erectus being larger bodied and
with a more slender trunk, indicating a change in the digestive system. This
change can be explained by the regular use of fire to help prepare food. For
over a decade researchers have argued this point, but there are no
archaeological instances of fire in the record with the appearance of H.
erectus. This study will assess the claim that the earliest fire in the record
dates back to at least 1.5 million years ago (mya) through a vigorous research
schedule that includes excavation and experimentation to determine the signature
of fire and its longevity on the landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores the ways in which fire can be identified in the ancient archaeological
record of open-air sites. It is based heavily on excavation, sampling, and
comparison to experimental work to look at the signature of fire on the
landscape and in cultural contexts, and whether it can be identified and
detected in sites greater than 1 million years. The work primarily takes place
in Northern Kenya.. The site of FxJj20 AB is a known site, which has so far
yielded several thousand artifacts and fossil bone, and contains some suggestive
evidence for the presence of fire. The site is located on floodplain sediments,
with little evidence of artifact movement by water or wind, which makes it a
good candidate to answer the question of whether or not fire was present and
whether or not fire was maintained and controlled by the human ancestors who
created the site. Excavation is conducted with small tools, enabling the
recovery of all materials in their original position. Artifacts and bone are
examined for possible indications of burning. Sampled materials include
sedimentary columns, and loose sediment, stone, and bone samples for
investigation using a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR), which are
compared with experimentally produced samples to determine whether the materials
on site have been burned. Sedimentary columns are also examined through
petrographic thin-sectioning to determine the specific history of the site after
its creation.