* 1443859
* I-Corps:  Bionic Liquids - Sustainable Solvents for Renewable Energy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Aaron Socha, CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Conventional biomass pretreatment uses high temperatures, high pressures, and
toxic chemical processing of lignocellulosic feedstocks (i.e., hardwoods,
softwoods, and grasses) to separate monomeric sugars for fermentation into
biofuels and other renewable chemicals. Among the conventional methods used for
lignocellulosic biomass pretreatment are dilute acid, steam explosion, ammonium
fiber expansion and organic solvent extraction. Unfortunately, these methods are
limited in terms of feedstock tolerance, energy costs and formation of by-
products that inhibit downstream fermentation. This team is pursuing the
commercialization potential of a class of ionic liquids (termed Bionic Liquids)
derived from renewable materials. Ionic liquids are liquid salts with low vapor
pressures, high conductivities and thermal stabilities with remarkable solvating
abilities for a wide range of substrates. As such, ionic liquids are ideal
solvents for biomass pretreatment because they can completely dissolve biomass
by simple heating and stirring, stripping the cellulose away from the by-product
stream.

Biomass pretreatment for the production of fuels and renewable chemicals from
cellulose is the largest customer need that will be met by Bionic Liquids. Using
the "closed-loop" biorefinery method whereby lignin and hemicellulose by-
products are converted to Bionic Liquids, an unlimited supply of these
remarkable renewable solvents can be produced. A biorefinery can then choose to
use the Bionic Liquids in-house, or tailor their chemistries by manipulating the
cation and anion combinations to meet demand across a variety of renewable
energy (i.e. battery, solar) and synthetic chemistry markets (i.e.
pharmaceuticals).