* 1443019
* CIF21 DIBBs: DIBBs for Intelligence and Security Informatics Research Community
* CSE,OAC
* 10/15/2014,09/30/2019
* Catherine Larson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,499,531.00

The growing number of cyber attacks on the Internet and other critical
infrastructure has led to an increased sense of urgency in developing a better
understanding of the motivation and methods behind such incursions. This project
develops a research infrastructure for the Intelligence and Security Informatics
(ISI) community comprised of experts across the computer, information, and
social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure consists of online
archives and analysis tools. The archives contain a wide array of open source
data including: discussions in online forums run by hackers, data from botnet
command and control servers used to stage computer attacks, video streams and
tweets and news summaries from economically and politically unstable states and
regions. The analysis tools developed for this project support a range of
research investigations. The social network analysis tool allows researchers to
study how organizations form and how people interact with one another both
virtually and in person. The data visualization tools are important for helping
researchers pick out important patterns and trends in large sets of data of
different types and from disparate sources. A new tool for adversarial data
mining and deception detection allows researchers to deepen their enquiries and
analysis of the intentions behind cyber-attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating these divergent data sources allows the
security research community to more easily collaborate with other members of the
community, rapidly test hypotheses, evaluate detection techniques, track down
malicious actors, and identify weaknesses in a cyberinfrastructure network.