* 1443475
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Changing Patterns of Human Activity in the McMurdo Dry Valleys using Digital Photo Archives
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Adrian Howkins, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 08/31/2019
* USD 166,082.00

Beginning with the discovery of a "curious valley" in 1903 by Captain Scott, the
McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV) in Antarctica have been impacted by humans, although
there were only three brief visits prior to 1950. Since the late 1950's, human
activity in the MDV has become commonplace in summer, putting pressure on the
region's fragile ecosystems through camp construction and inhabitation, cross-
valley transport on foot and via vehicles, and scientific research that involves
sampling and deployment of instruments. Historical photographs, put alongside
information from written documentation, offer an invaluable record of the
changing patterns of human activity in the MDV. Photographic images often show
the physical extent of field camps and research sites, the activities that were
taking place, and the environmental protection measures that were being
followed. Historical photographs of the MDV, however, are scattered in different
places around the world, often in private collections, and there is a real
danger that many of these photos may be lost, along with the information they
contain. This project will collect and digitize historical photographs of sites
of human activity in the MDV from archives and private collections in the United
States, New Zealand, and organize them both chronologically and spatially in a
GIS database. Sites of past human activities will be re-photographed to provide
comparisons with the present, and re-photography will assist in providing
spatial data for historical photographs without obvious location information.
The results of this analysis will support effective environmental management
into the future. The digital photo archive will be openly available through the
McMurdo Dry Valleys Long Term Ecological Research (MCM LTER) website
(www.mcmlter.org), where it can be used by scientists, environmental managers,
and others interested in the region.

The central question of this project can be reformulated as a hypothesis:
Despite an overall increase in human activities in the MDV, the spatial range of
these activities has become more confined over time as a result of an increased
awareness of ecosystem fragility and efforts to manage the region. To address
this hypothesis, the project will define the spatial distribution and temporal
frequency of human activity in the MDV. Photographs and reports will be
collected from archives with polar collections such as the National Archives of
New Zealand in Wellington and Christchurch and the Byrd Polar Research Center in
Ohio. Private photograph collections will be accessed through personal
connections, social media, advertisements in periodicals such as The Polar
Times, and other means. Re-photography in the field will follow established
techniques and will create benchmarks for future research projects. The spatial
data will be stored in an ArcGIS database for analysis and quantification of the
human footprint over time in the MDV. The improved understanding of changing
patterns of human activity in the MDV provided by this historical photo archive
will provide three major contributions: 1) a fundamentally important historic
accounting of human activity to support current environmental management of the
MDV; 2) defining the location and type of human activity will be of immediate
benefit in two important ways: a) places to avoid for scientists interested in
sampling pristine landscapes, and, b) targets of opportunity for scientists
investigating the long-term environmental legacy of human activity; and 3) this
research will make an innovative contribution to knowledge of the environmental
history of the MDV.