* 1443318
* Supporting young scientists to attend the Gordon Research Conference Centromere Biology:The Genomics and Epigenomics of Centromere Function and Dysfunction; Waltham, MA-7/27-8/1/14
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Rachel O'Neill, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* william eggleston
* 06/30/2015
* USD 13,980.00

The centromere is the chromosomal locus that drives chromosome movement during
cell division. The proper functioning of centromeres requires a complex cascade
of events involving assembly of hundreds of different proteins, however, the
precise mechanism by which this cascade proceeds is still largely unknown.
Failure to assemble the proteins at centromeres during each cell cycle
ultimately leads to chromosome mis-segregation and cell division defects in
subsequent cell cycles, leading to cell division defects. Remarkable discoveries
in the past decade have led to the identification of a few key players in the
protein assembly involved in centromere maintenance. The 2014 meeting ?Gordon
Research Conference: Centromere Biology? is the first to bring together
scientists who share a common interest in elucidating the organization, assembly
and dynamics of the centromere, the cellular structure that is critical to the
basic cellular processes and evolution of a species. The topic of centromere
biology is typically under-represented at other chromosome and centromere
meetings, or alternatively, is widely dispersed and diluted across many
different conferences. By highlighting diverse approaches and new discoveries,
this conference aims to spur progress in the field of centromere biology across
a myriad of topics, from understanding protein assembly and biochemical pathways
to defining patterns of inheritance. This conference will promote discussion
between scientists with common professional interests and the exchange of ideas
from advanced aspects of their field, enabling scientific collaborations to
evolve in new directions. This conference represents a unique opportunity to
encourage collaboration and discussion of new discoveries, since unpublished
data is the main focus of presented material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The venue and
the program are organized to promote a welcoming, inclusive atmosphere for
junior scientists and students to present their work and exchange ideas through
poster sessions and informal discussions. The relatively small number of
attendees (~100-150) will provide networking opportunities, mentoring, and
perspectives on new research for younger participants at a critical stage in
their scientific careers. Each session will include one to two talks, depending
on the session length, chosen from the submitted abstracts. These selected talks
will be targeted towards late breaking discoveries as well as early career
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this request is to support
exceptional early career scientists in the research community as well as
trainees such as postdocs and graduate students working in this field with
diverse backgrounds to attend the Centromere Biology Gordon Research Conference
2014. The funding from NSF will provide support for registration fee and/or
travel support for participants, with preference given to post docs and graduate
students to attend the meeting.