* 1443420
* Diatom and Oxygen Isotope Evidence of Pliocene Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics and Ross Sea Paleoceanography
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Justin Dodd, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 211,337.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;During the Early Pliocene, 4.8 to 3.4 million years ago,
warmer-than-present global temperatures resulted in a retreat of the Ross Ice
Shelf and West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Understanding changes in ocean dynamics
during times of reduced ice volume and increased temperatures in the geologic
past will improve the predictive models for these conditions. The primary goal
of the proposed research is to develop a new oxygen isotope record of Pliocene
oceanographic conditions near the Antarctic continent. Oxygen isotope values
from the carbonate tests of benthic foraminifera have become the global standard
for paleo-oceanographic studies, but foraminifera are sparse in high-latitude
sediment cores. This research will instead make use of oxygen isotope
measurements from diatom silica preserved in a marine sediment core from the
Ross Sea. The project is the first attempt at using this method and will advance
understanding of global ocean dynamics and ice sheet-ocean interactions during
the Pliocene. The project will foster the professional development of two early-
career scientists and serve as training for graduate and undergraduate student
researchers. The PIs will use this project to introduce High School students to
polar/oceanographic research, as well as stable isotope geochemistry.
Collaboration with teachers via NSTA and Polar Educators International will
ensure the implementation of excellent STEM learning activities and curricula
for younger students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This
project will produce a high-resolution oxygen isotope record from well-dated
diatom rich sediments that have been cross-correlated with global benthic
foraminifera oxygen isotope records. Diatom silica frustules deposited during
the Early Pliocene and recovered by the ANDRILL Project (AND-1B) provide ideal
material for this objective. Diatomite unites in the AND-1B core are nearly
pure, with little evidence of opal formation. A diatom oxygen isotope record
from this core offers the potential to constrain lingering uncertainties about
Ross Sea and Southern Ocean paleoceanography and Antarctic Ice Sheet history
during a time of high atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. Specifically,
oxygen isotope variations will be used to constrain changes in the water
temperature and/or freshwater flux in the Pliocene Ross Sea. Diatom species data
from the AND-1B core have been used to infer variations in the extent and
duration of seasonal sea ice coverage, sea surface temperatures, and mid-water
advection onto the continental shelf. However, the diatom oxygen isotope record
will provide the first direct measure of water/oxygen isotope values at the
Antarctic continental margin during the Pliocene.