* 1443046
* CIF21 DIBBs: STORM: Spatio-Temporal Online Reasoning and Management of Large Data
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Feifei Li, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,173,975.00

A fundamental challenge for many research projects is the ability to handle
large quantities of heterogeneous data. Data collected from different sources
and time periods can be inconsistent, or stored in different formats and data
management systems. Thus, a critical step in many projects is to develop a
customized query and analytical engine to translate inputs. But for each new
dataset, or for each new query type or analytic task for an existing dataset, a
new query interface or program must be developed, requiring significant
investments of time and effort. This project will develop an automatic engine
for searching large, heterogeneous data collections for weather and meteorology,
particularly from instruments in the western US, in a regional network called
MesoWest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an automatic query and
analytical engine for large, heterogeneous spatial and temporal data. This
capability allows users to automatically deploy a query and analytical engine
instance over their large, heterogeneous data with spatial and temporal
dimensions. The system supports a simple search-box and map-like query interface
that allows numerous powerful analytical queries. Techniques to make these
queries robust, relevant, and highly scalable will be developed. The project
also enables users to execute queries over multiple data sources simultaneously
and seamlessly. The goal of the work is to dramatically simplify the management
and analysis of large spatio-temporal data at different institutions, groups,
and corporations.