* 1443796
* Collaborative Research: Virtualized Wireless Networks and Their Impact on Capacity Markets
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Martin Weiss, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 199,524.00

This project develops a new vision for wireless networks, predicated on the
creation of service-driven virtual networks constructed from a pool for
resources that belong to a variety of stakeholders. The resources include
spectrum, physical infrastructure, and control and management support, and the
stakeholders include traditional mobile operators, operators of WiFi access
networks, businesses and households that support wireless connectivity through
small cell deployment, traffic aggregators (such as Mobile Virtual Network
Operators [MVNOs]), and regulators. The resulting architecture separates the
consumer-facing service provision from the technologies used to construct the
network, enabling the disintermediation of current wireless service provision
systems. Moving the point at which network access transactions take place up the
value chain (or the protocol stack) means that a greater range of service types
can be provided to consumers without requiring large up-front capital
investments on the part of the (consumer-facing) service providers. This will
have profound impact on both industry and society, affecting the way that these
networks are designed and built, spectrum and infrastructure resources are
managed, and pricing structures for services provided over the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project first defines a new architecture that
enables the virtualization of a wireless network over a combination of spectrum
licensed under different regimes and infrastructure with different ownership.
Relying on game theoretic and market models of virtual network construction, new
resource management mechanisms are designed to select the appropriate set of
resources to build a virtual wireless network with given coverage and capacity
requirements. Combinatorial auctions for multiple objects are practical
mechanisms for the dynamic allocation and aggregation of resources for such a
virtualized wireless network. In analyzing the impact of the proposed
architecture on spectrum markets, a key question is whether the incorporation of
a virtualized spectrum commodity influences the viability of these markets (as
measured by the liquidity outcome), and how this compares to previous scenarios
in which the traded commodity was the physical spectrum resource or 'naked
spectrum;. Finally, this project explores how markets in virtual wireless
capacity would work when implemented in current wireless networks, in the
context of LTE-Advanced and expected 5G developments.