* 1443260
* Collaborative Research:  Allan HILLs Englacial Site (AHILLES) Selection
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 124,396.00

Marine paleoclimate archives show that approximately one million years ago
Earth's climate transitioned from 40,000-year glacial /interglacial cycles to
100,000-year cycles. This award will support a study designed to map the
distribution of one million year-old ice in the Allan Hills Blue Ice Area,
Antarctica using state-of-the-art ground penetrating radar. The Allen Hills was
demonstrated to contain a continuous record of the past 400,000 years and is
also the collection location of the oldest ice samples (990,000 years) yet
recovered. The maps resulting from this study will be used to select an ice-core
drilling site at which a million-plus year-old continuous record of climate
could be recovered. Ice cores contain the only kind of record to directly
capture atmospheric gases and aerosols, but no ice-core-based climate record yet
extends continuously beyond the past 800,000 years. A million-plus year-old
record will allow better understanding of the major mechanisms and driving
forces of natural climate variability in a world with 100,000-year
glacial/interglacial cycles. The project will support two early career
scientists in collaboration with senior scientists, as well as a graduate
student, and will conduct outreach to schools and the public.

The Allan Hills Blue Ice Area preserves a continuous climate record covering the
last 400,000 years along an established glaciological flow line. Two kilometers
to the east of this flow line, the oldest ice on Earth (~1 million years old) is
found only 120 m below the surface. Meteorites collected in the area are
reported to be as old as 1.8 million years, suggesting still older ice may be
present. Combined, these data strongly suggest that the Allen Hills area could
contain a continuous, well-resolved environmental record, spanning at least the
last million years. As such, this area has been selected as an upcoming target
for the new Intermediate Depth Ice Core Drill by the US Ice Core Working Group.
This drill will recover a higher-quality core than previous dry drilling
attempts. This project will conduct a comprehensive ground penetrating radar
survey aimed at tracing the signature of the million-year-old ice layer
throughout the region. The resulting map will be used to select a drill site
from which an ice core containing the million-plus year-old continuous climate
record will be collected. The proposed activities are a necessary precursor to
the collection of the oldest known ice on Earth. Ice cores provide a robust
reconstruction of past climate and extending this record beyond the 800,000
years currently available will open new opportunities to study the climate
system. The data collected will also be used to investigate the bedrock and ice
flow parameters favorable to the preservation of old ice, which may allow
targeted investigation of other blue ice areas in Antarctica.