* 1443584
* Micro and Nanoscale Phase Change Heat Transfer: Role of Surface Structures, January 11-16, 2015 in Galveston, Texas.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Yoav Peles, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

CBET-1443584&lt;br/&gt;Peles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support
to cover the registration costs for several participants to attend the
conference. The conference is scheduled to be held January 11-16, 2015 in
Galveston, Texas. The main objective of this proposal is to support
participation at the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Micro and Nanoscale
Phase Change Heat Transfer. The proposed conference is the first of its kind for
the heat transfer community and will help accelerate ideas and disseminate
fundamental knowledge in the scientific frontier pertinent to thermal processes.
The community will be able to identify and develop strategies to better focus
future research efforts, develop a clear vision about research needs, learn
about recent research developments, and identify research shortcomings. This
newly established GRC will address emerging challenges in phase-change heat
transfer and identify new opportunities by establishing a cohesive multi-
disciplinary community consisting of researchers in heat transfer, chemistry,
material science, and interfacial science. The organizers are taking special
initiatives to recruit speakers and other attendees from under-representative
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics of the GRC will focus on the
fundamental modes of liquid vapor phase change in combination with surface
structures, and the opportunities provided by a new class of experimental heat
transfer and metrology methodology, theoretical and numerical thermal science,
surface science and chemistry, materials, and flow manipulation. Although
various general conferences in heat transfer exist, the phase change related
topics are often interspersed within the large conference program. This set up
does not allow for detailed technical discussions and the inclusion of
researchers from related fields. The proposed conference will bridge this gap
between heat transfer experts with others from important relevant disciplines.
In addition, the significant time allotted for discussions will foster
collaborations amongst diverse researchers to rapidly accelerate understanding.