* 1443677
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering the Ross Ocean and Ice Shelf Environment and Tectonic setting Through Aerogeophysical Surveys and Modeling (ROSETTA-ICE)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 08/31/2019
* USD 661,053.00

The Ross Ice Shelf is the largest existing ice shelf in Antarctica, and is
currently stabilizing significant portions of the land ice atop the Antarctic
continent. An ice shelf begins where the land ice goes afloat on the ocean, and
as such, the Ross Ice Shelf interacts with the ocean and seafloor below, and the
land ice behind. Currently, the Ross Ice Shelf slows down, or buttresses, the
fast flowing ice streams of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS), a marine-based
ice sheet, which if melted, would raise global sea level by 3-4 meters. The Ross
Ice Shelf average ice thickness is approximately 350 meters, and it covers
approximately 487,000 square kilometers, an area slightly larger than the state
of California. The Ross Ice Shelf has disappeared during prior interglacial
periods, suggesting in the future it may disappear again. Understanding the
dynamics, stability and future of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet therefore
requires in-depth knowledge of the Ross Ice Shelf. The ROSETTA-ICE project
brings together scientists from 4 US institutions and from the Institute of
Geological and Nuclear Sciences Limited, known as GNS Science, New Zealand. The
ROSETTA-ICE data on the ice shelf, the water beneath the ice shelf, and the
underlying rocks, will allow better predictions of how the Ross Ice Shelf will
respond to changing climate, and therefore how the WAIS will behave in the
future. The interdisciplinary ROSETTA-ICE team will train undergraduate and high
school students in cutting edge research techniques, and will also work to
educate the public via a series of vignettes integrating ROSETTA-ICE science
with the scientific and human history of Antarctic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ROSETTA-ICE survey will acquire gravity and
magnetics data to determine the water depth beneath the ice shelf. Radar, LIDAR
and imagery systems will be used to map the Ross Ice Shelf thickness and fine
structure, crevasses, channels, debris, surface accumulation and distribution of
marine ice. The high resolution aerogeophysical data over the Ross Ice Shelf
region in Antarctica will be acquired using the IcePod sensor suite mounted
externally on an LC-130 aircraft operating from McMurdo Station, Antarctica.
Field activities will include ~36 flights on LC-130 aircraft over two field
seasons in Antarctica. The IcePod instrument suite leverages the unique
experience of the New York Air National Guard operating in Antarctica for NSF
scientific research as well as infrastructure and logistics. The project will
answer questions about the stability of the Ross Ice Shelf in future climate,
and the geotectonic evolution of the Ross Ice Shelf Region, a key component of
the West Antarctic Rift system. The comprehensive benchmark data sets acquired
will enable broad, interdisciplinary analyses and modeling, which will also be
performed as part of the project. ROSETTA-ICE will illuminate Ross ice sheet-ice
shelf-ocean dynamics as the system nears a critical juncture but still is
intact. Through interacting with an online data visualization tool, and
comparing the ROSETTA-ICE data and results from earlier studies, we will engage
students and young investigators, equipping them with new capabilities for the
study of critical earth systems that influence global climate.