* 1443495
* Collaborative Research: First Scientific Priorities from the ARM West Antarctic Radiation Experiment
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Johannes Verlinde, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 241,985.00

The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) is a rapidly warming region of the Earth.
Its stability under projected warming scenarios is inextricably linked with
future global sea level rise. There have been only modest ground based
atmospheric science or climatological field observations collected in West
Antarctica since that undertaken during the era of the 1957 International
Geophysical Year. Satellite imagery and meteorological reanalysis indicate that
West Antarctica is highly susceptible to continental advection of warm and moist
maritime air and cloud cover, depending on the location and strength of
climatological low pressure cells in the Amundsen, Ross, and Bellingshausen
Seas. There is a need to quantify the role of these changing air masses have on
the surface energy balance, including radiation components and cloud radiative
forcing terms, and to identify distant teleconnections with lower latitudes,
such as the North Atlantic and the tropics.

The research proposed herein, at McMurdo and at WAIS divide, is organized in two
thrusts: (1) Empirical determination of the energy balance on the WAIS divide
site throughout a 75-day (austral summer) observing period, accounting for
meteorological factors governing the local energy balance, and including
exploration of teleconnections with lower latitudes, and, (2) Determination of
the major categories of meteorological conditions that give rise to recurring
types of cloud cover, including mixed phase clouds, and aerosol abundance over
Ross Island, over an annual cycle. These measurement campaigns will be organized
around the detailed protocols and advanced observing facilities enabled by the
DOE ARM mobile facility (Department of Energy ? Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement program). These extensive and advanced ARM microphysical data will
also be used to assess how well current polar-optimized regional climate models
simulate observed high latitude cloud cover.

The AWARE campaign also will provide a hands-on opportunity to help high school
teachers adapt to the new Next Generation Science and Engineering Standards
(NGSS). AWARE science team members will also participate in annual teacher
training workshops at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, involving selected
San Diego Unified School District (SDUSD) master teachers.