* 1443470
* Carbonyl Sulfide, Methyl Chloride, and Methyl Bromide Measurements in the New Intermediate-depth South Pole Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2019
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2019
* USD 596,900.00

In the past, Earth's climate underwent dramatic changes that influenced
physical, chemical, geological, and biological processes on a global scale. Such
changes left an imprint in Earth's atmosphere, as shown by the variability in
abundances of trace gases like carbon dioxide and methane. In return, changes in
the atmospheric trace gas composition affected Earth's climate. Studying
compositional variations of the past atmosphere helps us understand the history
of interactions between global biogeochemical cycles and Earth?s climate. The
most reliable information on past atmospheric composition comes from analysis of
air entrapped in polar ice cores. This project aims to generate ice-core records
of relatively short-lived, very-low-abundance trace gases to determine the range
of past variability in their atmospheric levels and investigate the changes in
global biogeochemical cycles that caused this variability. This project measures
three such gases: carbonyl sulfide, methyl chloride, and methyl bromide. Changes
in carbonyl sulfide can indicate changes in primary productivity and
photosynthetic update of carbon dioxide. Changes in methyl chloride and methyl
bromide significantly impact natural variability in stratospheric ozone. In
addition, the processes that control atmospheric levels of methyl chloride and
methyl bromide are shared with those controlling levels of atmospheric methane.
The measurements will be made in the new ice core from the South Pole, which is
expected to provide a 40,000-year record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus
of this project is to develop high-quality trace gas records for the entire
Holocene period (the past 11,000 years), with additional, more exploratory
measurements from the last glacial period including the period from
29,000-36,000 years ago when there were large changes in atmospheric methane.
Due to the cold temperatures of the South Pole ice, the proposed carbonyl
sulfide measurements are expected to provide a direct measure of the past
atmospheric variability of this gas without the large hydrolysis corrections
that are necessary for interpretation of measurements from ice cores in warmer
settings. Furthermore, we will test the expectation that contemporaneous
measurements from the last glacial period in the deep West Antarctic Ice Sheet
Divide ice core will not require hydrolysis loss corrections. With respect to
methyl chloride, we aim to verify and improve the existing Holocene atmospheric
history from the Taylor Dome ice core in Antarctica. The higher resolution of
our measurements compared with those from Taylor Dome will allow us to derive a
more statistically significant relationship between methyl chloride and methane.
With respect to methyl bromide, we plan to extend the existing 2,000-year
database to 11,000 years. Together, the methyl bromide and methyl chloride
records will provide strong measurement-based constraints on the natural
variability of stratospheric halogens during the Holocene period. In addition,
the methyl bromide record will provide insight into the correlation between
methyl chloride and methane during the Holocene period due to common sources and
sinks.