* 1443875
* Cognitive Networking for Wireless Communication in Rural Areas: A Directional Antennas and Propagation Modeling Approach with Low Cost Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Magdy Iskander, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Cognitive Networking for Wireless Communication in Rural Areas: A Directional
Antennas and Propagation Modeling Approach with Low Cost
Implementation&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nineteen million people, 6 percent of the US population,
do not have reliable broadband and high data rate communications coverage due to
inaccessibility in rural areas. Availability of such services is essential to
education, jobs, health care, and the economic development of these areas. The
objective of the proposed work is to develop a practical and affordable wireless
communication system that covers and best fits the needs of rural areas. The
proposed technology is particularly suitable for applications in areas with vast
coverage requirements, rough terrain, and sparse access nodes and base
stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project involves the development of an
integrative approach based on the utilization of "advanced" slow moving (or
stationary but strategically placed based on sight planning) mobile nodes with
extended monitoring and control capabilities to facilitate the use of advanced
antennas and propagation technologies while not requiring changes in existing
Medium Access Control (MAC) standards and upper layers of the ISO communications
model. The proposed affordable wireless communication and connectivity
technology in rural areas will have significant educational, job creation,
health care, and economic development impact on minorities and underrepresented
communities in the US and throughout the world. It represents a solution that
fits the long unaddressed needs of these communities. Demonstrating the proposed
technology and its use in rural areas in Hawaii, and perhaps beyond, will have
significant economic, educational, and health care (remote patient monitoring)
benefits to these communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As wireless protocols and
implementation standards continue to expand with additional capabilities to meet
fast growing demands, it is also becoming more difficult to interface and
integrate special needs such as those of rural areas with set protocols and
standards in the ISO communication model. The proposed work addresses this
issue, and an affordable, expandable, and effective system will be developed
that utilizes innovative technology and research advances without requiring
changes and adjustments in the MAC and upper layers of the ISO model. The
proposed procedure is based on the use of the so called "advanced" nodes which
include the use of "directional antennas," beam steering capabilities,
integration of propagation modeling, implementation of cognitive spectrum
sensing capabilities, and also providing networking topology controls in each of
these nodes. Specific innovations include development of new broadband, dual
polarization and low cost directional antenna array designs with beam steering
capabilities and the implementation of multi-level details propagation modeling
to enhance receivers performance while minimizing required computation time and
resources. The proposed cognitive network system and the associated introduction
of the "advanced" nodes, not only provide communication advantages such as
extended range and area coverage using high gain antennas and the relatively
lower power requirements when directional (rather than omnidirectional) antennas
are used, but the integration of the communication channel links controls in
these units facilitates interfaces between the proposed directional physical
layer with the MAC and other upper layers in the ISO model without modification
or alteration of set standards and protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A team of
investigators with expertise in antennas, propagation, and networking, is
participating in this proposal. In addition to the extensive simulation and
optimization studies, two "advanced" nodes prototype systems will be developed
and tested in the vast and challenging terrain conditions in rural areas in the
islands of Hawaii.