* 1443014
* CIF21 DIBBs: An Integrated System for Public/Private Access to Large-Scale, Confidential Social Science Data
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Jerome Reiter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,498,683.00

This research project will develop a pilot of an integrated system for
disseminating large-scale data about people. This project will address critical
challenges that have inhibited the wide-spread dissemination of large-scale
databases that can advance basic social, behavioral, and economic science
research and that offer enormous potential benefits to society. Among the
challenges the dissemination of these data have posed are the unintended
disclosures of data subjects' identities and sensitive attributes, thereby
violating promises and sometimes laws designed to protect data subjects' privacy
and confidentiality. The products of this project will facilitate the
development and dissemination of safe and useful large-scale datasets. The
project will result in extensible and open-source products that constitute a
proof of concept and that will provide valuable information for future larger-
scale implementations of the system. The project therefore will lay the
groundwork for a potential transformation in data dissemination, providing data
stewards with the infrastructure they need to release data products that advance
social science, policy making, and training. The project also will provide
education and training opportunities for a post-doctoral researcher as well as
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
create new methodology and broadly applicable tools for meeting data
dissemination challenges. From a technical perspective, they will advance
methodology for generating synthetic datasets via nonparametric methods capable
of handling highly dimensional data. They will advance methodology for providing
feedback on the quality of inferences from heavily redacted data, and they will
develop methods for in depth assessment and characterization of disclosure risks
inherent in releasing large-scale synthetic data with and without verification
servers. From an infrastructure perspective, the investigators will develop
systems and architecture for integrating the three core tools (synthetic data,
verification servers, and remote access) in ways that result in secure, scalable
access to data. The pilot system will be built with the goal of disseminating a
version of a dataset on the work histories of federal government employees.