* 1443637
* Analysis of Voltage-gated Ion Channels in Antarctic Fish
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Harold Zakon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 544,756.00

This project studies how the proteins of the nerves and muscles of fish that
live in Antarctica function in the cold, which should provide information on the
function of these same proteins in all animals, including humans. These
proteins, called ion channels, open and close to allow ions (atoms or molecules
with electrical charge) to flow into or out of cells which causes the electrical
activity of nerves and muscles. Mutations that influence this process are the
basis of numerous human disorders such as epilepsy, heart arrhythmias, and
muscle paralysis. Thus, it is important to understand what parts of the proteins
govern these transitions. The speed with which channels open and close depends
on temperature. Human ion channels transition slowly when we are cold, which is
why we become numb in the cold. Yet Antarctic fish, called icefish, are active
at freezing temperatures that drastically limit the activity of human ion
channels. The investigators have evidence that specific alterations in the
icefishs' ion channels allow their channels to operate differently in the cold
and they will use gene discovery and biophysical methods to test how these
changes alter the transitions of icefish proteins at different temperatures. The
project will also further the NSF goals of training new generations of
scientists and of making scientific discoveries available to the general public.
The gene discovery analysis will be done by undergraduate students including
those from a minority-serving university and the investigators will develop a
new course which will also serve students at that institution and elsewhere. In
addition, the investigators will participate in educational outreach events with
the general public as well as with groups with special
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Notothenioid fishes are one of the most successful
groups of vertebrates in Antarctica. Notothens have adaptations to the freezing
water they inhabit and this project will study how their voltage-gated ion
channels (VGICs) function in the cold. The molecular movements of ion channels
are severely impaired by cold, yet notothens function at temperatures that would
paralyze the nerves and muscles of "cold-blooded" temperate zone animals.
Surprisingly, no biophysical or molecular investigations have been conducted on
notothen VGICs. The investigators have preliminary data that amino acid
substitutions occur at sites in VGICs that are evolutionarily conserved from
fruit flies to humans. Some of these sites are known to impact channel function
and the role of others in channel transitioning are unknown. The results from
studying them will provide novel information also applicable to non-notothen,
perhaps even human, VGICs as well as providing insights into how VGICs adapt to
the cold. The project will biophysically characterize notothen VGICs using
voltage-clamp techniques will and compare their properties over a range of
temperatures to the same channel from two temperate zone fish. The role of
unique notothen amino acid substitutions will be characterized by mutagenesis.
One specific aim will be a project in which undergraduates mine notothen
sequence databases to identify other potential amino acid substitutions in VGICs
that might facilitate adaptation to the cold.