* 1443917
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Laying the Foundations of Social Network-Aware Cellular Device-to-Device Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2018
* USD 234,001.00

Providing ubiquitous access to the rapidly expanding suite of mobile social
applications has strained modern-day wireless networks, motivating the need for
new technologies to optimize the usage of the scarce radio resources. Device-to-
device (D2D) communications between mobile devices over the reliable and
pervasive cellular network infrastructure constitutes one of the most promising
technologies for further accelerating the penetration of mobile social services.
As compared to conventional D2D over short-range and limited-capacity
technologies such as Bluetooth, D2D over cellular provides longer transmission
ranges, improved spectrum sharing, higher capacities, guaranteed quality-of-
service, and a broader range of applications and services. Owing to its
promising potential, D2D is now viewed by both academia and standardization
bodies as a cornerstone technology in emerging 5th generation (5G) wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging cellular D2D for mobile social
applications requires addressing a variety of technical challenges that are
characterized by a strong interplay between social factors such as content
correlation, and wireless features such as network-controlled resource
allocation and interference management. This project addresses these challenges
by introducing a novel network optimization framework, cognizant of both social
and wireless realms, suitable for ensuring the delivery of high-speed, high-
quality social networking services over cellular D2D communications.
Specifically, new D2D-oriented socio-technological metrics and novel semi-
distributed resource allocation and content delivery algorithms will be
developed to optimize the quality-of-service of social network-aware D2D
systems. In addition, hierarchical resource allocation tools will be introduced
to optimize the distribution of social content over D2D while maximizing the
spread of data over multiple D2D connections. The results will be evaluated and
deployed on two platforms: a large-scale testbed based on open-source Android
devices for validating the approach and exploring new social metrics, and a
software defined radio platform to analyze the performance of the proposed
schemes within a realistic cellular setting.