* 1443633
* Erebus Volcano: Ccharacterizing a Subglacial Hydrothermal System and Potential effects on Carbon Dioxide Degassing
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 280,423.00

Erebus Volcano, Antarctica, is the world's southernmost currently active
volcano, with fully glaciated flanks, and an active, long-lived lava lake. It is
a natural laboratory for the study of magmatic processes due to its consistent
volcanic activity, location in an area with extremely dry atmospheric
conditions, lack of liquid water at the surface, and superb logistical support.
As such, it is the ideal place to investigate magma degassing. At Erebus
volcanic degassing occurs through the main crater and lava-lake but also, as at
many volcanoes, along its flanks. In contrast to non-glaciated volcanoes where
flank degassing is often diffuse and difficult to measure, the ice-towers and
ice caves on Erebus are direct indicators of sites of active degassing. This
project will investigate gas and steam discharges in approximately 20 ice caves.
Preliminary results show that the composition of gases within the ice caves is a
mixture of magmatic gases and air, and further that the gases are likely
interacting with, and dissolving in, a liquid, warm, hydrothermal system below
the glacier. The amount of carbon dioxide degassing from the volcano's flanks to
the atmosphere and the ability of the hydrothermal system (if present) to
dissolve magmatic gases will both be quantified. The results will have
implications for better quantifying carbon dioxide and other gas emissions from
glaciated volcanoes, which is relevant for better understanding of colder
periods in Earth's history, including potentially explaining the transition from
colder periods to warmer ones. The project will train a post-doctoral researcher
in volcanic and hydrothermal gas sampling and analyses, measurements of carbon
dioxide emissions from the volcano, and interpretation of the results. Images,
concepts, and data from the expedition will be used in classroom teaching at the
University of New Mexico, a minority serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The precise quantification of the
relative abundances of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and the noble gases
will allow us to characterize the extent and temperature distribution of the
liquid hydrothermal system below the glaciated volcano. Combination of these
data with measurement of CO2 flux in the ice caves provides information on the
processes of CO2 absorption and sequestration by the liquid-dominated
hydrothermal system at depth. By applying geochemical techniques and modeling,
the temperature, pH, and volatile content of the hydrothermal system can be
determined, the amount of CO2 that dissolves into the liquid phase, and the
ultimate source of the CO2 that is degassing from the volcano's flanks will be
assessed. These results can inform, and improve, models of volcanic CO2
contributions to the Earth's atmosphere from glaciated volcanoes. In addition to
training a post-doc, outreach efforts will include utilization of materials and
visuals for introductory Geology and volcanology classes. UNM is a majority-
minority institution and federally classified Hispanic-serving institution.
Therefore, a comparatively large proportion of undergraduates from culturally
diverse backgrounds take introduction classes and will be exposed to these
teaching materials.