* 1443342
* Collaborative Research: East Antarctic Glacial Landscape Evolution (EAGLE): A Study using Combined Thermochronology, Geochronology and Provenance Analysis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 33,732.00

Antarctica is almost entirely covered by ice, in places over two miles thick.
This ice hides a landscape that is less well known than the surface of Mars and
represents one of Earth's last unexplored frontiers. Ice-penetrating radar
images provide a remote glimpse of this landscape including ice-buried mountains
larger than the European Alps and huge fjords twice as deep as the Grand Canyon.
The goal of this project is to collect sediment samples derived from these
landscapes to determine when and under what conditions these features formed.
Specifically, the project seeks to understand the landscape in the context of
the history and dynamics of the overlying ice sheet and past mountain-building
episodes. This project accomplishes this goal by analyzing sand collected during
previous sea-floor drilling expeditions off the coast of Antarctica. This sand
was supplied from the continent interior by ancient rivers when it was ice-free
over 34 million year ago, and later by glaciers. The project will also study
bedrock samples from rare ice-free parts of the Transantarctic Mountains. The
primary activity is to apply multiple advanced dating techniques to single
mineral grains contained within this sand and rock. Different methods and
minerals yield different dates that provide insight into how Antarctica?s
landscape has eroded over the many tens of millions of years during which sand
was deposited offshore. The dating techniques that are being developed and
enhanced for this study have broad application in many branches of geoscience
research and industry. The project makes cost-effective use of pre-existing
sample collections housed at NSF facilities including the US Polar Rock
Repository, the Gulf Coast Core Repository, and the Antarctic Marine Geology
Research Facility. The project will contribute to the STEM training of two
graduate and two undergraduate students, and includes collaboration among four
US universities as well as international collaboration between the US and
France. The project also supports outreach in the form of a two-week open
workshop giving ten students the opportunity to visit the University of Arizona
to conduct STEM-based analytical work and training on Antarctic-based projects.
Results from both the project and workshop will be disseminated through
presentations at professional meetings, peer-reviewed publications, and through
public outreach and media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of
this project is to reconstruct a chronology of East Antarctic subglacial
landscape evolution to understand the tectonic and climatic forcing behind
landscape modification, and how it has influenced past ice sheet inception and
dynamics. Our approach focuses on acquiring a record of the cooling and erosion
history contained in East Antarctic-derived detrital mineral grains and clasts
in offshore sediments deposited both before and after the onset of Antarctic
glaciation. Samples will be taken from existing drill core and marine sediment
core material from offshore Wilkes Land (100°E-160°E) and the Ross Sea. Multiple
geo- and thermo-chronometers will be employed to reconstruct source region
cooling history including U-Pb, fission-track, and (U-Th)/He dating of zircon
and apatite, and 40Ar/39Ar dating of hornblende, mica, and feldspar. This
offshore record will be augmented and tested by applying the same methods to
onshore bedrock samples in the Transantarctic Mountains obtained from the US
Polar Rock Repository and through fieldwork. The onshore work will additionally
address the debated incision history of the large glacial troughs that cut the
range, now occupied by glaciers draining the East Antarctic Ice Sheet. This
includes collection of samples from several age-elevation transects, apatite
4He/3He thermochronometry, and Pecube thermo-kinematic modeling. Acquiring an
extensive geo- and thermo-chronologic database will also provide valuable new
information on the poorly known ice-hidden geology and tectonics of subglacial
East Antarctica that has implications for improving supercontinent
reconstructions and understanding continental break-up.