* 1443104
* Workshop: Support for doctoral students and junior researchers at The Digital Societies and Social Technologies Summer Institute
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Sean Goggins, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to support the "Digital Societies and Social Technologies Summer
Institute" (DSST-SI), a five-day interdisciplinary training workshop designed to
bring graduate students and young faulty together with established scholars
working at the socio-technical interface between computer science, human-
computer interaction, design studies, management information systems, and cyber-
social science. The Consortium will enhance the scientific workforce in this
emerging research area by developing a group of promising young researchers
interested in socio-technical research and building a "community of inquiry and
practice" that can address the mixture of technical, social and organizational
challenges that characterize today's increasingly digital workplaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's emerging information and communication
technologies (ICTs) promise significant advances across many domains of social
and scientific interest; however, these technologies stand at an uncomfortable
intersection of multiple scholarly and policy fields, "useful to many but
central to none." The DSST Summer Institute seeks to convene and reinforce the
community of social scientists, computer scientists, design researchers, and
computational methods and data specialists, to begin building the missing
intellectual and institutional infrastructure for sustained scholarship in this
crucial but underdeveloped no-man's-land. NSF funding allows 30 doctoral
students and early faculty to participate in the DSST Summer Institute program
and become better integrated into the emerging DSST
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the 2014 DSST Summer Institute
will focus on problems that are limiting the sociotechnical community's ability
to build coherent interdisciplinary dialogues, develop collaborative research
agendas, and nurture new generations of emerging scholars. The 2014 Institute
will also equip participants with the cyberinfrastructure concepts, theories and
tools needed to enlist computational and big-data research methods in pursuit of
new and transformative agendas in sociotechnical design science. Beyond raising
awareness of advances in tools and techniques, the DSST Summer Institute will
also develop interdisciplinary networks of sociotechnical scholars focused on
critical ICT challenges and on realizing the transformative potential of
emerging computational methods and big data resources within the ICT studies
domain. In addition, the workshops will also serve an educational purpose,
providing graduate students and other early-career researchers with training,
feedback, and opportunities to build collegial and mentorship ties beyond their
home departments. Moreover, beyond these direct contributions to strengthening
the community for sociotechnical ICT Studies, the Summer Institute will also
contribute to the infrastructure for computational and data-enabled science and
engineering more generally, by enhancing understanding of the continuities and
transformations that occur when work processes -- including scientific work
practices -- move from physical to virtual settings.