* 1443971
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Let's share CommRad -- spectrum sharing between communications and radar systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Mark Bell, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 05/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

The 2012 report to the President entitled "Realizing the Full Potential of
Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth" recommends releasing portions
of the large governmental radar bands to be shared with commercial wireless
services. This proposal identifies viable sharing mechanisms between radar and
communication systems, which traditionally are operated on non-overlapping bands
and are engineered to attain very different goals, so that they may co-exist in
a way that is minimally harmful, or ideally beneficial, to both. This research
first examines the impact unaltered radar and communication systems would have
on one another and thereafter proposes a series of solutions for co-existence
that range from realistic solutions with respect to legacy systems (where one of
the radar or communication systems remains unaltered) to novel transformative
joint designs. The availability of proven robust and optimal sharing mechanisms
will pave the way to the development of new wireless services while preserving
the critical roles radar systems play in the globally networked society.

A multidisciplinary team with expertise in radar and statistical signal
processing, cognitive radio and spectrum sharing, communication and information
theory, and electromagnetics and propagation, has been assembled to address the
following thrusts: 1) understand and model the impact of overlapping frequency
bands on current, unaltered radar and communication systems; 2) a radar centric
approach, where adaptive radar processing is the key to reduce interference from
communication systems; 3) a communication network centric approach, where coding
is used to improve resilience to radar interference; 4) the joint design of
communication and radar systems, where the information-theoretic understanding
of the tradeoffs between communication data rates and estimation rates is at the
base of this cooperative design; 5) validation of the models and proposed
algorithms by using real experimental data. The results of this research will be
timely presented at major national and international professional venues; the
general public will be reached by means of modern social media, such as videos
of undergraduate-run experiments that demonstrate the developed technology and
its practical impact. The developed fundamental framework will form a solid
foundation for spectrum sharing between radar and communication systems; the
developed technology is expected to be of immediate and far-reaching use for
both radar and communication private and public sectors alike. Students involved
in this research will receive a cutting edge education and training in radar and
communication sciences, acquiring fundamental skills to be successful in the
current competitive, diverse, and global workforce market.