* 1443216
* RAPID - Russia, Ukraine and The Dynamics of Public Attitudes Towards U.S. and Global Security
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Marianne Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 132,028.00

This project examines a pressing, time sensitive, topic with strong potential to
threaten U.S. national security. How the U.S. public reacts to the deepening
Ukraine crisis and other possible aggressive moves by Russia will have
significant consequences for U.S. and global security. The project will
investigate the dynamics of U.S. public attitudes towards the Ukraine crisis and
other possible Russian actions in Eastern Europe, the Middle East and elsewhere.
Recognizing the growing relevance of public attitudes for foreign policy,
researchers have begun to delineate factors shaping citizen decision-making
about military intervention, economic sanctions and humanitarian relief efforts.
To date, however, progress in testing important theoretical ideas has been
constrained by serious data limitations. Most studies examining forces affecting
stability and change in public opinion have relied on aggregate data, thereby
restricting the ability to explain what is happening at the individual level.
Limited research analyzing individual-level attitudes typically has relied on
data created for other purposes and important explanatory variables are
unavailable. In contrast, the present study uses data gathered in multi-wave
representative national panel surveys of the U.S. adult population to analyze a
wide variety of theoretically motivated hypotheses about factors affecting
public attitudes regarding the Ukraine crisis, ensuing events, and U.S. foreign
policy more generally. Hypotheses tested will focus on understanding how basic
value orientations and personality characteristics, benefit-cost calculations,
cues provided by leader images and partisan attachments, and moral
considerations combine to drive reactions to the Ukraine crisis and subsequent
events as well as foreign-policy attitudes more generally. Building on recent
work in cognitive psychology and experimental economics, newly available
statistical techniques will be marshaled to investigate sources of heterogeneity
in the effects of these factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct
four large (N = 5000), representative national panel surveys of the American
public over the next 12 months. Building on recent survey research funded by the
U.K. Economics and Social Research Council (ESRC) on American, British and
French reactions to the Syrian crisis and more general foreign policy attitudes
among the publics of these three countries, the proposed study will produce very
high quality, cost effective, science. The resulting multi-wave survey data set
will provide information needed for to conduct sophisticated, leading-edge
multivariate analyses of the etiology and dynamics of the American public's
foreign policy attitudes in a period when relations between the United States
and Russia are evolving in consequential ways. To leverage the project's impact,
all survey data will be made available to the scholarly community within three
months after the completion of fieldwork via a widely publicized project
website. Major findings will be presented in papers submitted for publication in
leading peer-reviewed journals and in a book-length manuscript.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will facilitate expert and lay understanding of
possible alternative reactions towards relations with Russia and America's
foreign policy stance more generally during a time when significant threats to
national security and world security are growing. To magnify its impacts outside
the scholarly community, key findings will be conveyed to non-specialist
audiences via graphs and short summary documents on the project website, as well
as by "columns" and "blogs" in widely accessed print and electronic media.