* 1443985
* Collaborative Research: Applying Behavioral-Ecological Network Models to Enhance Distributed Spectrum Access in Cognitive Radio
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Bilal Khan, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,986.00

The scientists identify fair resource sharing methods as a critical concern in
the design of smart radio networks. The researchers note that fair sharing of
resources is of fundamental importance in human communities, and propose to
apply social network methods to the design of dynamic spectrum access systems.
By applying the experience from a mature field, they plan to solve some of the
more complex issues related to spectrum sharing in a constantly changing
technical environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In drawing the connection from the
problem of resource-sharing in Cognitive Radio (CR), to models of solutions
found within human/animal societies, the proposed research evaluates the extent
to which our models of patterns of co-use in biological systems can be
profitably leveraged within the context of distributed uncoordinated CR
societies to enable individuals and groups to maximize their utility. Of
particular relevance to this endeavor is recent ethnographic research on
foraging networks of indigenous peoples and human foragers, which has found
social relations to be a critical context in which natural selection acts on
resource use and co-use behaviors. These findings concerning human behavior lie
at the forefront of anthropology, revealing the tensions between sharing
networks and optimal strategies and altering our understanding of past human
social evolution, and by extension, our vision of the future evolution of
artificial CR societies.