* 1443258
* Effects of Temperature on Phytoplankton Growth Rates
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Walker Smith, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2018
* USD 277,202.00

Temperature is a fundamental variable controlling many processes in polar
systems, but surprisingly few attempts to synthesize the effects of temperature
on the growth of single-celled organisms called phytoplankton have been made.
Because phytoplankton are the base of all marine food webs, they play an
essential role in the ocean's ecology. Many global models use a simple
relationship that extrapolate the effects of temperature on phytoplankton growth
derived from warmer waters to polar temperatures, but this introduces
substantial uncertainties in the models' results. This project will investigate
the effects of temperature on growth at the low temperatures encountered in
polar systems. Furthermore, given the potential oceanic changes expected in the
future, it will allow much more accurate predictions of future responses to this
change. The project will also further the NSF goals of training new generations
of scientists and of making scientific discoveries available to the general
public. The project will involve a graduate student in the fieldwork and
undergraduates in research activities at the home institution. Results from the
work will be incorporated into a new undergraduate course and the researchers
will involve the public through general lectures and other outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature is a fundamental variable in all ecosystems,
and is the single most important delimiting feature of polar systems. It is also
likely to be influenced by climate change; indeed, some (but not all) regions in
the Antarctic have experienced significant atmospheric warming in the past half
century. Despite the clear and profound influence of temperature of biological
systems, nearly all models use a temperature-growth rate formulation derived
from warmer temperatures. Modeled estimates of phytoplankton photosynthesis may
underestimate these rates by up to 60% if the growth rate is underestimated by
this temperature-phytoplankton growth relationship. If so, this could have
profound impacts on regional and global models of the impacts of temperature
change on oceanic productivity. To address this uncertainty, this project will
quantify the phytoplankton maximum growth rate-temperature relationship at
temperatures encountered in the Antarctic (less than 4 degrees C). Phytoplankton
isolated from Antarctic waters will be used in experiments designed to assess
the maximum growth rates of a number of types of phytoplankton that occur in the
Antarctic. Temperature perturbation experiments will be performed to assess the
response of Antarctic phytoplankton to a range of temperatures after having been
acclimated to increased temperatures during growth.