* 1443749
* Analysis and Modeling of the Data from CubeSat: Colorado Student Space Weather Experiment (CSSWE)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Xinlin Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 345,000.00

The electron radiation environment around Earth is a major hazard to spaceflight
assets. Understanding it, ideally to the point of predictive modeling of its
response to changing solar wind driving conditions, is a central goal of
magnetospheric physics. The condition in the radiation belts at any given time
is the result of a delicate balance between energization and loss processes
operating on the particles in the near-Earth environment. Neither of these is
well understood at present. This project will use new measurements from a NSF-
funded CubeSat mission that was recently carried out together with numerical
modeling to determine the energetic electron loss rate. Only when the loss rate
is accurately determined will it be possible to fully model the radiation belt
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colorado Student Space Weather Experiment
(CSSWE) is a tiny, so-called CubeSat, satellite mission funded by NSF and
launched into a high inclination, low-altitude orbit as a secondary payload
under NASA?s Educational Launch of Nanosatellites (ELaNa) program in September
2012. The entire CSSWE system, including its ground station, was designed,
built, calibrated, tested, delivered, and operated by students, with mentoring
and help provided by faculty and professional engineers at the Laboratory for
Atmospheric and Space Physics at University of Colorado. The satellite project
far exceeded it?s expected life-time and has collected more than 12 months worth
of high quality data on energetic electrons and protons in Low-Earth-Orbit. The
advanced data analysis to be done under this award will continue the
exploitation of this unique dataset and, in turn, will help to maximize the
scientific return on investment of this already highly successful CubeSat
project. For the most part, the scientific investigation is designed for and
will be carried out by graduate students under the supervision of the PI and
collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the precipitation loss rate of the
outer radiation belt electrons has not been quantified and resolved. The
electron loss rates in current published papers are erratic and diverge by an
order of magnitude. The goal of this study is to quantify the precipitation
losses and their dependence on longitude, L, and MLT directly from the data with
advanced modeling, thus providing a quantitative answer to the research
community on this important issue. Specifically, this effort will analyze over a
year's worth of CSSWE data in conjunction with the NASA Van Allen Probes to
determine the loss rates into the ionosphere during periods of gradual decay,
during episodes of fast loss and during episodes of large gain. Analyzing CSSWE
data during periods of gradual loss will determine how much additional
energization occurs during such periods to maintain the radiation belts;
analyzing the data during periods of fast loss will determine how much of the
loss occurs by scattering into the ionosphere versus loss due to outward radial
diffusion; analyzing the loss during periods of large gains will determine how
much additional energization is needed to produce the observed gains in electron
flux. The impact of such precipitation loss to the overall dynamics of radiation
belt electrons will then be assessed by comparing the measurements of CSSWE and
the corresponding modeling results with measurements from the Van Allen Probes
at the same times and locations.