* 1443879
* Workshop: Energy-Aware Operations in Manufacturing and Service Enterprises; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 16-17 September 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Vittaldas Prabhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 11/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Manufacturing and service enterprises consume a significant portion of energy;
consequently, they impact the environment and sustainability of our societies.
There have been a number of initiatives to improve energy efficiencies of homes
and commercial buildings. However, over the last five decades energy
productivity in industrial enterprises has not kept pace with the remarkable
strides that have been made in improving labor and material productivity. At
present, and in the foreseeable future, there are significant opportunities to
improve energy productivity in these enterprises by reducing energy waste, using
better technologies and techniques for designing and managing their operations.
This workshop will provide a critical role in defining a roadmap for research
and innovation into improving energy-efficiency of all aspects of manufacturing
and service enterprise operations, by bringing together researchers in academia,
government, and industry.

The workshop will be organized around sessions focused on the following topics:
building operations, logistics operations, grid operations, and factory
operations. Leading researchers from academia, government and industry will be
invited to contribute via keynote addresses and by serving as panelists. In
order to ensure significant participation, poster presentations are solicited as
well. In addition, breakout sessions will serve to obtain input from
participants on short-term and long-term research needs.