* 1443904
* Conference: Science and Technology Policy: Systems Approaches to Research and Practice GRC/GRS
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Jennifer Kuzma, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 11/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Science and technology (S&amp;T) are studied and deployed in complex and
uncertain environments. These environments include systems of interacting
components coming from the natural world, human-created world, and socio-
cultural contexts. Because of the complexity of multiple interacting elements of
systems in which S&amp;T are embedded, the impacts of S&amp;T are not always
predictable or even understood. Furthermore, how to govern science and
technology in the best manner possible, upstream of technological deployment, is
not usually obvious. Through better understanding these systems and interactions
within them, policies for S&amp;T can be better designed and executed. For
example, sensitive system components, feedback loops, or leverage points can be
identified and targeted for policy-making or future data collection. Yet,
systems research is difficult. A holistic understanding of S&amp;T policy
systems requires the multi-disciplinary and diverse perspectives of, scholars,
practitioners, and stakeholders to examine them from scientific and practical
standpoints.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research Conferences (GRC) provide an
international forum for the presentation and discussion of frontier research in
the natural and physical sciences designed to maximize productive interaction
between attendees. For over 75 years they, have been viewed as the world's
premier scholarly meetings. The 2014 GRC on S&amp;T Policy: Systems Approaches
to Research and Practice (August 10-15, 2014) will address the challenges and
opportunities associated with systems research and practice in S&amp;T Policy. A
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will precede the 2014 GRC on S&amp;T policy and
take place on Aug 9-10, 2014. The GRS creates a forum for graduate students and
those starting their careers to present their work and receive mentoring by more
experienced professionals in the field. This type of conference is an important
component of training, as participants gain valuable leadership experience as
speakers, discussion leaders, and organizers. GRS participants also attend the
GRC and present posters, allowing them to interact with prominent S&amp;T policy
scholars. Both the GRS and GRC, explicitly promote participation by diverse
communities, including women, under-represented minorities, scholars from
developing countries, and multiple sector-representatives (government, non-
profits, industry, academe, think-tanks, et al). The conference will serve to
increase the presence of these groups in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The conference will improve scholarship within S&amp;T policy
and help to harness the knowledge to innovate in public-policy domains, matching
two key goals of the NSF Science of Science Policy program. The conference will
have positive downstream effects on decision-making about S&amp;T, will help to
better define the field of S&amp;T policy, and will assist in setting an
research agenda for important unanswered questions. The GRS/GRC is expected to
increase graduate-student and young-scholar interest in the field of S&amp;T
Policy (including the Science of Science Policy), and in many cases, to change
the course of their careers.