* 1443773
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) Aware Cooperative Dynamic Spectrum Access
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Ozlem Kilic, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,998.00

The objective of this project is to develop a Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO)
aware cooperative Dynamic Spectrum Access framework, termed McDysa, which
enables multiple primary users and multiple secondary users to cooperate in
dynamic spectrum sharing. By exploiting the underlying cognitive radio and MIMO
techniques, McDysa is expected to achieve significant gains on spectrum
efficiency while providing substantial enhancements to physical layer security
as well. The technical merit and impact of this project are both fundamental and
applied, including new problems, algorithms, and methodologies. The McDysa
architecture considers multiple simultaneous primary- and secondary-user
transmissions by exploiting MIMO techniques. A number of problems studied in the
project may foster the development of novel techniques and methodologies toward
MIMO-aware dynamic spectrum access. Examples include the novel problem of MIMO-
enabled relay selection, insightful analysis of McDysa transmission capacity,
and the consideration of secrecy capacity enhancement via friendly jamming. As
many of the methodologies in McDysa leverage knowledge from other domains such
as game theory, the research outcomes of this project may also motivate
advancements of the corresponding domain-specific research. The broader impact
of this project also extends to education. The project contains a detailed plan
for disseminating the research results and for outreaching to students from
underrepresented groups via various channels established in the past years. It
also includes a plan for integrating undergraduate and graduate education with
research through curriculum development and student involvement. Specifically,
the testbed validation of McDysa can offer undergraduate and graduate students
valuable hands-on experience, and is therefore an excellent educational vehicle
to broaden the participation of students, especially those from underrepresented
groups, in computer science research.

Technically, this project defines novel problems and develops new performance-
optimization techniques in the following three thrusts that are critical to
MIMO-aware cooperative dynamic spectrum access: (i) Relay selection and resource
sharing, which focuses on developing novel centralized and distributed relay
selection and resource management algorithms based on game theory to enable
multiple MIMO-empowered primary and secondary users to cooperate for joint
optimization. (ii) Achievable transmission capacity analysis, which investigates
the achievable transmission capacity of secondary networks and secrecy capacity
of the primary network, and the usage of beamforming optimization to maximize
such capacities. (iii) Secrecy capacity enhancement, which studies the usage of
two friendly jamming mechanisms, cooperative jamming and artificial
interference, in the design of novel beamforming techniques and interference
signals for nulling the interference at the receivers, in order to enhance the
secrecy capacity of the primary network. Besides the three thrusts, this project
also includes the design and validation of a testbed that supports a number of
experimental tasks for validating the effectiveness of approaches and
methodologies developed in the project. This project also has strong societal
impact as the rigorously proven solutions developed in the project can serve as
guidelines and backbone for promoting and establishing more flexible spectrum
access policies and regulations.