* 1443097
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Cohn, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 21,496.00

This is funding to support participation by about 8 graduate students from U.S.
institutions, along with about 5 senior members of the ICMI community who will
serve as mentors, in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction
with and immediately preceding the 16th International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction (ICMI 2014), which will take place November 12-16, 2014, at Bogazici
University in Istanbul, Turkey, and which is organized by the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM). The ICMI conference series is the premier
international forum for multidisciplinary research on multimodal human-human and
human-computer interaction, interfaces, and system development. The conference
focuses on theoretical and empirical foundations, component technologies, and
combined multimodal processing techniques that define the field of multimodal
interaction analysis, interface design, and system development. Topics of
special interest to the conference this year include: multimodal interaction
processing; interactive systems and applications; modeling human communication
patterns; data, evaluation and standards for multimodal interactive systems; and
urban interactions. ICMI 2014 will feature a single-track main conference which
includes: keynote speakers, technical full and short papers (including oral and
poster presentations), special sessions, demonstrations, exhibits and doctoral
spotlight papers. The ICMI 2014 proceedings will be published by ACM Press and
included in the ACM Digital Library. As a further incentive for high-quality
student participation ICMI 2014 will be awarding outstanding paper awards, with
a special category for student papers. More information about the conference may
be found online at http://icmi.acm.org/2014/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the ICMI Doctoral Consortium is to provide PhD students with an opportunity to
present their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of
academic and industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral
research plan and progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers
interested in designing multimodal interfaces. Student participants will present
their ongoing thesis research as a short talk at the Consortium and also as a
poster at the conference Doctoral Spotlight Session. Following the fruitful
experience of last year's ICMI conference and doctoral consortium, and with the
goal of providing more opportunities for interaction between the students and
senior members of the field, the program will once again include a lunch on the
day of the workshop for students and mentors, a career panel that will provide
the students and mentors the opportunity to ask and answer questions and discuss
challenges and opportunities in the field, and a dinner that will provide the
students with the opportunity to hold informal conversations among themselves as
well as with the organizers and mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral
Consortium will give student participants exposure to their new research
community, both by presenting their own work and by observing and interacting
with established professionals in the field. It will encourage students at this
critical time in their careers to begin building a social support network of
peers and mentors. The organizers will take steps proactively to achieve a
diversity of research topics, disciplinary backgrounds, methodological
approaches, and home institutions among the students. To further increase
diversity, the organizers have committed that no more than two students will be
invited from any given U.S. institution of higher learning, and when two are
accepted one of them must be a woman.