* 1443011
* Wave-vector-resolved Study of Lightning Whistler Propagation and Energetics in the Low-latitude Plasmasphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Holzworth, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 446,261.00

Lightning strikes on Earth generate bursts of radio waves called whistlers that
can travel upwards into space and scatter high-energy electrons into the
atmosphere causing losses from the trapped radiation belts. When these whistlers
are generated, they typically become trapped between the conducting surface of
the Earth and the lower ionosphere, the Earth-ionosphere wave-guide, and can be
observed thousands of kilometers away from the original lightning strikes. If
they strike the ionosphere at the correct angle though, whistlers can pass
though the Earth-ionosphere wave-guide and move upward. This is believed to
occur mostly at high latitudes dropping in significance approaching the low-
latitude ionosphere and ceasing near the magnetic equator. Whistlers moving
upward from low latitudes will interact with the inner radiation belt, those
moving upward at higher latitudes with the outer radiation belt. Recent
observations imply that more whistlers actually enter the ionosphere at low
latitudes than previously believed but the reasons are not understood. The goal
of this proposal is to assess the influence of lightning-generated whistlers on
the low-latitude inner radiation belt. It has recently become apparent that
understanding this process and others that control radiation belt intensity is
important for national security. A high-altitude nuclear explosion is estimated
to enhance the radiation belts by a factor of 1,000 to 10,000 destroying
satellites in low and medium Earth orbit in a matter of weeks to months and
crippling critical societal infrastructures. A detailed knowledge of the
radiation belts will enable the design of technologies to potentially mitigate
such hostile enhancements. This project enables the training and mentoring of a
graduate student at the University of Washington contributing to the creation of
the next generation of scientists.

The specific technological approach in the proposed work is novel. An extensive
database of 3-channel electric field observations taken at +/- 26 degrees
latitude by the C/NOFS satellite will be analyzed to extract information on the
wave vectors, polarization and Poynting flux of the whistlers. Normally, this
would require observations of both the wave electric and magnetic field vectors.
However, by making the reasonable assumption of no wave electric field along the
direction of the background magnetic field, this information can be extracted
from the wave electric field observations alone. Once the wave vector is
calculated in this way, it will be used as input to a chain of modeling tools to
trace the whistler backwards from the satellite to the source lightning in the
lower ionosphere and then compared to observations at that location from a
ground-based lightning detection network.