* 1443942
* EARS: Directional Spectrum Sensing and Communications Utilizing Beam- and Frequency-Agile Parasitic Antenna Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Xun Gong, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract Title: Directional Spectrum Sensing and Communications Utilizing Beam-
and Frequency-Agile Parasitic Antenna Arrays&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
research will address some of the major challenges in enabling the next
generation of spectrum efficient and energy efficient wireless communication
systems for a wide range of applications, including personal communications,
emergency-response, and cyber-physical systems (e.g., intelligent transportation
systems and the smart-grid), by developing collaboration between two fields of
signal processing and communication theory and antenna design.The principal
investigators (PIs) will develop a novel beam- and frequency-agile antenna and
new signal processing and communication techniques that take full advantage of
the antenna capabilities, in order to enable directional spectrum sensing and
communications for portable lightweight terminals and provide significant
spectral efficiency gains. This research has multifaceted benefits in advancing
the field, and in education and diversity (i) It will make a significant impact
on the theory and practice of the evolving cognitive radio networks and
technologies, for a variety of applications that benefit society. (ii) It will
provide a unique opportunity to bond the two research groups supervised by the
PIs and enhance research and education through this partnership. The PIs will
train graduate and undergraduate students and will actively engage in the
stimulation and development of the field. The undergraduate students will gain
experience with research in an interesting area. (iii) It will increase the
participation of under-represented students in the PIs? research groups. The PIs
will use the resources available through the UCF Summer mentoring fellowship
program, which provides financial support for the minority students who are
interested in conducting research with a faculty mentor. (iv) It will integrate
research and education through incorporation of the research results into the
Electrical and Computer Engineering graduate curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research thrusts are: (i) Design of a low-cost beam-
and frequency-agile antenna, using an Electrically Steerable Parasitic Array
Radiator (ESPAR) approach: These ESPAR antenna arrays require minimum number of
phase shifters by parasitically coupling antenna elements. Continuous beam (main
lobe and null) as well as frequency scanning can be realized simultaneously
within the antenna structure. The ESPAR antenna arrays will be used for both
directional spectrum sensing and communications. (ii) Model-based signal
processing for directional spectrum sensing utilizing the ESPAR antennas: The
PIs will develop a signal model for the ESPAR antennas. Based on this signal
model, energy and eigenvalue-based detectors will be developed, which do not
require any prior information about the signal of primary users (PUs) to be
detected. The energy detector, although simple, requires knowledge of the
receiver noise level. On the other hand, the eigenvalue-based detectors do not
require this information and hence are insensitive to uncertainties in receiver
noise level. Comparing detection performance of eigenvalue-based detectors
against that of energy detectors for omnidirectional antennas unveils the
improvement in spectrum sensing accuracy provided by the ESPAR antennas. (iii)
Directional communications utilizing the ESPAR antennas: For a system where a
pair of secondary users (SUs) wishes to communicate in the presence of primary
user( PU) activities, and based on the developed signal model, several
constrained communication optimization problems will be formulated, which aim to
optimize a physical layer performance metric, subject to interference level
constraint, in order to find the best steering angles for SU transmitter and
receiver. (iv) Testbed: a low-cost yet flexible test platform will be developed
to verify the directional spectrum sensing and communication schemes with the
ESPAR antennas. This platform is able to adapt to different frequencies,
bandwidths, modulation schemes, and antenna structures.