* 1443788
* I/UCRC Planning Grant:  Doubled Haploid Research
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Martin Bohn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 10,309.00

A new center is to be planned based at Iowa State University and University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign named the Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) for Doubled Haploid Research (CeDHR). CeDHR plans to provide the
basic research foundation necessary for the applied research goals of industry
and will make the process of Doubled Haploid line production both more effective
and available in species where it is currently unavailable. The research scope,
comprised of four primary areas, is unique among I/UCRCs: 1) Isolation of genes
involved in the haploid induction and genome doubling process, 2) Establishment
of a DH system in species, where it is not available yet, 3) Efficient screening
procedures for haploids, and 4) A novel concept of an in vitro nursery including
automation of this process and methods.

In order to meet the projected increase of global demand for food, feed, and
fibre (100% by 2050), the efficiency, reliability, and speed of genetic
improvement must be accelerated. The mission for the proposed Center will be to
streamline and link the efforts of industry and academia towards speeding up
plant breeding using doubled haploid (DH) through a formalized and extended
research partnership. Students and postdoctoral researchers within the proposed
Center will receive professional development training at both ISU and UIUC. In
addition, industry representatives have indicated their need for scientists with
multidisciplinary undergraduate or graduate training; a primary goal of the
Center will be to address this critical training and educational need. Center
trainees, including minorities and underrepresented groups, will be drawn from
diverse backgrounds. Research findings will be disseminated internationally.