* 1443448
* Collaborative Research: A High-sensitivity Beryllium-10 Record from an Ice Core at South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Gisela Winckler, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 10/31/2021
* USD 799,244.00

This project will acquire measurements of the concentration of beryllium-10
(10Be) from an ice core from the South Pole, Antarctica. An isotope of the
element beryllium, 10Be, is produced in the atmosphere by high-energy protons
(cosmic rays) that enter Earth's atmosphere from space. It is removed from the
atmosphere by settling or by scavenging by rain or snowfall. Hence,
concentrations of 10Be in snow at the South Pole reflect the production rate of
10Be in the atmosphere. Because the rate of production of 10Be over Antarctica
depends primarily on the strength of the Sun's magnetic field, measurements of
10Be in the South Pole ice core will provide a record of changes in solar
activity. The South Pole ice core will reach an age of 40,000 years at the
bottom. The project will result in measurements of 10Be at annual resolution for
the last 100 years and selected periods in the more distant past, such as the
Maunder Minimum, a period during the late 17th century during which no sunspots
were observed, or the last glacial cold period, about 20,000 years ago. A
climate model that can simulate the production of 10Be in the atmosphere, it's
transport through the atmosphere, and its deposition at the snow surface in
Antarctica will be used to aid in using the 10Be data to determine past changes
in solar activity from decadal to millennial scale, and in turn to evaluate the
role of the Sun in Earth?s climate from a new
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of 10Be in Earth's atmosphere
results from the spallation of oxygen and nitrogen in the atmosphere by cosmic
rays. Cosmic ray variations in the high latitudes are primarily modulated by
solar variability. Time-series records of 10Be from ice cores are therefore
important for deriving variations in solar activity through time, which is
fundamental to understanding climate variability. Deposition of 10Be to the ice
surface is also influenced by variability in atmospheric circulation and
deposition processes, and South Pole is the best available location for
minimizing the influence of variable atmospheric circulation on 10Be deposition.
To date, only one record of 10Be exists from South Pole; that record is widely
used in solar forcing estimates used in climate models, but covers only the last
millennium and ends in CE 1982. We will obtain 10Be concentration measurements
in a 1500-m, 40000-year long ice core from the South Pole. This will extend the
existing record both further back in time and forward to the present, providing
overlap with the modern instrumental record of solar and climate variability.
High resolution (annual to biannual) measurements will be made in targeted areas
of interest, including the last 100 years, the Maunder Minimum (CE 1650-1715),
and the last glacial maximum. The novel data will be used in conjunction with
climate model experiments that incorporate 10Be production, transport, and
deposition physics. Together, data and modeling will create an updated record of
atmospheric 10Be production and hence of solar activity.