* 1443990
* International Workshop on Education of Future Geotechnical Engineers in Response to Emerging Multi-scale Soil-Environment Problems; Cambridge, UK; September 5-6, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2016
* USD 49,990.00

This workshop will address the new skill set needed by Geotechnical Engineers to
solve the multi-scale, multi-physics problems faced by modern technology. New
research areas such as: solid/fluid transition from the grain to the landslide;
geological waste storage from micro-cracks to fractured reservoirs; bio-
engineered geomerials from natural bacteria to designed structures; energy piles
from soil properties to geotechnical performance; geotechnical earthquake
engineering: from ground motion to structural safety all require a broader range
of knowledge than previously provided in the typical Geotechnical Engineering
course of study. This International Workshop aims to identify key challenges for
the education of new generations of geotechnical engineers, focusing on
undergraduate education. The main questions that will be addressed include: What
courses outside the engineering curriculum are needed? Are changes in the basic
Chemistry, Physics, Biology courses desirable for engineering students? What
knowledge of soil mechanics is needed for students pursuing a B.Sc. in Civil
Engineering who have no intent to practice geotechnical engineering? For
students, who plans to become geo-engineers? The workshop will benefit from the
participation of members of the international academic and higher-education
community, involving a number of leading institutions from the European Union
and the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the United States, most Civil
Engineering undergraduate curricula offer only one course in Soil Mechanics. In
Europe and in the United States, the first course taught to engineering students
in geotechnical engineering has not changed significantly in content during the
last few decades: it covers soil gradation, soil compaction, steady laminar flow
and Darcy's law, one-dimensional consolidation theory and soil shear strength.
Future engineers need to master new experimental and theoretical skills that
will allow them to solve multi-scale, multiphysics problems, and make
recommendations for safe and sustainable design. Efforts have recently been made
to make geotechnical engineering course more attractive to students, and to
involve undergraduate students in research projects as part of their required
coursework. However, no systematic analysis has been undertaken to date that
addresses the needs of the geotechnical community to prepare future engineers to
validate new standards for geomaterial characterization, experimental testing
procedures, and geotechnical design. Faculty and graduate students participating
in this workshop will assess strategies for training and development of graduate
and undergraduate students, and identify efficient teaching methods to create an
innovative skills toolkit at the undergraduate level. In addition to curricular
recommendations, working groups will propose two to three options of in-class
activity that could be integrated in a module at the undergraduate level.
Participating Ph.D. students will be encouraged to maintain the workshop
wikipage after the workshop.