* 1443767
* EAGER: Microetching of the Human Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gregory Dunn, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,810.00

The project "Microetching of the Human Brain" endeavors to create the most
comprehensive illustration of the human brain that has ever existed.
Investigators will utilize reflective microetching, a process combining
mathematics and optics to create an art piece that evolves based on the position
of the viewer. Microetching allows the depiction of very complex brain activity
at incredibly fine detail. The final piece will be a wall-sized piece of fine
art experienced by a diverse population of thousands daily at the Franklin
Institute in Philadelphia. Additionally, this project is an educational
opportunity for undergraduate students through direct involvement in the
creation of the piece. As this project spans many scientific and artistic
disciplines, students will be given an opportunity to learn about fields apart
from their own, to broaden their skill set, and to learn how to communicate
scientific concepts effectively.

This project is a collaboration between neuroscientists, engineers, physicists,
and artists to address the question of whether art can be used in the
dissemination of scientific understanding to new audiences in a way that gives a
visceral sense of the underlying concepts. The human brain is massively complex
and challenging to portray clearly. Conveying a sense of its complexity through
art may inspire an interest in the brain's scientific content and inspire a new
generation of neuroscientists. To produce a piece of fine art capable of
sufficient detail to depict the brain at near full complexity, the piece will be
executed by a technique called reflective microetching. Microetching is a high-
resolution lithographic process that patterns a microtopography of periodic
ridges into the surface. These ridges are engineered to reflect a point-source
illumination toward a viewer when standing at a specific angle relative to the
painting. Similar to darkfield microscopy, this can yield incredibly fine
detail. Additionally, the angular dependence of the light adds an extra
dimension that can be used to convey time, depth, or motion as the viewer walks
past. The piece will feature neurons, glia, vasculature, white and gray matter,
and reflectively animated circuit dynamics between areas of the brain
corresponding to neural processes involved in visual self-recognition. This will
infuse the piece with additional meaning, as the circuits activated within
viewers' brains will be the same that are depicted in the artwork.