* 1443178
* MSI-REaCH:  Minority-Serving Institution-Reconstructing Earth's Climate History Program to Enhance Ocean and Climate Curricula and Provide Authentic Research Opportunities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Kristen St. John, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2018
* USD 654,576.00

This collaborative project expands on an NSF 2012-2013 OEDG Planning Grant; it
utilizes scientific ocean core data, tested curriculum, mentoring, and research
experiences to provide faculty and students at Minority Serving Institutions
(MSIs) with opportunities to explore past climate, and thereby gain valuable
geological context for understanding modern climate change and future climate
projections. MSI-REaCH will draw from the vast array of publically-available
marine core data on past climate change, and guide faculty through the process
of integrating paleoclimate curricular materials into their courses and forming
research questions for them to pursue with undergraduate students. This approach
will lead to enhanced scientific literacy, and options for mentored MSI
undergraduate student research. The short courses, follow-up meetings, and
partnering of each MSI faculty participant with both a research and a
pedagogical mentor will be a team-building experiential learning process that
models the nature of scientific investigation and presentation. It will support
collaborations across the the spectrum of two-year, four-year and research
intensive institutions of higher education, open doors to more advanced
geoscience study for underrepresented students, and create a reproducible
template for other undergraduate educational and research-based initiatives
focused on complementary paleoclimate archives such as ice cores, continental
sediment records, and tree ring records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSI-REaCH
program is a collaboration among the Consortium for Ocean
Leadership/International Ocean Discovery Program, James Madison University,
American Meteorological Society, and Los Angeles Valley College that greatly
advances work completed during a 2012-2013 NSF planning grant and expands on
three major NSF awards. The goal of the project is to provide MSI faculty and
students with scientific training, mentoring, and collaboration opportunities
for the purposes of (1) enhancing scientific literacy, (2) integrating research-
based, data-rich paleoclimate curricula into their undergraduate courses, and
(3) creating a foundation for MSI student paleoclimate research, thus
strengthening pathway towards advanced geoscience study and careers. Over the
three-year project period, MSI-REaCH will include a series of professional
development opportunities for about 32 MSI faculty members focused on
paleoclimate marine research data and the pedagogy for adding inquiry-based
exercise modules and prototype research experiences to local curricula. The
project team will conduct two Schools of Rock experiential learning short
courses and a follow-up workshop at a geoscience conference, foster an
educational and research network of colleges and universities, and administer a
formal faculty and student research mentoring program. The group will also
support MSI faculty as they adapt and develop paleoclimate activities,
demonstrations and/or lectures to supplement existing survey level courses or
form the foundation of new courses, design and implement prototype authentic
research experiences for undergraduates that incorporate data from scientific
ocean drilling, and provide select MSI students with the opportunity to attend
an immersive short course. To administer the project, the team will partner with
institutions across the two-year college, four-year college, and research
university spectrum involved in scientific ocean drilling research, including
Texas A&amp;M University, which houses the Gulf Coast Repository, Ohio State
University, University of Texas at El Paso, Indiana University of Pennsylvania,
and North Hennepin Community College. The WestEd STEM program will design and
implement ongoing evaluation tools that measure the cognitive and behavioral
impacts of each phase of MSI-REaCH on participating faculty and students.
Coupled with regular observations and discussions, this information will be used
to adjust content delivery strategies and guide the materials development
process.