* 1443325
* Minimal Models for Investigating the Influence of Latent Heat Release on Midlatitude Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Leslie Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2019
* USD 750,000.00

This collaborative research will target some of the most scientifically
interesting and operationally relevant problems in weather systems science of
the midlatitudes. To isolate essential vs. non-essential processes of moist
midlatitude dynamics, a set of geophysical fluid dynamics problems will be
formulated and investigated by a research team of applied mathematicians and
atmospheric scientists. The participants will use a minimal modeling approach
coupled with comparison to observational data, and when appropriate, to the
results of comprehensive-physics numerical computations. The goal is to isolate
the essential physical mechanisms and the role of precipitating convection in
shaping some of the canonical structures of the midlatitude
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;A minimal model
will be used to study midlatitude dynamics with precipitating convection. Cloud
microphysics is included in the limit that the time scales associated with
condensation, auto-conversion and evaporation are small compared to all other
relevant time scales in the problem (advection, buoyancy, rotation, and
rainfall). The simplified thermodynamics is based on the following design
principle: the conservation laws for momentum, energy, moist entropy, and total
water should all be retained, but they should have the simplest nontrivial form
possible. Under these assumptions, the fully three-dimensional model accounts
for precipitating convection while vastly reducing the number of necessary
closure models. Three main case studies will be conducted: (i) evolution of one
or more baroclinically unstable mode(s) to investigate the role of latent heat
release in the midlatitude occlusion process, (ii) the dynamics of a single-jet
in the presence of low-altitude convection to elucidate the mechanisms
responsible for the jet-convection feedback loop and its saturation, and (iii)
double jet dynamics with convection as a simplified model for the occasional
merger of the polar and subtropical jets and the subsequent possibility of
extreme precipitation events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;A
primary goal of the project is cross training of junior researchers in
atmospheric science and mathematical modeling. New developments in mathematical
modeling will be brought to the atmospheric sciences community, and
simultaneously junior mathematicians will be exposed to key open problems in
atmospheric science. As one way of sharing new insights with both communities,
the minimal model will be made publicly available as the UW Virtual Atmosphere,
with educational/research modules to explore the effects of precipitating
convection on the Eady baroclinic instability problem (UWVA:Eady), and nonlinear
evolution of eddies and jets (UWVA:Jet). The research is likely to provide
valuable insights into extreme weather associated with jet superposition,
anticipated to be more frequent in a globally warming world. Slight increases in
tropical sea-surface temperatures are expected to lead to a general northward
displacement of the Northern Hemisphere subtropical jet, and thus to an
increased likelihood of subtropical and polar jet superposition. Better
understanding of the role of precipitating convection in the formation and
evolution of midlatitude eddies and jets will likely lead to improved ability to
predict high-impact weather in a warmer climate.