* 1443393
* Tephra 2014 - Maximizing the potential of tephra for multidisciplinary science
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Marcus Bursik, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,540.00

This award will provide partial funding for a workshop focus on the
interdisciplinary study of tephra to be held at Portland State University in
Portland, Oregon on August 4-7, 2014. The discussions at this workshop will have
implications for the understanding of geologic hazards, climate change and human
origins. The goal is to bring different communities that use tephra in their
research to learn from each other's practices and scientific interests. The
participants will include volcanologists, tephrochronologists, and
archeologists, geochronologists, paleoclimatologists, paleoecologists,
paleolimnologists, glaciologists, petrologists, atmospheric scientists,
Quaternary scientists, data managers, statisticians, among others. The three
objectives of the workshop will include: 1) to discuss modern techniques used in
volcanic stratigraphy and sedimentology; 2) to discuss modern advances in
tephrochronology; and 3) to begin to develop a model of atmospheric transport
and terrestrial, glacial, and submarine distribution of tephra. Materials
related to presentations (abstracts and videos) will be made available via the
open-access forum Vhub.org. Participants at this workshop will include
scientists at different stages of professional careers from different countries,
and will be recruited via announcements in listservs for the different
scientific communities and invitations to some scientists. One of the outcomes
of this workshop will be a resource book for tephra studies. The workshop will
start with a field trip to Mount St. Helens, followed up by presentations, group
discussions, and hands-on training sessions.