* 1443576
* Investigating Early Miocene Sub-ice Volcanoes in Antarctica for Improved Modeling and understanding of a Large Magmatic Province
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Kurt Panter, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 190,185.00

Predictions of future sea level rise require better understanding of the
changing dynamics of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. One way to better
understand the past history of the ice sheets is to obtain records from inland
ice for past geological periods, particularly in Antarctica, the world?s largest
remaining ice sheet. Such records are exceedingly rare, and can be acquired at
volcanic outcrops in the La Gorce Mountains of the central Transantarctic
Mountains. Volcanoes now exposed within the La Gorce Mountains erupted beneath
the East Antarctic ice sheet and the data collected will record how thick the
ice sheet was in the past. In addition, information will be used to determine
the thermal conditions at the base of the ice sheet, which impacts ice sheet
stability. The project will also investigate the origin of volcanic activity in
Antarctica and links to the West Antarctic Rift System (WARS). The WARS is a
broad area of extended (i.e. stretched) continental crust, similar to that found
in East Africa, and volcanism is wide spread and long-lived (65 million years to
currently active) and despite more than 50 years of research, the fundamental
cause of volcanism and rifting in Antarctica is still vigorously debated. The
results of this award therefore also potentially impact the study of oceanic
volcanism in the entire southwestern Pacific region (e.g., New Zealand and
Australia), where volcanic fields of similar composition and age have been
linked by common magma sources and processes. The field program includes a
graduate student who will work on the collection, analysis, and interpretation
of petrological data as part of his/her Masters project. The experience and
specialized analytical training being offered will improve the quality of the
student?s research and optimize their opportunities for their future. The
proposed work fosters faculty and student national and international
collaboration, including working with multi-user facilities that provide
advanced technological mentoring of science students. Results will be broadly
disseminated in peer-reviewed journals, public presentations at science
meetings, and in outreach activities. Petrologic and geochemical data will be
disseminated to be the community through the Polar Rock
Repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of subglacially erupted volcanic
rocks has been developed to the extent that it is now the most powerful proxy
methodology for establishing precise ?snapshots? of ice sheets, including
multiple critical ice parameters. Such data should include measurements of ice
thickness, surface elevation and stability, which will be used to verify, or
reject, published semi-empirical models relating ice dynamics to sea level
changes. In addition to establishing whether East Antarctic ice was present
during the formation of the volcanoes, data will be used to derive the coeval
ice thicknesses, surface elevations and basal thermal regime(s) in concert with
a precise new geochronology using the 40Ar/39Ar dating method. Inferences from
measurement of standard geochemical characteristics (major, trace elements and
Sr, Nd, Pb, O isotopes) will be used to investigate a possible relationship
between the volcanoes and the recently discovered subglacial ridge under the
East Antarctic ice, which may be a rift flank uplift. The ridge has never been
sampled, is undated and its significance is uncertain. The data will provide
important new information about the deep Earth and geodynamic processes beneath
this mostly ice covered and poorly understood sector of the Antarctic continent.