* 1443446
* Triennial Review of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 02/28/2017
* USD 640,000.00

1443446&lt;br/&gt;Lancaster&lt;br/&gt;National Academy of
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI requests funds to conduct the next
triennial National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) review. A review of the
overall progress of the NNI is an important element of delivering on the
scientific and societal benefit nanotechnology has to offer. The review
committee will be a blend of academia, private sector, business community
members (large and small), and members able to represent the growing community
of those concerned about the ethical, legal and societal aspects of
nanotechnology. Emphasis will be placed on delivering a balanced review of the
science needed for basic discovery, and the science needed for execution at the
application phase; namely, moving toward commercialization in a responsible
manner. Progress in developing good science that supports the needs of policy
makers and regulatory agencies should be an area for investigation. Results from
research agencies that support commercialization, and how to evaluate the impact
of that research would be a welcome and much needed component of this review.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed intellectual merit is to build upon the
findings from the 2013 review. The focus will be on (1) the NNI signature
initiatives as they relate to commercialization and (2) nanotechnology physical
and human infrastructure needs. In addition to advancing fundamental research,
the NNI user facilities are a driver for nanotechnology commercialization.
Better coordination among the facilities, and potentially the introduction of
new facilities dedicated to nanotechnology material characterization, should be
explored further. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact from nanotechnology arises
from its potential to significantly transform numerous fields, including
information technology, aerospace, agriculture, energy, homeland security,
environment, healthcare, national defense, and transportation systems. This next
triennial NNI review will produce feedback to the Nanoscale Science,
Engineering, and Technology Subcommittee and the National Nanotechnology
Coordination Office in order to even more effectively serve the Nanotechnology
community in the near future.