* 1443040
* CIF21 DIBBS: Tripal Gateway, a Platform for Next-Generation Data Analysis and Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jill Wegrzyn, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,485,021.00

Scientific community databases fulfill an important research need by offering
curated information to audiences with shared basic and applied research goals.
They serve as clearinghouses for community information and communication.
Researchers need easy-to-use analytical workflows in an easily accessible and
familiar location, but the community database typically lacks the infrastructure
to support these needs and more data exchange is needed between sites.
Additionally, the community database requires the ability to easily incorporate
results from analytical workflows for public dissemination, and the capacity to
transfer large datasets quickly between computational resources and the
database. Tripal, an open-source toolkit used for construction of online genomic
and genetic databases, is uniquely positioned to provide solutions to these
challenges as it has been adopted by multiple community databases and thus
provides a common infrastructure.

This project creates Tripal Gateway: a set of modules (extensions) to be
incorporated into Tripal to foster greater data dissemination, collaboration,
and research. The team develops three modules that integrate Tripal with Galaxy
(a popular workflow system), interconnects Tripal sites for data sharing, and
utilizes emerging technologies for faster data exchange: - Tripal Galaxy - a
module integrating Galaxy workflows into a Tripal site, providing both next-
generation analytical workflows and seamless transition of results into the
community database. - Tripal Exchange - a module to provide capabilities for
cross-site querying, enabling collation and viewing of data from multiple sites,
and integration of data into workflows. - Tripal SDN - a module incorporating
software defined networking (SDN) technology, providing mechanisms to improve
speed of data exchange.

These new modules are developed, implemented, and tested in conjunction with six
data sites (the Citrus Genome Database, Cool Season Food Legumes, CottonGen, the
Genome Database for Rosaceae, Hardwood Genomics, and TreeGenes). Integration of
the Tripal Gateway is also anticipated for four additional databases
(GrainGenes, KnowPulse, LegumeInfo, and PeanutBase). After implementation, this
effort will interlink and allow cross-querying across a major Arabidopsis
resource, four legume genomics sites, the primary cotton community site,
GrainGenes, and four different tree genomic sites covering fruit trees and
forest trees. Implementation of Tripal Gateway into the community databases
servicing these extensive research communities will support basic and applied
research that is both crop-specific and broadly useful across crop agriculture.