* 1443929
* KUMUNU 2014 Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Steven Cutkosky, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 11/30/2015
* USD 8,000.00

The conference KUMUNU 2014 will be held at the University of Missouri-Columbia
on September 27 and 28, 2014. KUMUNU is the annual weekend conference anchored
by the University of Kansas (KU), University of Missouri (MU) and University of
Nebraska (NU). It was founded by the algebraists in these three institutions in
1999 to promote interaction among faculty, post docs and graduate students in
commutative algebra and related disciplines. The three institutions are within 5
hours driving distance and with modest travel and lodging support the weekend
KUMUNU conferences continue to have significant regional impact. KUMUNU moved to
Missouri in 2012. Last year, it was held Sept. 21-22. The KUMUNU conference has
a strong tradition of playing an important mentoring role for graduate students,
recent PhDs and early career faculty in research institutions and four-year
colleges. KUMUNU provides an annual venue for these groups to come together with
senior researchers at KU, MU and NU along with two or three senior researchers
from some institutions not so near. Beginning in 2012, we also feature three
graduate students, one each from KU, MU and NU who present their developing
theses. KUMUNU stimulates interactions by having talks on current research
accessible to graduate students with ample time and opportunity for interaction
outside of talks in an informal and friendly setting. There will be six main
talks by Melvin Hochster (Michigan), Daniel Erman (Univ. Wisconsin), Kevin
Tucker (Univ. Illinois at Chicago), Hilong Dao (KU), Dale Cutkosky (MU) and
Thanh Wu (NU). There will also be three talks by graduate students at KU, MU and
NU. In addition to faculty and students from KU, MU and NU, and other
institutions from Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska, KUMUNU draws participants from
neighboring states such as Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan,
Oklahoma and North Dakota. One of the main goals is to showcase research of
young faculty, helping enrich the research programs of recent PhDs and graduate
students in commutative algebra and related fields by both formal and informal
mentoring from experienced researchers. In addition, KUMUNU serves to enhance
the existing strengths at these three institutions. The conference website is
http://kumunu.missouri.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KUMUNU 2014 will provide an
opportunity for mathematicians to interact and establish research connections
with each other; in particular, the participants will interact with other
researchers and hear and discuss recent developments in the field and its
relationships with other areas. The primary impacts of the conference will be
its dissemination of recent ideas in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry,
and stimulation and enrichment of the research careers of students and early
career participants. Participants will take ideas form the conference back to
their colleagues and students, stimulating further research and mathematical
enrichment at their home institutions. The relatively small size of the meeting
and its geographic and disciplinary focus will be particularly effective at
enabling participants to establish productive collaborative relationships.
Encouragement and mentoring that begins at the conference will significantly
contribute to the success and professional development of early career
mathematicians whether in research institutions or primarily teaching
institutions.