* 1443329
* Collaborative Research: Potential Direct Geologic Constraint of Ice Sheet Thickness in the Central Transantarctic Mountains during the Pliocene Warm Period
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,140.00

This investigation will reconstruct past behavior of the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet during periods of warmer-than-present climate, such as the Pliocene, in
order to better project the likely response of Earth's largest ice sheet to
anthropogenic warming. Containing the equivalent of ~55 m sea-level rise, the
future evolution of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet has clear societal
ramifications on a global scale as temperatures continue to rise. Therefore,
determining ice-sheet sensitivity to climate on the scale predicted for the next
two centuries is a matter of increasing urgency, particularly in light of
evidence suggesting the East Antarctic Ice Sheet is more dynamic than previously
thought. This research will provide a terrestrial geologic record of long-term
ice-sheet behavior from sites immediately adjacent the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
in the Transantarctic Mountains, with which the project will help ascertain how
the ice sheet responded to past warm periods. The project will focus primarily
on the Pliocene warm period, 5 to 3 million years ago, as this represents the
closest analogue to 21st Century climate conditions.

The proposed research will investigate glacial deposits corresponding to the
East Antarctic Ice Sheet in the central Transantarctic Mountains in order to
expand the geologic record of past ice-sheet behavior. The overarching research
objectives are to improve understanding of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet's
configuration during periods of warmer-than-present climate, such as the
Pliocene warm period, and to determine whether the ice sheet underwent
significant volume changes or remained relatively stable in response to warming.
To address these goals, the investigation will map and date glacial deposits
preserved at mountain sites immediately adjacent the ice sheet. Specifically, we
will: (i) employ multiple cosmogenic nuclides (10Be, 26Al, 21Ne) to establish
more fully ice-thickness histories for the upper Shackleton and Beardmore
Glaciers, where they exit the ice sheet; (ii) use this record to identify
periods during which the East Antarctic Ice Sheet was at least as extensive as
today; and (iii) use these data to assess long-term ice-sheet variability in
East Antarctica, with particular emphasis on Pliocene warm episodes. This
research will require Antarctic fieldwork, glacial-geologic mapping, and
cosmogenic surface-exposure dating.