* 1443126
* Impact of Supraglacial Lakes on Ice-Shelf Stability
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Douglas MacAyeal, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 295,399.00

Meltwater lakes that sit on top of Antarctica's floating ice shelves have likely
contributed to the dramatic changes seen in Antarctica's glacial ice cover over
the past two decades. In 2002, the 1,600-square-kilometer Larsen B Ice Shelf
located on the Eastern side of the Antarctic Peninsula, for example, broke into
thousands of small icebergs, which subsequently floated away as a result of the
formation of more than 2,000 meltwater lakes on its surface over the prior
decade. Our research project addresses the reasons why surface lakes form on
Antarctic ice shelves and how these surface lakes subsequently contribute to the
forces that may contribute to ice-shelf breakup like that of the Larsen B. Our
project focuses primarily on making precise global positioning system (GPS)
measurements of ice-shelf bending in response to the filling and draining of a
surface lake on the McMurdo Ice Shelf. The observed vertical displacements (on
the order of tens of centimeters) in response to lake filling will be used to
calibrate and test computer simulation models that predict the response of ice
shelves to surface lakes more generally and in a variety of future climate
conditions. Our project will make hourly measurements of both vertical ice-shelf
movements (using GPS surveying instruments) and of temperature and sunlight
conditions (that drive melting) around a surface lake located close to the
McMurdo Station airfield. Following this initial data-gathering effort, computer
simulations and other more theoretical analysis will be undertaken to determine
the suitability of the chosen McMurdo Ice Shelf surface lake as a field-
laboratory for continued study. Ultimately, the research will contribute to
understanding of the glaciological processes that link climate change to rising
sea level. A successful outcome of the research will allow glaciologists to
better assess the processes that promote or erode the influence Antarctic ice
shelves have in controlling the transfer of ice from the interior of Antarctica
into the ocean. The project will undertake two outreach activities: (1) web-
posting of a field-activity journal and (2) establishing an open-access
glaciological teaching and outreach web-sharing site for the International
Glaciological Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to
experimentally verify a theory of ice-shelf instability proposed to explain the
explosive break-up of Larsen B Ice Shelf in 2002. This theory holds that the
filling and draining of supraglacial lakes on floating ice shelves induces
sufficient flexure stress within the ice to (a) induce upward/downward
propagating fractures originating at the base/surface of the ice shelf that (b)
dissect the ice shelf into fragments that tend to have widths less than about
half the ice thickness. The significance of narrow widths is that they promote
capsize of the ice-shelf fragments during the break-up process. This capsize
releases large amounts of gravitational potential energy (comparable to
thousands of kilotons of TNT for the Larsen B Ice Shelf) thereby promoting
explosiveness of the Larsen B event. The observational motivation for
experimentally verifying the surface-lake mechanism for ice-shelf breakup is
based on the fact that &gt;2,000 surface lakes developed on the Larsen B Ice
Shelf in the decade prior to its break up, and that these lakes were observed
(via satellite imagery) to drain in a coordinated fashion during the day prior
to the initiation of the break up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field-observation
component of the project will focus on a supraglacial lake on the McMurdo Ice
Shelf where there is persistent summer season surface melting. The lake will be
studied during a single provisional field season to determine whether grooming
of surrounding surface streams and shorelines with heavy construction equipment
will allow surface water to be manually encouraged to fill the lake. If
successfully encouraged to develop, the McMurdo Ice Shelf surface lake will
allow measurements of key ice-shelf flexure and stress variables needed to
develop the theory of ice-shelf surface lakes without having to access the much
more logistically demanding surface lakes of ice-shelves located elsewhere in
Antarctica. Data to be gathered during the 6-week provisional field season
include: energy- and water-balance parameters determining how the surface lake
grows and fills, and various global positioning system measurements of the
vertical bending of the ice sheet in response to the changing meltwater load
contained within the surface lake. These data will be used to (1) constrain a
computer model of viscoelastic flexure and possible fracture of the ice shelf in
response to the increasing load of meltwater in the lake, and (2) determine
whether continued study of the incipient surface-meltwater lake features on the
McMurdo Ice Shelf provides a promising avenue for constraining the more-general
behavior of surface meltwater lakes on other ice shelves located in warmer parts
of Antarctica. Computer models constrained by the observational data obtained
from the field project will inform energy- and water-balance models of ice
shelves in general, and allow more accurate forecasts of changing ice-shelf
conditions surrounding the inland ice of Antarctica. The project will create the
first-ever ground-based observations useful for spawning the development of
models capable of predicting viscoelastic and fracture behavior of ice shelves
in response to supraglacial lake evolution, including slow changes due to energy
balance effects, as well as fast changes due to filling and draining.