* 1443673
* RESNA Student Design Competition 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Michael Brogioli, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2015
* USD 20,146.00

This is funding to support the undergraduate Student Design Competition (SDC),
which will be part of the 2014 annual RESNA conference to be held June 11-15 in
Indianapolis. Today, over 54 million people in the United States report some
degree of disability, a number which will likely grow in coming years due to the
baby boomer generation. RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive
Technology Society of North America, is the one organization with an
international focus that is devoted solely to technology for individuals with
disabilities. RESNA's membership consists of individuals and institutions
covering a range of disciplines (including researchers, clinicians, suppliers,
manufacturers, consumers and educators who work in both non-profit and for-
profit settings), all of whom are dedicated to promoting the exchange of ideas
and information for the advancement of assistive technology. In addition to its
annual conference, RESNA conducts a variety of credentialing program for
assistive technology practitioners, rehabilitation engineering technologists and
suppliers, while the organization's Technical Standards Board is the U.S.
Technical Advisory Group to ANSI, the official U.S. representative to the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), for the development of ISO
standards pertaining to assistive technology and other products for persons with
disabilities. More information about RESNA and its annual conference is
available online at http://www.resna.org while information specific to the SDC
may be found at http://aac-rerc.psu.edu/wordpressmu/RESNA-SDC and student team
entry abstracts are included on the AT Wiki
http://atwiki.assistivetech.net/index.php/ATWiki_Home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RESNA Student Design Competition fosters innovation and creativity with the
ultimate goal of producing technology that can contribute to the independence of
individuals with disabilities. The first SDC was held in 1980 as part of the
inaugural RESNA conference; since then over 254 designs have been identified as
winning entries from among over 788 submitted by students from over 125
different universities and institutes of higher learning. Both undergraduate and
master's level graduate candidates are eligible to submit entries, which must
represent the work of students only; no faculty or professionals may be included
as co-authors, although faculty may be mentioned as advisors and/or mentors. NSF
has been a supporter since 2005. This year's funding will enable the SDC to be
further expanded and enhanced, so as to include more entries and support for
more design teams, especially from minorities, women, and individuals with
disabilities. A call for participation has been posted on the conference
website, and also distributed electronically to a large number of colleges and
universities with engineering and design schools. A team of 5 judges will pre-
select up to 8 semi-finalist teams, from which two members each will be invited
to attend the conference fully supported with travel and hotel funds as well as
complimentary registration (NSF funds will cover the costs associated with 6 of
the semi-finalist teams). On Thursday, June 12, during the pre-conference
activities these teams will make presentations and show off their working
prototypes to the judges before a public audience, and 5 finalist teams will be
selected. Judges will have an opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions
and recommendations to the design teams. The conference schedule includes a
platform session on Sunday, June 15 in which the finalists will present their
designs to the general conference audience; in addition, finalists will have an
opportunity to present their projects during the Annual Developers' Forum on
Friday evening, June 13, which highlights new products under development (some
past SDC student team designs have been patented and are now available
commercially).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual RESNA Conference and the Student
Design Competition combine to create a forum for interaction between working and
experienced rehabilitation engineers and students who are about to enter the
field. Unique in its primary focus on undergraduates, the event provides
participants with experience and skills that help them succeed in their
engineering and design careers. It encourages and mentors students in various
disciplines to become involved in the assistive technology and rehabilitation
engineering fields, and provides an opportunity for the students to network with
their peers as well as participants in previous SDCs, many of whom are now
leaders in service, research, and educational areas related to technology for
people with disabilities. Furthermore, continuing a practice started a few years
ago, all participants (not just the finalists) will create blog posts that
capture and archive their submissions, and these will remain accessible
indefinitely through the RESNA website and the AT Wiki. Thus, those who teach
will be able to share this information with their students as examples of
projects that others have done, while service providers and people with
disabilities will be able to search for unique solutions to barriers they may
face.