* 1443690
* Collaborative Research: Southern Plateau Ice-sheet Characterization and Evolution of the Central Antarctic Plate (SPICECAP)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Duncan Young, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 428,418.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;East Antarctica holds a vast, ancient ice
sheet. The bedrock hidden beneath this ice sheet may provide clues to how
today's continents formed, while the ice itself contains records of Earth's
atmosphere from distant eras. New drilling technologies are now available to
allow for direct sampling of these materials from more than two kilometers below
the ice surface. However, getting this material will require knowing where to
look. The Southern Plateau Ice-sheet Characterization and Evolution of the
Central Antarctic Plate (SPICECAP) project will use internationally collected
airborne survey data to search East Antarctica near the South Pole for key
locations that will provide insight into Antarctica's geology and for locating
the oldest intact ice on Earth. Ultimately, scientists are interested in
obtaining samples of the oldest ice to address fundamental questions about the
causes of changes in the timing of ice-age conditions from 40,000 to 100,000
year cycles. SPICECAP data analysis will provide site survey data for future
drilling and will increase the overall understanding of Antarctica's hidden ice
and geologic records. The project involves international collaboration and
leveraging of internationally collected data. The SPICECAP project will train
new interdisciplinary scientists at the undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This
study focuses on processing and interpretation of internationally collected
aerogeophysical data from the Southern Plateau of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet.
The data include ice penetrating radar data, laser altimetry, gravity and
magnetics.  The project will provide information on geological trends under the
ice, the topography and character of the ice/rock interface, and the
stratigraphy of the ice. The project will also provide baseline site
characterization for future drilling. Future drilling sites and deep ice cores
for old ice require that the base of the ice sheet be frozen to the bed (i.e. no
free water at the interface between rock and ice) and the assessment will map
the extent of frozen vs. thawed areas. Specifically, three main outcomes are
anticipated for this project. First, the study will provide an assessment of the
viability of Titan Dome, a subglacial highland region located near South Pole,
as a potential old ice drilling prospect. The assessment will include
determining the hydraulic context of the bed by processing and interpreting the
radar data, ice sheet mass balance through time by mapping englacial reflectors
in the ice and connecting them to ice stratigraphy in the recent South Pole, and
ice sheet geometry using laser altimetry. Second, the study will provide an
assessment of the geological context of the Titan Dome region with respect to
understanding regional geologic boundaries and the potential for bedrock
sampling. For these two goals, we will use data opportunistically collected by
China, and the recent PolarGAP dataset. Third, the study will provide an
assessment of the risk posture for RAID site targeting in the Titan Dome region,
and the Dome C region. This will use a high-resolution dataset the team
collected previously at Dome C, an area similar to the coarser resolution data
collected at Titan Dome, and will enable an understanding of what is missed by
the wide lines spacing at Titan Dome. Specifically, we will model subglacial
hydrology with and without the high resolution data, and statistically examine
the detection of subglacial mountains (which could preserve old ice) and
subglacial lakes (which could destroy old ice), as a function of line spacing.