* 1443080
* CIF21 DIBBs: Scalable Capabilities for Spatial Data Synthesis
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Shaowen Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,499,998.00

This project will develop a set of tools for spatial data synthesis through
scalable data aggregation and integration based on cloud computing, CyberGIS,
and other existing tools. Many scientific problems require the aggregation and
integration of large and varied spatial data from a multitude of sources, yet
existing approaches and software cannot effectively synthesize the enormous
amounts of spatial data that often are available. This project will resolve
problems associated with the use of massive spatial data, thus facilitating work
dependent on this type of data for scientific problem solving, such as research
on population dynamics and urban sustainability. Learning materials derived from
the research activities will be openly accessible through the CyberGIS Science
Gateway. Targeted massive open online course development will provide
inexpensive and efficient ways to teaching students about the capabilities and
underlying scientific principles of spatial data synthesis. A summer school will
be offered during the second half of the project to provide a more focused and
in-depth training event.

This research project will create scalable capabilities for spatial data
synthesis enabled by cloud computing and CyberGIS. The project will begin by
developing the capabilities for solving specific scientific problems and then
move on to engage a broader community for validating and improving the core
capabilities. The research will incorporate two interrelated themes: (1)
measuring urban sustainability based on a number of social, environmental, and
physical factors and processes; and (2) examining population dynamics by
synthesizing multiple population data sources with social media data. Spatial
data synthesis capabilities that the project will provide include extracting
metadata and dealing with problems of spatial references and units. The project
also will develop a fundamental capability to characterize uncertainty in data
and its propagation.