* 1443936
* EARS: Photonically-Enabled Extremely Wideband Compressive Wireless Spectrum Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Trac Tran, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2017
* USD 499,999.00

Abstract Title: &lt;br/&gt;EARS: Photonically-Enabled Extremely Wideband
Compressive Wireless Spectrum Sensing&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Johns Hopkins
University&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;With its
multitude of uses in wireless communications and sensing, the radio spectrum is
a highly regulated and finite resource. At present the radio spectrum is tightly
and statically allocated and modern electronic systems are increasingly relying
on high-bandwidth wireless communications for internet connectivity as well as
inter-device communications. While the radio spectrum is tightly allocated,
investigations indicate that the usage at any location and time is generally
sparse with a limited number of active channels, scattered across an extremely
broad spectral range. This observation indicates that a radio system that can
efficiently and rapidly sense spectral usage could adapt to exploit these
temporary spectral opportunities and thus make more efficient use of the finite
radio spectrum resource. The key technology for such a system is wideband
spectrum sensing and this technology must be implemented rapidly with minimal
hardware resources. This program will develop an extremely wideband, compact,
and robust spectrum sensing system for the microwave through millimeter-wave
frequency bands to facilitate efficient high-bandwidth communications and high-
resolution sensing in future mobile electronic systems. This program will also
provide research opportunities for undergraduate and high-school students as
well as develop educational tools, for example interactive on-line teaching
applications, and facilitate outreach activities, for example through the Johns
Hopkins University Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) and STEM Achievement
in Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES) programs, that target underrepresented
groups in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the framework
of compressive sensing (CS) emerged as a promising method to efficiently capture
signals that are sparse in some domain with significantly fewer measurements
than would be traditionally necessary permitting faster, simpler, and/or lower
power sensing. The wideband spectrum is inherently sparse due to its spectrum
under-utilization at any given spatiotemporal location. Hence, CS emerges as a
promising candidate to realize effective low-cost wideband spectrum sensing. The
extremely wideband spectrum sensing necessary for cognitive radios in the
microwave and mm-wave will necessitate photonic solutions, since the
instantaneous bandwidths (potentially 300 GHz) are simply too large and spectral
opportunities too short lived for traditional electronic sampling hardware. This
research program will demonstrate a new approach for compressive photonic
sampling that addresses these shortcomings by performing much of the signal
processing in the photonic domain. More specifically, this program will develop
an extremely wideband chip-scale spectrum sensing architecture by combining the
benefits of high-speed integrated photonics with recently developed photonic-
domain compressive sensing. Through the union of these technological
advancements with algorithmic advancements tailored to the unique capabilities
of this hardware, an extremely wideband spectrum sensing system will be proven
to facilitate cognitive radio systems in the microwave and mm-wave ranges of the
wireless spectrum. This architecture allows for extremely rapid collection of
compressive sensing measurements and compressive sensing theory and algorithms
will be developed to take advantage of this unique capability. Such a system is
greatly needed to address the high information capacity and efficient spectral
usage expected by future wireless electronic devices.