* 1443483
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Iron-inding Ligands in Southern Ocean Diatom Communities: The Role of Diatom-Bacteria Associations
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Kristen Buck, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 276,593.00

This project focuses on an important group of photosynthetic algae in the
Southern Ocean (SO), diatoms, and the roles associated bacterial communities
play in modulating their growth. Diatom growth fuels the SO food web and
balances atmospheric carbon dioxide by sequestering the carbon used for growth
to the deep ocean on long time scales as cells sink below the surface. The
diatom growth is limited by the available iron in the seawater, most of which is
not freely available to the diatoms but instead is tightly bound to other
compounds. The nature of these compounds and how phytoplankton acquire iron from
them is critical to understanding productivity in this region and globally. The
investigators will conduct experiments to characterize the relationship between
diatoms, their associated bacteria, and iron in open ocean and inshore waters.
Experiments will involve supplying nutrients at varying nutrient ratios to
natural phytoplankton assemblages to determine how diatoms and their associated
bacteria respond to different conditions. This will provide valuable data that
can be used by climate and food web modelers and it will help us better
understand the relationship between iron, a key nutrient in the ocean, and the
organisms at the base of the food web that use iron for photosynthetic growth
and carbon uptake. The project will also further the NSF goals of training new
generations of scientists and of making scientific discoveries available to the
general public. The project supports early career senior investigators and the
training of graduate and undergraduate students as well as outreach activities
with middle school Girl Scouts in Rhode Island, inner city middle and high
school age girls in Virginia, and middle school girls in
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines trace metal biogeochemistry,
phytoplankton cultivation, and molecular biology to address questions regarding
the production of iron-binding compounds and the role of diatom-bacterial
interactions in this iron-limited region. Iron is an essential micronutrient for
marine phytoplankton. Phytoplankton growth in the SO is limited by a lack of
sufficient iron, with important consequences for carbon cycling and climate in
this high latitude regime. Some of the major outstanding questions in iron
biogeochemistry relate to the organic compounds that bind &gt;99.9% of dissolved
iron in surface oceans. The investigators' prior research in this region
suggests that production of strong iron-binding compounds in the SO is linked to
diatom blooms in waters with high nitrate to iron ratios. The sources of these
compounds are unknown but the investigators hypothesize that they may be from
bacteria, which are known to produce such compounds for their own use. The
project will test three hypotheses concerning the production of these iron-
binding compounds, limitations on the biological availability of iron even if
present in high concentrations, and the roles of diatom-associated bacteria in
these processes. Results from this project will provide fundamental information
about the biogeochemical trigger, and biological sources and function, of
natural strong iron-binding compound production in the SO, where iron plays a
critical role in phytoplankton productivity, carbon cycling, and climate
regulation.