* 1443013
* CIF21 DIBBs: T2-C2: Timely and Trusted Curator and Coordinator Data Building Blocks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* David Nicol, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,500,000.00

A 2008 National Academy report on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering
noted that in a rapidly changing and increasingly competitive global market,
integrated innovative design and rapid product development must be supported by
computationally based designs, fast engineering analysis, and efficient data
management tools. This project addresses the National Materials Review Board
recommendations of reducing the cycle from the design of new materials to the
fabrication of new devices using new materials. To address the materials-to-
devices cycle challenge, the project focuses on the potential of capturing,
curating, correlating and coordinating materials-to-devices digital data in a
real-time and trusted manner before fully archiving and publishing the data for
wide access and sharing. The software developed in this project is useful
throughout the materials science and device fabrication fields, by automatically
collecting, archiving, and providing collected information on all phases of
materials and device fabrication development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
develops the Timely and Trusted Curation and Coordination (T2-C2) Data
Framework, consisting of two data blocks: &lt;br/&gt;1) T2-C2 Curator, providing
real-time acquisition and curation of digital data from selected materials-
making / characterization and device-fabrication instruments in the
collaborative research units at the university, the Material Research Lab (MRL)
and the Micro-and-Nanotechnology Lab (MNTL) , and&lt;br/&gt;2) T2-C2
Coordinator, where collected data are filtered, correlations among data and
dependency relations are identified, and the results are connected to other data
processing capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the T2-C2 framework is to enable
reduction of the development time and cost of materials-making /characterization
to device-making processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through open-source software
licenses and training programs, the project impacts material science, device
fabrication and other fields within the university, and other interdisciplinary
research institutions and their materials design and manufacturing processes.
Through courses, tutorials, workshops, and outreach, the project develops
interdisciplinary scientists, teaches the next generation of students, and
informs broader audiences about the potential of timely and trusted data
collection, curation, spatio-temporal analytics, and correlations between
material-making/characterization and device-fabrication processes.