* 1443373
* Collaborative Research: Stochasticity and Cryoconite Community Assembly and Function
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Andrew Fountain, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2022
* USD 282,431.00

Cryoconite holes are pockets of life completely encased in otherwise barren
glacial ice. These pockets of life form when dust blown onto the ice melts a
small, largely isolated hole that can function as its own tiny ecosystem. This
dust can contain microorganisms such as bacteria, algae, or microscopic animals.
The microorganisms within the hole interact and carry out functions typical of a
larger ecosystem, such as a forest. Cryoconite holes are especially important in
extreme cold environments such as the Antarctic Dry Valleys, where they function
as repositories of life. Because cryoconite holes are mostly enclosed and
persist for years, they can be tracked over time to test fundamental scientific
questions about how communities of interacting organisms develop to become fully
functioning ecosystems. This project will sample existing and experimentally
created cryoconite holes to understand how these ecosystems develop and to what
degree random processes (such as which organisms get there first) affect the
final community composition and functioning. The results will not only improve
our understanding of how microbial communities assemble and affect the
functioning of microecosystems such as cryoconite holes, but also how the
processes of community assembly affect functioning of larger ecosystems, such as
forests. A better understanding of community establishment, development, and
response to abiotic factors are essential to forecasting ecological responses to
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is essential to unravel the links
between community assembly, biodiversity, and nutrient cycling across numerous
ecosystems because these are critical factors determining ecological responses
to environmental change. The unique, largely isolated nature of cryoconite holes
provides an experimental system that will advance fundamental understanding of
the processes (e.g., stochastic dynamics such as dispersal limitation, assembly
order, and ecological drift) driving community assembly. This project will use a
field sampling campaign and a number of manipulative experiments to test a
hypothesis that unites theory in community and ecosystem ecology: the degree to
which stochastic processes guide microbial community assembly and affects
regional patterns in biodiversity and ecosystem processes. Cryoconite holes will
be sampled to compare community composition, environmental factors, and
ecosystem functioning between hydrologically connected and isolated holes. New
cryoconite holes will also be constructed and monitored over the course of two
growing seasons to specifically alter assembly order and community size, thereby
pairing a unique manipulative experiment with field surveys to address questions
with relevance to the Antarctic and beyond. Amplicon sequencing, metagenomics,
microscopy, sensitive environmental chemistry methods, and photosynthesis and
respiration measurements will be used to test a series of sub-hypotheses that
relate stochasticity to patterns in regional biodiversity, heterogeneity in
environmental factors, and ecosystem processes.