* 1443891
* Collaborative Research: EARS: Creating an Ecosystem for Enhanced Spectrum Utilization Through Dynamic Market Mechanisms
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Srinivas Shakkottai, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2018
* USD 252,014.00

The surge in demand for Internet access using smart hand held devices has
resulted in the emergence of a multitude of apps and devices, which have diverse
requirements and capabilities. However, underlying policies for scheduling
cellular resources are optimized for average or worst case performance, and do
not allow end-users to indicate the relative value of resources on the packet
level. Simultaneously, it has become clear that while there are insufficient
bandwidth resources for unlimited cellular data plans, the prevailing scheme of
degrading access after a certain limit is exceeded is both unpopular and
inefficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to bridge the
disconnects between user preferences and allocated resources by the use of
dynamic market mechanisms that allow for packet-level value determination over
time. The objective is to study both primary markets in which service providers
sell network access to end-users, as well as secondary markets in which end-
users share resources via hot spots and device-to-device networking. While doing
so, the project identifies the impact of such packet-scale transactions on the
incentives and efficiency of the market at a long time-scale, packet-aggregate
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes an important step towards the
systematic design of dynamic mechanisms for resource sharing in wireless
communication networks, which would innately account for user preferences and
valuations. The PIs will develop an analytical framework for designing dynamic
market-based mechanisms that would implicitly allow the determination of the
value of allocating and trading resources among various agents. The research is
organized into three inter-dependent areas: 1) Value Identification and Resource
Scheduling in Single-Sided Markets; 2) Utilizing End-User Resources through Two-
sided Markets; 3) Policy and Provisioning Decisions. The dynamic market
mechanisms that are developed will be tested via experiments conducted on a
smart phone test bed in order to better understand real-world implications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All three PIs are heavily involved in the education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and the proposed work will
further strengthen the students? exposure to network control, game theory and
optimization. The project will disseminate results to the public through
seminars and summer camps focusing on electrical engineering concepts
appropriate for high school level students.