* 1443652
* Extending the Capabilities for Fully Coupled Land-Ice Simulations within the Community Earth System Model
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Mariana Vertenstein, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 116,288.00

Mass loss (primarily melting and iceberg discharge) from land ice is
accelerating and will soon become the dominant contribution to long-term sea
level rise. Accurate, physically-based projections of land-ice change are needed
to assess the threats to coastal regions. While progress has been made,
uncertainty still exists in sea level rise projections for the 21st century and
beyond. This is in part because the models used for climate projections have
traditionally incorporated very simple treatments of land ice. This award will
allow for more accurate consideration of the role of land ice within predictive
models, specifically through continued development of a sophisticated land ice
component in the Community Earth System Model (CESM). One individual will work
directly on the task, and will be available to train others. The Broader Impacts
of this work include better predictions of sea level rise, which will provide
coastal planners with better information to support the development of effective
mitigation and adaptation strategies.

Specific components of this project include adding conservative, two-way
coupling between ice sheets, the land, and the atmosphere into the CESM. This
will allow for improved long-term simulations to assess coupled ice-
sheet/climate interactions. In addition, the project will support enhancements
to the CESM's snow physics model, a component needed for accurate modeling of
future ice-sheet mass changes. Finally, this project will provide support for
improved model infrastructure that is needed to better simulate the future
evolution of the Arctic and Antarctic ice sheets, as well as better hindcasting
of paleo ice sheets that can be studied as analogs for the future. Together,
these activities will result in refined research tools to address the important
question of future sea level rise.