* 1443249
* U.S.-Romania-Poland Planning for Cooperative Research in Nuclear Astrophysics at the Exteme Light Infrastructure-Nuclear Physics(ELI-NP)Facility in Bucharest, Romania
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Moshe Gai, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 01/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Through a set of catalytic activities U.S. scientists at the University of
Connecticut and Duke University intend to forge a long-term partnership for
studies in nuclear astrophysics with international collaborators in Poland and
Romania. The U.S. principal investigator, Moshe Gai, and Henry Weller of Duke
University will cooperate with counterparts Wojciech Dominik, at the University
of Warsaw, and Ovidiu Tesilean, at the Extreme Light Infrastructure-Nuclear
Physics (ELI-NP) being constructed near Bucharest. Together, they will prepare
the groundwork for new basic research in nuclear astrophysics and use of the
gamma-ray beam facility of the ELI-NP in Magurele-Bucharest, Romania. This
cooperation aims to leverage significant European Union investments in
experimental ELI infrastructure while engaging U.S. expertise in the design of
an electronic Time Projection Chamber (eTPC) detector and gas recycling system.
For broader impact, breakthroughs that eventually contribute to a high-end gas
recycling and purification system could yield ideas for future industrial
applications. Because one U.S. postdoctoral student will participate in the
early simulations and detector design, other benefits include early career
engagement in this forefront U.S.-European teamwork. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, preliminary results should contribute to new concepts for detector
technology capable of providing a highly precise determination of an important
astrophysical quantity, the carbon-to-oxygen ratio in stellar helium burning.
This collaboration presents a unique opportunity to link use of a new laser
facility and planning for a new detector with a new novel u-v-w electronic
Readout, developed in Warsaw for measuring x-ray emissions. After completed
construction and with additional research support, results should allow
scientists to determine photo nuclear cross sections for center-of-momentum
energies lower than those investigated at the High Intensity gamma-ray Source
(HIgS) facility in the U.S. The new data obtained can be expected to reduce the
ambiguities in the astrophysical S-factors obtained at HIgS and therefore lead
to determining a more precise carbon-to-oxygen ratio. The researchers hope that
their new method may be applied to other important astrophysical reactions.