* 1443433
* Collaborative Research: Multidisciplinary Analysis of Antarctic Blue Ice Moraine Formation and their Potential as Climate Archives over Multiple Glacial Cycles
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 301,647.00

Licht/1443433&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediments deposited by the Antarctic ice
sheet are an archive of its history with time and help geologists to determine
how the remote interior of the ice sheet has changed over the past several
hundred thousand years. This project will focus on the formation and dynamics of
moraines (accumulations of dirt and rocks that are incorporated in the glacier
surface or have been pushed along by the glacier as it moves) near the blue ice
area of Mt. Achernar in the central Transantarctic Mountains in Antarctica.. The
study will improve basic understanding of the formation of these moraines.
Fieldwork at the site will focus on imaging the internal structure of the
moraine to determine the processes by which it, and others like it, form over
time. Additional analyses will include measurements of ice flow and collection
of rock samples to determine the timing of debris deposition and the changes in
the sources of sediments from deep within the Antarctic continent. The project
will provide both graduate and undergraduate students training in paleoclimate
studies, geology, and numerical modeling approaches. The broader impacts of the
proposed work include hands on training in the Earth Sciences for graduate and
undergraduate students, collaboration with colleagues in New Zealand and Sweden
to provide an international research experience for students from the US, and
three educational modules to be delivered by student researchers regarding
Antarctica's role in global environments. The research is societally relevant
and multidisciplinary and the topics are ideal for sharing with the public. All
research findings will be made publicly available to others via timely
publication in high-impact, peer-reviewed journals and all data will be
submitted to the National Snow and Ice Data Center, and excess samples will be
provided to the U.S. Polar Rock Repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct
observations of ice sheet history from the margins of Antarctica's polar plateau
are essential for testing numerical ice sheet models, and the laterally
extensive, blue-ice moraines of the Mt. Achernar Moraine complex in the central
Transantarctic Mountains contain a unique and nearly untapped direct, quasi-
continuous record of ice sheet change over multiple glacial cycles. The project
objectives include improved understanding of processes and rates of blue ice
moraine formation, as well as identifying the topographic, glaciological, and
climatic controls on their evolution. Data to be collected with fieldwork in
Antarctica include: imaging of internal ice structure with ground-penetrating
radar, measurement of ice flow velocity and direction with a global positioning
system (GPS) array, analysis of debris concentration and composition in glacier
ice, state-of-the-art cosmogenic multi-nuclide analyses to determine exposure
ages of moraine debris, mapping of trimlines and provenance analysis. Numerical
model simulations, constrained by field data, will be used to evaluate the
factors influencing changes in glacier flow that potentially impact the
accumulation of the moraine debris. All together, the new data and modeling
efforts will improve conceptual models of blue ice moraine formation, and
thereby make them a more valuable proxy for developing a better understanding of
the history of the ice sheet.