* 1443833
* Enhancing Connections: The National Academy of Science, International Council for Science, Pacific Science Association, and International Visitors Office
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2017
* USD 824,392.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the Board on
International Scientific Organizations (BISO) of the National Academies of
Science (NAS), which functions as the U.S. National Committee to the
International Council for Science (ICSU) and serves as the focal point for ICSU-
related activities in the United States. It manages U.S. membership in ICSU and
has oversight of many of the national committees that serve as liaisons to
unions, committees and programs federated under the ICSU umbrella. BISO's
primary goal is to support effective U.S. participation and strong leadership in
the ICSU network in response to growing needs in international science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICSU, a non-governmental organization, plans
and coordinates interdisciplinary research to address major issues in science
and society; advocates for freedom in the conduct of science; promotes equitable
access to scientific data and information; and facilitates science education and
capacity building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also provides dues payment
to the Pacific Science Association (PSA). PSA is an interdisciplinary regional
organization within ICSU whose goal is to advance science and technology in
support of sustainable development in the Pacific region. Based in Honolulu,
Hawaii, PSA has a long history of linking scientists in the U.S. with their
counterparts on the Pacific?s rim and islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-
year award will enable BISO to continue to manage U.S. participation in ICSU.
The award provides costs associated with the support and management of the U.S.
National Committee to ICSU and organizational activities of adhering U.S.
committees representing the diverse disciplines that participate in ICSU
activities.