* 1443291
* 2nd Workshop  on Biological Distributed Algorithms (BDA 2014)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Ziv Bar-Joseph, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

General description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to bring together
computer scientists and biologists interested in studying the relationships
between distributed algorithms and biological systems with the aim of benefiting
both fields through joint studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed systems are
prevalent in computer science and biology. Both domains rely on networks of
interacting entities - molecules, cells, and organisms in biology; mobile and
autonomous robot devices in computer science - to reach joint decisions,
coordinate responses to inputs, and to route resources and navigate through
challenging environments. Both also seek solutions to these problems that are
efficient, robust, and adaptive with respect to changes expected in natural and
competitive environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore these shared
properties and goals and to determine whether progress made in one of these
domains can be used to assist work in the other domain, PIs have organized the
BDA workshop to bring together scientists from both areas for a two day meeting
in Austin. TX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The
connections mentioned above between the two areas suggest that by thinking
computationally about the settings, requirements, and goals of information
processing within distributed biological systems, researchers can achieve two
complementary goals: First, they can use insights about how biological systems
solve computational problems to aid in designing more flexible, robust, and
adaptive novel distributed algorithms. Second, they can use, develop, or adapt
existing distributed computing theory to help understand the behavior of
biological systems and propose new, testable hypotheses to determine how well
such models fit the observed behavior of the biological system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable such cross-disciplinary research, PIs have
organized the BDA workshop. For this year's workshop, the plan is to primarily
focus on relationships between distributed problems in computer science and
problems related to communication and coordination in insect colonies (e.g.
foraging, navigation, task allocation, construction) and to networks in the
brain (e.g. learning, decision-making, attention). Other topics for submissions
include: synchronization, communication models inspired by biological systems,
and flocking behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will have invited talks
from leaders in both the distributed computing and biological communities. There
will also be contributed talks from researchers working in the interface of the
two domains and a poster session presenting early stage work linking biological
and computational distributed computing. To leverage existing interest amongst
computer scientists, the workshop is co-located with one of the premiere and
long-standing conferences in distributed computing (DISC: The International
Symposium on Distributed Computing), which will be held in Austin, TX in October
2014.