* 1443082
* EAGER: Development of a Novel Online Visual Survey Data Analysis Tool and Assessment of its Capabilities to Enhance Learning of Quantitative Research Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Kevin Lewis, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 05/31/2018
* USD 315,999.00

As public opinion and other surveys become a ubiquitous tool in many contexts
and disciplinary domains, the need for online survey analysis systems that can
be used by non-professionals to quickly and accurately analyze patterns of
responses in different subsets of respondents is also increasing. The system
developed by the project will vastly expand opportunities for survey data access
and online data sharing and exploration in several domains that rely on
questionnaire data collection. The ability to annotate patterns of responses and
share the annotations with others leads to a valuable new quality in survey
analysis, making it a collaborative and interactive online experience. Important
benefits are expected in education and learning. Online learning of research
methods is often hampered by a deep-seated fear of quantitative approaches
reported by many social science majors. The ability to relate inferential
results with easy to use visual interactive exploration of social datasets will
help students test distributional assumptions, compute models for graphically
selected groups of respondents, and find and explain outliers. This combination
of features has the potential to transform how survey data are shared and
analyzed online, and increase the value of research investment in sociological
and related studies by promoting reuse of available data. &lt;br/&gt;This
project's goal is to build an online tool for exploratory survey data analysis,
which can be used by researchers and students to examine, analyze, share, and
publish public opinion and other questionnaire surveys. The online tool offers a
new visual metaphor for analyzing surveys and intuitively uncovering patterns of
relationships, making survey data easy to share, appealing to explore, and
simple to navigate from any subsets of respondents to individual cases. The
project leverages technical approaches from image analytics, faceted search, and
online map navigation, combining them into a novel survey authoring and online
publication system which allows users to juxtapose interactive exploration with
common inferential statistics, and share and annotate analytical results. The
system is evaluated as a learning tool in several research method classes for
both graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, it is field tested in a
number of surveys conducted by the project and the advisory team members. A key
novel feature of the survey analysis system is its efficient and intuitive
exploratory data analysis interface accessible by a wide group of expert and
non-expert users. Another key novel feature is its support of standards-based
data sharing, collaboration, and communication among social survey analysts and
students. The project includes development of architecture and information
models for a cyberlearning-focused survey analysis system; integration of
inferential statistics and exploratory approaches in a single easy to use visual
analytical interface; and exploration of survey data sharing, collaborative
online analysis and annotations.