* 1443176
* EAGER:  Development of a Multivariate Biomarker Analysis Technique for Paleoclimate Reconstruction
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Jessica Tierney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2016
* USD 75,894.00

Reconstructions of past environments based on chemical "proxies" have provided
invaluable insights into how the Earth system functions on a variety of
timescales, from decades to millions of years. Organic molecular, or
"biomarker", proxies are being applied increasingly in paleoclimate studies, and
these compounds hold a wealth of information about an array of environmental
conditions includin temperature, aridity, vegetation biome type, and water
salinity. However, their current interpretation is mainly in terms of a single
variable of interest, most often temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study,
led by an early-career researcher from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
is a first attempt to leverage the multidimensional quality of biomarker data
for paleoclimate reconstruction. A statistical model will be developed using
artificial neural network (ANN) and support vector regression (SVR) algorithms
("machine learning" techniques). This will allow quantitative evaluation of how
assemblages of biomarkers in sedimentary archives relate to an array of modern
environmental conditions. The outcomes of the proposed project will include
development of a new toolbox to quantitatively reconstruct past climates over
land and in the ocean in many types of paleoclimate archives. Such a tool could
have broad application across a range of fields including environmental studies,
petroleum geology, and computer science.