* 1443566
* Laser Dust Logging of a South Pole Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Ryan Bay, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 171,072.00

Bay/1443566 This award supports the deployment and analysis of data from an
oriented laser dust logger in the South Pole ice core borehole to complement
study of the ice core record. Before the core is even processed, data from the
borehole probe will immediately determine the depth-age relationship, augment 3D
mapping of South Pole stratigraphy, aid in searches for the oldest ice in
Antarctica, and reveal layers of volcanic or extraterrestrial fallout. Regarding
the intellectual merit, the oriented borehole log will be essential for
investigating features in the ice sheet that may have implications for ice core
chronology, ice flow, ice sheet physical properties and stability in response to
climate change. The tools and techniques developed in this program have
applications in glaciology, biogeoscience and exploration of other planetary
bodies. The program aims for a deeper understanding of the consequences and
causes of abrupt climate change. The broader impacts of the project are that it
will include outreach and education, providing a broad training ground for
students and post-docs. Data and metadata will be made available through data
centers and repositories such as the National Snow and Ice Data Center web
portal.

The laser dust logger detects reproducible paleoclimate features at sub-
centimeter depth scale. Dust logger data are being used for synchronizing
records and dating any site on the continent, revealing accumulation anomalies
and episodes of rapid ice sheet thinning, and discovering particulate horizons
of special interest. In this project we will deploy a laser dust logger equipped
with a magnetic compass to find direct evidence of preferentially oriented dust.
Using optical scattering measurements from IceCube calibration studies at South
Pole and borehole logs at WAIS Divide, we have detected a persistent anisotropy
correlated with flow and crystal fabric which suggests that the majority of
insoluble particulates must be located within ice grains. With typical
concentrations of parts-per-billion, little is known about the location of
impurities within the polycrystalline structure of polar ice. While soluble
impurities are generally thought to concentrate at inter-grain boundaries and
determine electrical conductivity, the fate of insoluble particulates is much
less clear, and microscopic examinations are extremely challenging. These in
situ borehole measurements will help to unravel intimate relationships between
impurities, flow, and crystal fabric. Data from this project will further
develop a unique record of South Pole surface roughness as a proxy for paleowind
and provide new insights for understanding glacial radar propagation. This
project has field work in Antarctica.