* 1443346
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution Reconstruction of Holocene Deglaciation in the Southern Ross Embayment
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* John Stone, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 254,977.00

The response of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to future climatic changes is recognized
as the greatest uncertainty in projections of future sea level. An understanding
of past ice fluctuations affords insight into ice-sheet response to climate and
sea-level change and thus is critical for improving sea-level predictions. This
project will examine deglaciation of the southern Ross Sea over the past few
thousand years to document oscillations in Antarctic ice volume during a period
of relatively stable climate and sea level. We will help quantify changes in ice
volume, improve understanding of the ice dynamics responsible, and examine the
implications for future sea-level change. The project will train future
scientists through participation of graduate students, as well as undergraduates
who will develop research projects in our laboratories.

Previous research indicates rapid Ross Sea deglaciation as far south as
Beardmore Glacier early in the Holocene epoch (which began approximately 11,700
years before present), followed by more gradual recession. However, deglaciation
in the later half of the Holocene remains poorly constrained, with no
chronological control on grounding-line migration between Beardmore and Scott
Glaciers. Thus, we do not know if mid-Holocene recession drove the grounding
line rapidly back to its present position at Scott Glacier, or if the ice sheet
withdrew gradually in the absence of significant climate forcing or eustatic sea
level change. The latter possibility raises concerns for future stability of the
Ross Sea grounding line. To address this question, we will map and date glacial
deposits on coastal mountains that constrain the thinning history of Liv and
Amundsen Glaciers. By extending our chronology down to the level of floating ice
at the mouths of these glaciers, we will date their thinning history from
glacial maximum to present, as well as migration of the Ross Sea grounding line
southwards along the Transantarctic Mountains. High-resolution dating will come
from Beryllium-10 surface-exposure ages of erratics collected along elevation
transects, as well as Carbon-14 dates of algae within shorelines from former
ice-dammed ponds. Sites have been chosen specifically to allow close comparison
of these two dating methods, which will afford constraints on Antarctic
Beryllium-10 production rates.