* 1443434
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-Layer Approach Towards Reliable Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Wade Trappe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 301,000.00

The development of radio technologies that support efficient and reliable
spectrum sharing is an enabler for utilizing the spectrum being made available
through the National Broadband Plan. Software defined radios represent a
promising technology that supports spectrum sharing as evidenced by the large
amount of algorithms and protocols that allow for cognitive radio networks
(CRNs) to be deployed. Unfortunately, the economic promise of dynamic spectrum
access is easily undermined if cognitive radio users act dishonestly or
maliciously, thereby subverting protocols that are founded on the cooperation of
users. It is therefore important that mechanisms are developed that ensure the
trustworthy operation of CRNs in the presence of potentially malicious or
malfunctioning wireless nodes. The objective behind the project's research
activities is to develop technological solutions that ensure that cognitive
radios operate in trustworthy manner in spite of potential security threats. As
a result of this research effort, it is possible for radio spectrum to be more
reliably utilized, thereby ensuring that the economic opportunities associated
with the radio spectrum are fairly utilized by everyone. The educational impact
of the work comes from its multi-disciplinary foundation, broadening student
views of wireless system design, and guiding the next generation of wireless
engineer to include security and reliability in the design process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless technologies are an enabler for economic growth
in the United States, and cognitive radio networks are an emerging form of
wireless system that make spectrum access more available to the broader
population. Unfortunately, cognitive radio systems are susceptible to threats
that undermine the correct operation of their algorithms and protocols, and thus
solutions that support the secure operation of cognitive radio networks are
needed. This project ensures the trustworthy operation of cognitive radio
networks by: 1) developing algorithms that ensure the correct operation of
spectrum sensing procedures upon which spectrum access protocols rely; 2)
developing traffic monitoring tools that identify improper communication
activity by cognitive radio devices; and 3) developing new forms of
interference-resistant communications that ensure that cognitive radio
communication continues reliably in the face of interference. The research
effort is inter-disciplinary, pulling from statistical tools to network traffic
analysis to communications theory to support the secure operation of cognitive
radio networks. The algorithms and protocols developed in this project are
complemented by a systems prototyping and experimentation effort aimed at
guaranteeing that the technologies developed are suitable for deployment in real
wireless systems.