* 1443165
* Development of an In-situ Dissolved Oxygen Sensing Network to Map the Temporal Dynamics of the Oxic/Anoxic Interface in Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2022
* Terence Marsh, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 419,999.00

Environmental sensor networks are an emerging tool in earth science research
that will enable scientists to study the effects of climate on a complete
ecosystem. The sensor network must be capable of making measurements that cover
rapid fluctuations spanning minutes or hours as well as seasonal and annual
processes. What is needed is instrumentation that can provide in-situ data from
an entire ecosystem 24 hours/day, 365 days/year. Dissolved oxygen concentration
is a key variable in the environment that influences the habitability of
ecosystems, carbon cycling and sequestration, along with the basic bio-chemical
reactions in both terrestrial and aquatic systems. Scientists need to track the
boundary between the oxic (oxygen containing) and anoxic (depleted of oxygen)
regions in water. How this boundary evolves in time can reflect global or local
environmental changes including unusual events such as formation of dead zones
in the Gulf of Mexico or Lake Erie, leaching of toxic metals from bioremediation
sites or the transport of volatile organic compounds in drinking water supply
wells. Current technologies for monitoring oxygen concentration do not have the
capability to provide the required data over extended periods at the ecosystem
level. This project will develop a new oxygen sensor system capable of
autonomous, remote monitoring of the oxic/anoxic interface. In addition to
instrumentation development, the project will establish a community resource for
local stakeholders concerned about water quality. The objective is to provide
information on available technologies in a manner that is accessible to the
general public. The project scientists will work with the Michigan Lakes and
Streams Association, whose members include watershed/water resource management
communities and lake associations. These interactions will lead to the creation
of a website, tentatively titled ?MyMIwater?, on water quality monitoring
methods accessible to the citizen environmentalist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the synthesis of nano-scale metal-
halide cluster photophysics, chemical measurement techniques, optical and
electronic device design and fiber optic engineering to develop a real-time
oxygen sensing system. The unique photochemistry of the phosphorescent MoCl
luminophores developed at Michigan State University enables in-situ oxygen
monitoring for months to years with the same device in both aquatic systems and
partially saturated porous sediment. Vertically resolved fiber optic oxygen
probes, with mm scale resolution, will be deployed 24/7 without need for
recalibration despite the presence of common contaminants. With current
technologies such a system could only be deployed at prohibitive monetary cost
while requiring significant labor to operate; this new optical oxygen sensor
probe will circumvents the limitations of these existing techniques.