* 1443410
* RAPID: Investigation of Co-seismic Surface Cracks Produced during the April 1, 2014, Magnitude 8.2 Pisagua, Chile, Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Richard Allmendinger, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2016
* USD 24,807.00

Surface cracks, if preserved, formed during large subduction zone earthquakes
potentially provide records of past large earthquakes. However, these subtle
surface features disappear within days in most settings. Due to the aridity of
the Atacama Desert in Chile, these cracks are preserved and can be used to
estimate deformation associated with large earthquakes along the Chilean
subduction zone. The recent magnitude 8.2 earthquake in Chile affords an
opportunity to directly test the idea that cracks form during these large events
and that the cracks can be used to estimate the amount of slip that occurred
during an earthquake and the amount of deformation experienced above the
earthquake source region. If successful, the project would add a new method to
improve understanding of earthquake hazards associated with large megathrust
earthquakes in Chile and elsewhere, such as Cascadia, Alaska, and Japan.

The goal of this RAPID project, carried out in collaboration with Chilean
researchers, is to collect scan line data of co-seismic Mode I surface cracks in
the Chilean Coastal Cordillera produced by the April 1, 2014 Mw 8.2 Pisagua
earthquake. Cracks commonly form in unconsolidated deposits and must be measured
within about six months from the time of the earthquake in order to be
identified as having been produced during the earthquake. Accurate measurement
of crack apertures is likewise important for determination of surface strain for
comparison with GPS data that will be forthcoming from this event. As the walls
of the cracks degrade over time, accurate measurement of aperture becomes more
and more difficult. The objectives are to re-measure scan lines that have
already been measured, pre-earthquake, at Punta de Lobos and to measure new scan
line data for at least three separate sites in the region between the city of
Iquique and north of the pueblo of Pisagua. Initial InSAR data suggest that the
highest surface deformation will be encountered between Iquique and Pisagua. Co-
seismic surface cracks provide a unique long term record of thousands of cycles
of plate boundary seismicity. The Pisagua earthquake provides an outstanding
opportunity to document the crack population developed during a single
earthquake to help refine models of co-seismic crack generation as well as
explore the basic question of how much of the co-seismic geodetic signal
(predominantly GPS) reflects recoverable elastic deformation and non-recoverable
plastic deformation. These data will help refine models of co-seismic surface
deformation and average rupture segments, which are key inputs into seismic
hazard assessment.