* 1443733
* Collaborative Research: Fjord Ecosystem Structure and Function on the West Antarctic Peninsula - Hotspots of Productivity and Biodiversity? (FjordEco)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Martin Truffer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 04/30/2019
* USD 962,297.00

Marine communities along the western Antarctic Peninsula are highly productive
ecosystems which support a diverse assemblage of charismatic animals such as
penguins, seals, and whales as well as commercial fisheries such as that on
Antarctic krill. Fjords (long, narrow, deep inlets of the sea between high
cliffs) along the central coast of the Peninsula appear to be intense,
potentially climate sensitive, hotspots of biological production and
biodiversity, yet the structure and dynamics of these fjord ecosystems are very
poorly understood. Because of this intense biological activity and the
charismatic fauna it supports, these fjords are also major destinations for a
large Antarctic tourism industry. This project is an integrated field and
modeling program to evaluate physical oceanographic processes, glacial inputs,
water column community dynamics, and seafloor bottom community structure and
function in these important yet little understood fjord systems. These Antarctic
fjords have characteristics that are substantially different from well-studied
Arctic fjords, likely yielding much different responses to climate warming. This
project will provide major new insights into the dynamics and climate
sensitivity of Antarctic fjord ecosystems, highlighting contrasts with Arctic
sub-polar fjords, and potentially transforming our understanding of the
ecological role of fjords in the rapidly warming west Antarctic coastal marine
landscape. The project will also further the NSF goal of training new
generations of scientists, providing scientific training for undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students. This includes the unique educational
opportunity for undergraduates to participate in research cruises in Antarctica
and the development of a novel summer graduate course on fjord ecosystems.
Internet based outreach activities will be enhanced and extended by the
participation of a professional photographer who will produce magazine articles,
websites, radio broadcasts, and other forms of public outreach on the
fascinating Antarctic ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
a 15-month field program to test mechanistic hypotheses concerning oceanographic
and glaciological forcing, and phytoplankton and benthic community response in
the Antarctic fjords. Those efforts will be followed by a coupled
physical/biological modeling effort to evaluate the drivers of biogeochemical
cycles in the fjords and to explore their potential sensitivity to enhanced
meltwater and sediment inputs. Fieldwork over two oceanographic cruises will
utilize moorings, weather stations, and glacial, sea-ice and seafloor time-lapse
cameras to obtain an integrated view of fjord ecosystem processes. The field
team will also make multiple shipboard measurements and will use towed and
autonomous underwater vehicles to intensively evaluate fjord ecosystem structure
and function during spring/summer and autumn seasons. These integrated field and
modeling studies are expected to elucidate fundamental properties of water
column and sea bottom ecosystem structure and function in the fjords, and to
identify key physical-chemical-glaciological forcing in these rapidly warming
ecosystems.