* 1443550
* Controls on Variations in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide and Nitrous Oxide During the Last 10,000 years
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 432,410.00

The temperature of the earth is controlled, in part, by heat trapping gases that
include carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. Despite their importance to
climate, direct measurements of these gases in the atmosphere are limited to the
last 50 years at best. Air trapped in ice cores extends those data back hundreds
of millennia, and measurements of greenhouse gases in ice cores underpin much of
our understanding of global chemical cycles relevant to modern climate change.
Existing records vary in quality and detail. The proposed work fills gaps in our
knowledge of nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide over the last 10,000 years. New
measurements from an ice core from the South Pole will be used to determine what
role changes in ocean and land based processes played in controlling these
gases, which decreased during the first 2,000 years of this time period, then
gradually increased toward the present. The work will address a major
controversy over whether early human activities could have impacted the
atmosphere, and provide data to improve mathematical models of the land-ocean-
atmosphere system that predict how future climate change will impact the
composition of the atmosphere and climate.

For nitrous oxide the work will improve on existing concentration records and
provide a novel, detailed Holocene stable isotope record. It will also develop
measurement of the isotopomers of nitrous oxide and explore their utility for
understanding aspects of the Holocene nitrous oxide budget. The primary goal is
to determine if marine and/or terrestrial emissions of nitrous oxide change in
response to changes in Holocene climate. A new Holocene isotopic record for
carbon dioxide (stable carbon and oxygen isotopes), will improve the precision
of existing records by a factor 5 and increase the temporal resolution. These
data will be used to evaluate controversial hypotheses about why carbon dioxide
concentrations changed in the Holocene and provide insight into millennial scale
processes in the carbon cycle, which are not resolved by current isotopic data.
A graduate student will receive advanced training during and the student and
principle investigator will conduct outreach efforts targeted at local middle
school students. The proposed work will also contribute to teaching efforts by
the PI and to public lectures on climate and climate change. The results will be
disseminated through publications, data archive, and the OSU Ice Core Lab web
site. New analytical methods of wide utility will also be developed and
documented.