* 1443703
* Assimilative Mapping of Interhemispheric Polar Ionospheric Electrodynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Delores Knipp, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 02/28/2019
* USD 396,547.00

The Earth's main magnetic field geometry is not similar to that of a bar magnet
centered and simply tilted about 11 degrees from the Earth's spin axis. The
geomagnetic field has its North Pole located at ~1,200-km of the North
Geographic Pole towards Canada, but its South Pole is located about 1,550-km
from the South Geographic Pole in Antarctica towards Pacific Ocean. This
asymmetry is caused by the non-dipolar nature of the Earth's magnetic field that
leads to various hemispherical differences in the interaction of the solar wind
plasma flow with the Earth's magnetosphere. Thus the solar wind's energy and
momentum are deposited into the polar ionospheres of both the Northern and
Southern Polar Regions asymmetrically, causing considerable diversity in
different electrodynamic parameters of the polar ionosphere reported in past
studies. As new instrumentation techniques are developed, it is important to
invest in development of new data assimilation and inverse methods to assure a
more complete extraction of geophysical information out of new observations.

The magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling is not symmetrical in terms of high-
latitude ionospheric convection, field-aligned currents, electromagnetic energy
(Poynting) flux, auroral particle precipitation, and upper atmosphere
(thermosphere) responses. This study will quantify the degree of instantaneous
interhemispheric imbalance of the electromagnetic energy deposition via
geomagnetic field-aligned currents and ionospheric convection electric fields,
integrating quantification of all these variables into a unified framework.
Multiple types of space-based and ground-based observations can be
simultaneously analyzed, creating a coherent interhemispheric picture of global
ionospheric electrodynamics via the community Assimilative Mapping of
Ionospheric Electrodynamics (AMIE) software technique. In the past, the lack of
observations in the Southern polar region in comparison with the Northern polar
region precluded a comprehensive analysis of interhemispheric ionosphere
electrodynamic variables, unless exclusively relying on space-based
observations. The recent availability of data from ground-based magnetometers
and high frequency (HF) radars in the Southern polar region is changing this
situation.

The proposed research is timely, using a creative, even transformative approach
that takes advantage of new global interhemispheric observations available
through the NSF-funded Active Magnetosphere and Polar Electrodynamics Response
Experiment (AMPERE), Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN), and SuperMAG
database. This will help addressing fundamental questions of geospace research
that have eluded conclusive explanation so far. Several electrodynamic variables
will be self-consistently analyzed globally in both polar regions via the
extensive assimilation of observational data.

This study will contribute significantly to the research and development
activities at the NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC) where a new
generation of AMIE mapping of interhemispheric high-latitude electrodynamics may
become part of the services provided by SWPC to the U.S. Government agencies
that address negative effects of space weather on the nationwide ground- and
space-based technological systems. The updated AMIE will also become a common
platform for active collaboration among national and international space
scientists who study the global transfer of solar wind energy and momentum into
the Earth's magnetosphere, ionosphere, and thermosphere. At last, this
interesting and important scientific research provides an ideal opportunity for
educational experience and training for a graduate student through direct
involvement in the study.