* 1443948
* Mathematical Sciences Program at SACNAS, October 15-18, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Ricardo Cortez, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2015
* USD 34,884.00

This project will make possible the participation of ten students and twenty
junior faculty and postdoctoral researchers at the annual conference of the
Society for Advancement of Chicanos &amp; Native Americans in Science (SACNAS)
that will take place on October 15 - 18, 2014 in Los Angeles, CA. The
postdoctoral researchers and faculty participants will play two roles: they will
be speakers in scientific sessions during the conference and they will be active
mentors to undergraduate and graduate students attending the conference. The
SACNAS conference attracts well over 3,000 scientists and students, mostly from
underrepresented groups, to experience scientific symposia, student
presentations, and a comprehensive collection of mentoring and professional
development sessions. The mission of SACNAS is to foster the success of
Chicano/Latino and Native American scientists to attain advanced degrees,
careers, and positions of leadership in science. The mathematics presence at
SACNAS is about 300 strong, making it one of the largest gatherings of minority
mathematics students and professionals in the country. This annual conference
inspires minority students to go on to graduate school and eventually become
influential mathematicians and scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The titles of
the sessions to be supported include Mathematical Applications in Physiology,
Combinatorial Algebraic Geometry, The Discrete Side of Mathematics, Problems in
Algebra and Diophantine Equations, Advancing the Next Generation Towards Full
Representation in STEM, Current Research Trends in Mathematics Education, Young
Latinas in Math and Computer Science, Beauty and the Beast---Our Real Life
Relationship with Mathematics, New Discoveries in Public Health and Life
Sciences through Statistics, and Applications of Mathematics in Biology. While
the presentations will be accessible to students, they focus on recent findings
in these areas including publications co-authored by undergraduate students. The
goals of the talks are to present current research by active investigators that
can serve as dissertation topics, to promote research in the mathematical
sciences among groups traditionally underrepresented in mathematics, and to
expand the network of mentors in mathematics.