* 1443267
* Collaborative Research: Using Stable Isotopes to Constrain the Atmospheric Carbon Monoxide Budget over the Last 20,000 Years
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Vasilii Petrenko, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 120,000.00

Mak/1443482&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compare current atmospheric
conditions with those of the remote past prior to human influence. This is
important in order to understand the impact of human activities on Earth's
atmosphere, and to determine the stability of the composition of the atmosphere
in the past. How humans have impacted Earth?s atmospheric composition is
important for developing accurate predictions of future global atmospheric
conditions. In addition to training students, the investigators will support
continuing education of high school science teachers on Long Island through
specifically tailored, interactive seminars on various topics in earth science,
atmospheric sciences, physics and biology. A pilot program at Mount Sinai School
District, near Stony Brook University will be the first implementation of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to reconstruct historical
variations in the sources of atmospheric carbon monoxide (CO) from measurements
of the concentration and stable isotopic abundance of carbon monoxide ([CO],
13CO and C18O) in the South Pole Ice Core, which is being drilled in 2014-2016.
The goal is to strategically sample and reconstruct the relative variations in
CO source strengths over the past 20,000 years. These will be the first
measurements to extend the CO record beyond 650 years before present, back to
the last glacial maximum. Both atmospheric chemical processes and variations in
CO sources can impact the CO budget, and variations in the CO budget are useful
in identifying and quantifying chemistry-climate interactions.