* 1443232
* Using Electrical Conductance Measurements to Develop the South Pole Ice Core Chronology
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Edwin Waddington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Ice cores record detailed histories of past climate variations. The South Pole
ice core will allow investigation of atmospheric trace gases and fill an
important gap in understanding the pattern of climate variability across
Antarctica. An accurate timescale that assigns an age to the ice at each depth
in the core is essential to interpretation of the ice-core records. This work
will use electrical methods to identify volcanic eruptions throughout the past
~40,000 years in the core by detecting the enhanced electrical conductance in
those layers due to volcanic impurities in the ice. These eruptions will be
pattern-matched to other cores across Antarctica, synchronizing the timing of
climate variations among cores and allowing the precise timescales developed for
other Antarctic ice cores to be transferred to the South Pole ice core. The
well-dated records of volcanic forcing will be combined with records of
atmospheric gases, stable water-isotopes, and aerosols to better understand the
large natural climate variations of the past 40,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The electrical conductance method and dielectric profiling
measurements will be made along the length of each section of the South Pole ice
core at the National Ice Core Lab. These measurements will help to establish a
timescale for the core. Electrical measurements will provide a continuous record
of volcanic events for the entire core including through the brittle ice
(550-1250m representing ~10,000-20,000 year-old ice) where the core quality and
thin annual layers may prevent continuous melt analysis and cause discrete
measurements to miss volcanic events. The electrical measurements also produce a
2-D image of the electrical layering on a longitudinal cut surface of each core.
These data will be used to identify any irregular or absent layering that would
indicate a stratigraphic disturbance in the core. A robust chronology is
essential to interpretation of the paleoclimate records from the South Pole ice
core. The investigators will engage teachers through talks and webinars with the
National Science Teachers Association and will share information with the public
at events such as Polar Science Weekend at the Pacific Science Center. Results
will be disseminated through publications and conference presentations and the
data will be archived and publicly available.