* 1443054
* CIF21 DIBBs: Middleware and High Performance Analytics Libraries for Scalable Data Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Geoffrey Fox, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 5,283,170.00

Many scientific problems depend on the ability to analyze and compute on large
amounts of data. This analysis often does not scale well; its effectiveness is
hampered by the increasing volume, variety and rate of change (velocity) of big
data. This project will design, develop and implement building blocks that
enable a fundamental improvement in the ability to support data intensive
analysis on a broad range of cyberinfrastructure, including that supported by
NSF for the scientific community. The project will integrate features of
traditional high-performance computing, such as scientific libraries,
communication and resource management middleware, with the rich set of
capabilities found in the commercial Big Data ecosystem. The latter includes
many important software systems such as Hadoop, available from the Apache open
source community. A collaboration between university teams at Arizona, Emory,
Indiana (lead), Kansas, Rutgers, Virginia Tech, and Utah provides the broad
expertise needed to design and successfully execute the project. The project
will engage scientists and educators with annual workshops and activities at
discipline-specific meetings, both to gather requirements for and feedback on
its software. It will include under-represented communities with summer
experiences, and will develop curriculum modules that include demonstrations
built as 'Data Analytics as a Service.'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
design and implement a software Middleware for Data-Intensive Analytics and
Science (MIDAS) that will enable scalable applications with the performance of
HPC (High Performance Computing) and the rich functionality of the commodity
Apache Big Data Stack. Further, this project will design and implement a set of
cross-cutting high-performance data-analysis libraries; SPIDAL (Scalable
Parallel Interoperable Data Analytics Library) will support new programming and
execution models for data-intensive analysis in a wide range of science and
engineering applications. The project addresses major data challenges in seven
different communities: Biomolecular Simulations, Network and Computational
Social Science, Epidemiology, Computer Vision, Spatial Geographical Information
Systems, Remote Sensing for Polar Science, and Pathology Informatics. The
project libraries will have the same beneficial impact on data analytics that
scientific libraries such as PETSc, MPI and ScaLAPACK have had for supercomputer
simulations. These libraries will be implemented to be scalable and
interoperable across a range of computing systems including clouds, clusters and
supercomputers.