* 1443356
* Collaborative Research: Grounding Line Dynamics: Crary Ice Rise Revisited
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Michelle Koutnik, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 430,019.00

Recent observations and model results suggest that collapse of the Amundsen Sea
sector of West Antarctica may already be underway. However, the timeline of
collapse and the effects of ongoing climatic and oceanographic changes are key
unanswered questions. Complete disintegration of the ice sheet would raise
global sea level by more than 3 m, which would have significant societal
impacts. Improved understanding of the controls on ice-sheet evolution is needed
to make better predictions of ice-sheet behavior. Results from numerical models
show that buttressing from surrounding ice shelves and/or from small-scale
grounded ice rises should act to slow the retreat and discharge of ice from the
interior ice sheet. However, there are very few field observations with which to
develop and validate models. Field observations conducted in the early 1980s on
Crary Ice Rise in the Ross Sea Embayment are a notable exception. This project
will revisit Crary Ice Rise with new tools to make a suite of measurements
designed to address questions about how the ice rise affects ice discharge from
the Ross Sea sector of West Antarctica. The team will include a graduate and
undergraduate student, and will participate in a range of outreach activities.

New tools including radar, seismic, and GPS instruments will be used to conduct
targeted geophysical measurements both on Crary Ice Rise and across its
grounding line. The project will use these new measurements, together with
available ancillary data to inform a numerical model of grounding line dynamics.
The model and measurements will be used to address the (1) How has the ice rise
evolved over timescales ranging from: the past few decades; the past millennia
after freeze-on; and through the deglaciation? (2) What history of ice dynamics
is preserved in the radar-detected internal stratigraphy? (3) What dynamical
effect does the presence/absence of the ice rise have on discharge of the Ross
Ice Streams today? (4) How is it contributing to the slow-down of the proximal
Whillans and Mercer ice streams? (5) What dynamical response will the ice rise
have under future environmental change?