* 1443923
* Collaborative Research: Measurement-Augmented Spectrum Databases for White Spaces
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sumit Roy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2018
* USD 345,000.00

The recent wave of radio spectrum deregulation encourages shared use of
underutilized spectrum (so-called 'white spaces') where licensed users (primary)
co-exist with unlicensed or lightly licensed users (secondary). Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) has recommended use of online spectrum databases
to ensure that primary communications are protected against interference coming
from secondary communications. However, these databases provide notoriously poor
estimates of whether a primary communication is active as they are based on
empirically driven radio propagation modeling. This accuracy issue ultimately
weakens the business case for white space networks, particularly in urban
regions where the demand of both primary and secondary use is high.

The core intellectual merit of the project is a fundamental rethinking of the
current approach to spectrum databases. The project develops a functional system
architecture that improves the spectrum database estimates by integrating the
current modeling-based approach with distributed spectrum measurement data. The
project delivers the key components necessary to realize such measurement-
augmented database system: (i) open access spectrum observatory tool backed by
models and databases, (ii) a spatial statistics-based approach to integrate
modeling and measurement data, (iii) practical methods to collect large-scale,
distributed spectrum measurement data to feed into the database.

Success in the project will revitalize the interest in white spaces among
commercial operators and also will help FCC in future spectrum policy
formulation. The open access spectrum observatory tool will provide researchers
with significant data sets and models. The project also plans technology
transfer and cross-disciplinary educational efforts in wireless systems.