* 1443491
* Collaborative Research: Contribution of Prydz Bay Shelf Water to Antarctic Bottom Water Formation
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Ruoying He, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2021
* USD 301,880.00

Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) formation is a key component in setting the global
thermohaline (overturning) circulation. Recent studies infer a reduction of the
AABW component from reduced volume of AABW entering global deep ocean basins
around the Antarctic continent. It is important to obtain better estimates of
AABW production rate in its source areas, and to investigate whether the global
overturning circulation is slowing-down. The project will continue fieldwork
with CTD/LADCP surveys including 2 yearly repeat sections, mooring recoveries
and deployments. Seasonal-interannual variability of CDW intrusion, dense shelf
water accumulation and export as well as overflow from the Prydz Bay shelf will
also be observed. The Prydz Bay- Amery Ice Shelf region has been suggested as a
key AABW production site. USAP access to this remote region of the Antarctic
continent is challenging. The project will involve fieldwork to be carried out
with Danish and Chinese collaboration aboard the Chinese research vessel, Xue
Long.

A high-resolution regional ocean-sea ice coupled model will be developed to
allow time and space continuous three-dimensional ocean state estimation. Both
in-situ and remote sensing observations along with the modeling simulation
results will be used to investigate (i) the local atmosphere-ocean-sea ice
interaction and shelf processes that produce dense shelf water and (ii) the
dynamic processes that control the shelf water export.