* 1443507
* Scientific Studies from a Network of Sustainable, Robotic Observatories Across the Antarctic Ice-shelf:  A New Approach to Polar Research
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Andrew Gerrard, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,948,388.00

The near-Earth environment (Geospace) is mostly controlled by the Earth's
magnetic field, which provides the Earth with protection from phenomena of
electromagnetic nature, such as solar flares, coronal mass ejection, etc.; some
of these events could be very dangerous and affect and even damage satellites,
their instrumentation, and their communication with ground centers. However, the
Earth's magnetic field has some specific regions where it is exposed to all
these impacts from outer space. The polar caps are specific areas around the
geomagnetic poles where geomagnetic field lines are open and directly interact
with the interplanetary magnetic field (that is an extended magnetic field of
the Sun). During strong geomagnetic disturbances, the polar caps increase their
size - sometimes dramatically. Monitoring the Earth's polar regions, geomagnetic
disturbances, currents that flow over these regions, polar cap boundary
dynamics, etc., are important issues of space weather studies. Hundreds of
magnetometers observe the Northern hemisphere polar cap and auroral zone on a
regular basis. However, the Southern hemisphere has many fewer observatories.
Having a large network of magnetometers for monitoring the geomagnetic
environment is vital for understanding space weather-related events and their
impact on environments, since the number of satellites in Geospace continues to
grow very fast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major problems in developing an
observational infrastructure in Antarctica is the enormous difficulty for people
to reach the region and to stay there. This factor makes any scientific project
extremely expensive. Therefore, the development of Automatic Geophysical
Observatories (AGO) that can function autonomously with minimal human
interaction and maintenance provides a unique opportunity that can solve the
problem. The arrangement of instrumentation produces data with a high potential
to provide key advances in the field and that are highly demanded by scientific
community. The science questions to be addressed in this research effort are:
(1) Is the synoptic fluxgate magnetometer determination of the open-closed
magnetic field boundary (OCB) valid; (2) What are impacts of solar wind
structures on the OCB morphology; (3) How synoptic structures of GPS
scintillations are relevant to OCB dynamics, and (4) Could the Iridium's Short
Burst Data system be used to transmit fluxgate magnetometer data at a 1-hour
time lag. The research is a cost-effective investment that will advance the
state of knowledge of the Geospace domain and provide scientific community with
vital observations.