* 1443525
* High Resolution Heterogeneity at the Base of Whillans Ice Stream and its Control on Ice Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 219,289.00

This project evaluates the role that water and rock/ice properties at the base
of a fast moving glacier, or ice stream, play in controlling its motion. In
Antarctica, where surface melting is limited, the speed of ice flow through the
grounding zone (where ice on land detaches, and begins to float on ocean water)
controls the rate at which glaciers contribute to sea level rise. The velocity
of the ice stream is strongly dependent on resistance from the bed, so
understanding the processes that control resistance to flow is critical in
predicting ice sheet mass balance. In fact, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) recognized this and stated in their 4th assessment report
that reliable predictions of future global sea-level rise require improved
understanding of ice sheet dynamics, which include basal controls on fast ice
motion. Drilling to obtain direct observations of basal properties over
substantial regions is prohibitively expensive. This project uses passive source
seismology to "listen to" and analyze sounds generated by water flow and/or
sticky spots at the ice/bed interface to evaluate the role that basal shear
stress plays in ice flow dynamics. Because polar science is captivating to both
scientists and the general public, it serves as an excellent topic to engage
students at all levels with important scientific concepts and processes. In
conjunction with this research, polar science educational materials will be
developed to be used by students spanning middle school through the University
level. Starting in summer 2015, a new polar science class for high school
students in the California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science
(COSMOS) will be offered at the University of California-Santa Cruz. This
curriculum will be shared with the MESA Schools Program, a Santa Cruz and
Monterey County organization that runs after-school science clubs led by
teachers at several local middle and high schools with largely minority and
underprivileged populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal extends the
period of borehole and surface geophysical monitoring of the Whillians Ice
Stream (WIS) established under a previous award for an additional 2 years. Data
from the WIS network demonstrated that basal heterogeneity, revealed by
microseismicity, shows variation over scales of 100's of meters. An extended
observation period will allow detailed seismic characterization of ice sheet bed
properties over a crucial length scale comparable to the local ice thickness.
Due to the fast ice velocity (&gt;300 m/year), a single instrumented location
will move approximately 1 km during the extended 3 year operational period,
allowing continuous monitoring of seismic emissions as the ice travels over
sticky spots and other features in the bed (e.g., patches of till or subglacial
water bodies). Observations over ~1km length scales will help to bridge a
crucial gap in current observations of basal conditions between extremely local
observations made in boreholes and remote observations of basal shear stress
inferred from inversions of ice surface velocity data.