* 1443338
* Earth's Electromagnetic Environment: Advancing Recent Discoveries in Auroral Plasma Radio Emission Research
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* James LaBelle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Above 70 miles over the ground, the near-Earth's environment (Geospace) is
mostly organized by the Earth's magnetic field, which at a greater distance
interacts with the solar wind (charged particles, plasma, flowing with a great
speed from the Sun) and interplanetary magnetic field (extended Sun's magnetic
field). Geospace is mostly populated by plasma that originates either in the
atmosphere or in the solar wind. Interaction of the these two major players -
magnetic fields and charged particles - takes various forms and produces many
interesting electromagnetic phenomena such as aurorae (Northern and Southern
lights), plasma waves, natural electromagnetic radiation and currents, etc.,
especially in the polar areas where this interaction is most intense and reaches
close to the Earth. Studying these phenomena is important since they affect
satellite instrumentation and communication, as well as important technologies
such as GPS (Global Positioning System).

A research effort previously funded by NSF and performed in Antarctica within
the last few years made new discoveries related to natural electromagnetic
phenomena in the polar areas. These discoveries are: (1) correlations between
powerful auroral kilometric radiation observed at ~200,000 km above the Earth
and analogous signals observed simultaneously at the South Pole Station; (2)
discovery of radiation at a high harmonic of the electron cyclotron frequency
(an important frequency at which charged particles oscillate in a magnetic
field); and (3) discovery of a new type of radio emission of auroral origin.
These phenomena are best observed, and in most cases can only be observed, using
instruments deployed in Antarctica where a manmade electromagnetic interference
is minimal.

The new research built on these discoveries will significantly advance our
knowledge of the Earth's natural electromagnetic environment, which in turn has
significant impact on the broader Geospace environment and space weather because
of how interconnected these systems are. Furthermore, the new discoveries probed
by this research represent outstanding questions of Geospace research that have
escaped scientists' attention so far. The research is a cost-effective
investment that will advance the state of knowledge of the Geospace domain and
provide students at Dartmouth College with an opportunity to obtain good skills
and experience with experimental measurements and data analysis.