* 1443349
* I-Corps:  Versatile Statistical Platform to Analyze, Diagnose, Track, and Treat Neurological Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Elizabeth Torres, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal focuses on a new statistical platform paired with wearable sensing
technology that objectively and automatically assesses real-time changes in the
intentional and spontaneous aspects of physical motions embedded in natural
human behaviors. The proposed activity will also help the team to better
customize the behavioral motion data collection and analysis to address
different needs of potential customers. Such customization can lead to more
insight on various scientific questions involving the interconnections between
brain and body functions during naturalistic behaviors, behavioral and
pharmacological interventions, as well as in sports and performance
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity (Statistical Platform for
Individualized Behavioral Analyses, SPIBA) addresses two fundamental gaps in
current analytical techniques for motion capture data: (1) The lack of real time
capability within physiologically relevant time scales and frequencies; (2) The
reliance on expected values from population averages rather than from the
individual's inherent physiological features. SPIBA does not assume the
Theoretical Gaussian distribution or homogeneous variance of motion parameters.
Instead, the underlying probability distributions of various motion trajectory
parameters along with their real time shifts in noise to signal ratios are
estimated. These estimates and their rates of change are unique to the
individual and therefore amenable to develop treatment effectiveness metrics for
truly personalized medicine.