* 1443226
* A Plio-Pleistocene record of environment and climate from the Salar de Atacama basin based on recently recovered sediment cores
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Lee Ann Munk, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 05/31/2015
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract (nontechnical)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Salar de Atacama in northern
Chile hosts a massive, geologically young salt deposit which contains one of the
world's most economically important lithium-rich brines. This brine is currently
the source of the majority of the world's lithium supply. The evolution of the
salt and brine deposits is controlled by the tectonics of the Salar de Atacama
basin and the extreme arid climate of the Atacama Desert. Climate records for
these types of environments give important clues to understanding modern and
future climate change patterns of the Earth. The Salar de Atacama is one of the
most important hyper-arid environments on the planet and therefore is the focus
of many climate proxy investigations. An unprecedented opportunity to extend the
climate record back to 4 million years exists through sediment cores that have
recently been recovered by the lithium mining industry from the south and
transitional margin of the Salar de Atacama basin. This project will focus on
characterizing the depositional environments and climate proxies preserved in
these cores and on placing these records in a robust chronological framework. As
such, radioisotopic dating of the deposits is important in determining
environmental change at the margin of Salar de Atacama over the last 4 million
years. This study will provide a framework relevant to future research questions
related to the origin of the lithium-rich brine, life in extreme environments,
and climatic change in hyper-arid environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
(technical)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to develop a
paleoenvironmental record derived from recently recovered strata in drill cores
from the southern margin of the Salar de Atacama, Chile. The focus of this work
will be to develop a robust chronological framework within which to interpret
the complex and high- resolution stratigraphic record of environmental dynamics.
Strong gradients in tectonic processes, topography, and climate of this region
give rise to one of largest active salt depo-centers in the world. This area is
of considerable scientific interest because it is one of the most extreme
environments on the planet. The new drill cores span a modern environmental
gradient including alluvial environments, groundwater discharge marshes,
sulfate-rich playas, saline lagoons, and a halite nucleus with shallow
subsurface brine. Some of the cores contain strata that may be as old as 3.5?4.0
Ma. Many of these cores exhibit obvious and astounding shifts in
paleoenvironment. Therefore, this study will provide the most detailed and
comprehensive record of climate and environment from the Salar de Atacama. The
geologic materials from the cores are sensitive to environmental conditions and
therefore need to be sampled and analyzed within an appropriate timeframe. The
cores will be described, and key intervals of ignimbrite and ash, carbonates,
halite, mud and other sediments will be sub-sampled for the geochronologic work
and for elemental and isotopic proxy investigations. Dating techniques will
include a combination of 40Ar/39Ar, 14C and U-Th depending on the sediment and
volcanic deposit types. Stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen in carbonate will
be measured to constrain changes in climatic conditions. Lithium concentrations
in salts will be measured to further understand the dynamic water balance in the
system through time. Hydrogeological characteristics of the materials will aid
in understanding the pathways of fluids in the subsurface, and inform climatic
interpretation of shifting environments in this hydrologically complex system.