* 1443958
* EARS: Signal processing techniques for enhancing spectrum access in wireless networks using coupled antenna arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nader Behdad, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 415,410.00

Proposal number: 1443958&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Title: EARS: Signal
processing techniques for enhancing spectrum access in wireless networks using
coupled antenna arrays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current spectrum crunch calls
for innovative approaches to utilize the available frequency spectrum more
efficiently. This proposal aims at addressing this issue by introducing a new
class of antenna arrays called coupled antenna arrays (CAAs). The unique nature
of the CAAs allows for placing the antenna elements closely resulting in very
small arrays that are suitable for mobile radios. The performance of CAAs should
be assessed with proper models and analysis tools. Also, utilizing CAAs for
different applications requires proper signal processing techniques. The
proposed research is expected to result in achieving performance levels and
spectrum efficiencies that far exceed the current wireless technologies. In the
short term, the expected research findings will lead to the development of
multi-antenna receivers with offered spectral efficiencies that cannot be easily
achieved using any other existing technology today. This will profoundly impact
the efficiency of spectrum utilization of future wireless systems. In the long
term, these concepts are expected to revolutionize how we solve problems in a
variety of areas ranging from wireless communications and signal processing to
antenna theory and radar systems. In addition to these positive societal,
economic, and technological impacts, the proposed work integrates research and
education through a carefully planned series of activities. These will
facilitate the engineering-oriented professional development of K-12 science
teachers; integrate research activities into the teaching of science/engineering
at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels; improve recruitment and
retention of under-represented minority and female students in research
activities at the pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate levels; and result in
development and broad dissemination of research based educational materials
through both traditional and non-traditional means of
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the
proposed interdisciplinary research project is to use recent advances in the
areas of multi-antenna wireless communication systems and signal processing and
coupled antenna array (CAA) technology to fundamentally enhance the efficiency
of spectrum utilization of mobile wireless communication systems. Specifically,
the PI and the Co-PI plan to develop a new class of electrically-small CAAs and
investigate their applications for: 1) Spectrum co-existence and capacity
enhancement of wireless systems operating in strong interference environments;
2) Capacity-enhancement of multi-input multi-output (MIMO) communications
systems; and 3) Capacity enhancement and complexity reduction of multi-cell
cooperative networks. The proposed work bridges the gaps between two
traditionally separate areas of research to develop viable solutions for
enhancing the spectrum efficiency of future wireless systems. This work
particularly emphasizes on small mobile wireless devices that cannot accommodate
large antenna arrays, and work at frequencies below 5.0 GHz where the
propagation conditions are most suitable for achieving wide-area coverage that
many mobile wireless systems rely on. This project involves two fundamental
thrusts of investigation that are expected to significantly advance our
knowledge and understanding in the fields of applied electromagnetics/antenna
design and communications/signal processing. The first involves developing a new
class of CAAs that offer significantly higher directivities and signal-to-noise
ratios over conventional antenna arrays, particularly when the overall
electrical dimensions of the array are small. Investigating the architectures,
performance, capabilities, and limitations of the proposed CAA concept is
expected to fundamentally advance our knowledge and understanding of antenna
array theory and design. The second thrust involves investigating the new
communications applications that the proposed CAAs enable. CAAs introduce
fundamentally new capabilities to small-aperture, mobile wireless devices that
are not available using any other existing technology today. These capabilities
will be exploited to increase the frequency as well as directional selectivity
of small antenna arrays, enhance the capacity of MIMO wireless systems, mitigate
the adverse effects of interference in congested spectral environments, and
reduce the complexity and increase the spectral efficiency of cellular networks.