* 1443814
* Optimized and Modular Architectures for Grid Integration of a Cluster of Hydrokinetic Energy Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Maryam Saeedifard, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 324,793.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to advance hydrokinetic energy generation by developing methods to
increase the power density and minimize the installation and maintenance costs
of the generator, power conditioning system, and interface to the utility grid.
The approach is to (i) establish the fundamental tradeoff between cost and power
delivered of several alternative hydro-generation systems, (ii) explore
alternative machine/converter architectures that reduce the installation and
maintenance cost/power delivered, and (iii) develop modular, scalable, and
efficient power conditioning and interface systems with high power
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project develops a
generalized modular and scalable power conversion structure for further
expansion and grid integration of hydrokinetic energy resources. It also
establishes a rigorous derivation of the design tradeoffs between several
competing technologies that will allow the community to make informed decisions
on the architecture that is best suited for a given
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The developed technology will
help to increase the large-scale installation of hydrokinetic energy conversion
systems and will contribute to the growth of the renewable energy sector. The
results and outcomes of the proposed research will provide useful design
guidance to reduce the cost of grid integration of hydrokinetic energy
resources. The educational program will help to educate and equip the next
generation of power engineers with the knowledge and skills required to address
tomorrow?s energy challenges. This will contribute to local and national green
businesses and industries.