* 1443490
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mobility, Political Complexity And Community Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2015
* William Honeychurch, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2015
* USD 25,200.00

For many, nomads of the Eurasian steppe are "stoic" figures that are the product
of a long life lived in isolation, always moving as the natural environment
dictates. The distinctiveness of the pastoral nomadic historical and
archaeological records, however, allows researchers to analyze general questions
of political organization in relation to a wider range of variables. It is
important from a comparative perspective to know how political strategies play
out differently over conditions of rapid mobility, extensive territories, and
low population density. The main questions addressed by this research project
are how do steppe polities provide examples of alternative trajectories for
development of political systems and what does this tell about the ways in which
human societies do or do not adopt more complex forms of organization?
Accordingly, the anthropological questions addressed by studies of steppe
society need not be "pastoral" questions per se, but general questions on human
organization that take into consideration individual and group
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project raises the question of what does
community scale political development look like during the earliest stages of
statehood among eastern steppe nomads? To address this question, the research
will explore the "bottom-up" processes at play in the local acceptance,
configuration, and enactment of political change that led up to the first
regional scale polity of Mongolia - the Xiongnu state. Working in north central
Mongolia, the project will use survey and excavation data to analyze exchange
relationships as revealed by neutron activation analysis of local and nonlocal
ceramics and trends in settlement patterns prior to and during the Xiongnu
Period. The distinctiveness of the pastoral nomadic lifeway presents a
fascinating case study for the transformation of political systems and holds
promising lessons for other parts of the world including Mesopotamia, East
Africa, and the Central Andes. As such, the current study will shed light on the
capacity for political action by common households within a nomadic community
and then ask how this perspective informs anthropological understanding of
alternative trajectories for socio-political complexity.