* 1443175
* Advancing cyberinfrastructure for accessing ecological data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Robert Waide, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,859.00

New informatics tools and resources have the potential to advance our
understanding of how biological processes interact over multiple spatial and
temporal scales to structure natural communities and ecosystems. This project
will enhance the reuse and integration of long-term ecological data by
increasing its accessibility. These improvements could stimulate data synthesis
and raise new lines of inquiry by creating a well-documented and readily
accessible repository for long-term environmental data.

Two complementary activities will stabilize access to long-term ecological
research data through the Provenance Aware Synthesis Tracking Architecture
(PASTA) data repository. Data packages (data plus metadata) uploaded into PASTA
meet high standards of quality and integrity consistent with community
standards. The first task will be to identify a scalable performance-based
metadata search engine and deploy it into PASTA as a replacement for the
currently-used but aging Metacat repository. Once a search engine method is
selected, examples will be researched and tested for use with content stored in
the Ecological Metadata Language and for use within the PASTA framework. Final
replacement of Metacat will require a transition strategy to minimize downtime
of PASTA. Both performance and stability will increase by removing older
technology that results in search 'bottlenecks' and replacing it with faster
search algorithms that have been tested through extensive community use. The
second task is to complete testing of a new PASTA Member Node for use with
DataONE. This new node will improve usability of long-term ecological data by
disseminating data products through a global data network. Once a suitable
metadata search engine is identified, the PASTA Member Node will be synchronized
with DataONE infrastructure as new data packages are uploaded into PASTA. Once
synchronization occurs, the DataONE Coordinating Node metadata archive will be
tested to ensure all available data packages, including metadata and data, have
been registered in DataONE. This project will increase opportunities for
synthesis and will improve understanding of natural ecosystems by improving
access to high quality, long-term data. Data will be readily accessible by
researchers from a broad range of disciplines, educators, students, policy
makers, and managers.