* 1443341
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Upstream Ice and Firn Dynamics affecting the South Pole Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Robert Hawley, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 619,086.00

Ice-core records are critical to understanding past climate variations. An
Antarctic ice core currently being drilled at the South Pole will allow detailed
investigation of atmospheric gases and fill an important gap in understanding
the pattern of climate variability across Antarctica. Critical to the
interpretation of any ice core are: 1) accurate chronologies for both the ice
and the trapped gas and 2) demonstration that records from the ice core reliably
reflect climate. The proposed research will improve the ice and gas chronologies
by making measurements of snow compaction in the upstream catchment in order to
constrain age models of the ice. These measurements will be a key data set
needed for better understanding and predicting time-varying conditions in the
upper part of the ice sheet. The research team will measure the modern spatial
gradients in accumulation rate, surface temperature, and water stable isotopes
from shallow ice cores in the upstream catchment in order to determine the
climate history from the ice-core record. The new ice-flow measurements will
make it possible to define the path of ice from upstream to the South Pole ice-
core drill site to assess spatial gradients in snowfall and to infer histories
of snowfall from internal layers within the ice sheet. The project will be led
by an early-career scientist, provide broad training to graduate students, and
engage in public outreach on polar science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice-core
records of stable isotopes, aerosol-born particles, and atmospheric gases are
critical to understanding past climate variations. The proposed research will
improve the ice and gas chronologies in the South Pole ice core by making in
situ measurements of firn compaction in the upstream catchment to constrain
models of the gas-age ice-age difference. The firn measurements will be a key
data set needed to form a constitutive relationship for firn, and will drive
better understanding and prediction of transient firn evolution. The research
team will measure the modern gradients in accumulation rate, surface
temperature, and water stable isotopes in the upstream catchment to separate
spatial (advection) variations from temporal (climate) variations in the ice-
core records. The ice-flow measurements will define the flowline upstream of the
drill site, assess spatial gradients in accumulation, and infer histories of
accumulation from radar-observed internal layers. Results will directly enhance
interpretation of South Pole ice-core records, and also advance understanding of
firn densification and drive next-generation firn models.