* 1444143
* Collaborative Research: US-KU-QA-AE Planning Visit - The Impact of American Higher Education in the Gulf Arab States
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Natalie Koch, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 01/31/2016
* USD 10,899.00

This CNIC project supports a planning visit to three countries in the Arabian
Gulf by two US Investigators, Dr. Natalie Koch of Syracuse University in New
York and Dr. Neha Vora of Lafayette College in Pennsylvania. Their planning
visit will help develop a multi-year project that explores the impacts of
American-style universities in three key monarchies in the Arab Gulf: Kuwait,
Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), engaging local partners at the
University of Kuwait, Texas A&amp;M University-Qatar, and the American
University of Sharjah in the UAE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last two
decades, most states of the GCC (Gulf Cooperative Council) have established
programs to move away from petroleum reliance through the development of
"knowledge-based" economies. These countries are investing heavily in higher
education, and have deliberately chosen to adopt US models of higher education,
encouraging the establishment of branch campuses of top American universities,
seeking out US university partnerships, and even restructured national
universities to include American-style mission statements, student citizenship
models and curricular offerings. Adopting a three-country comparative approach,
the investigators will use targeted case studies and draw upon the complementary
insights of their two disciplines, cultural anthropology and political
geography, to explore how key actors negotiate different Gulf and American value
systems in developing and administering pedagogy (faculty and administrators)
and in the classroom and postgraduate careers (students). This CNIC grant will
enable the PIs and their local collaborators to design a mixed-methods project
to be submitted to the NSF core programs in Cultural Anthropology and Geography
and Spatial Sciences. This CNIC project will help develop a valuable
collaboration between American and Gulf-based scholars to evaluate how the
ostensibly conflicting value systems between liberal education and non-liberal
nationalization policies operate on the ground and assessing the impact of
recent higher education transformations on Gulf countries. Their results will
help inform academic and policy debates in the U.S. regarding the development of
branch campuses and many other types of collaborations in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been minimal ethnographic research to
date on the impacts US-modeled institutions are having in their host countries
beyond the campus walls. The study resulting from this planning visit grant will
develop a more nuanced understanding of the broader impacts of American higher
education in the Gulf Arab states in terms of citizenship practices, gender
roles, and post-oil economic futures. The findings promise to be highly relevant
to U.S. policy-makers and U.S. university administrators, as they navigate the
politics and economics of developing international branch campuses and foreign
university partnerships. In addition to laying the groundwork for an innovative
empirical and theoretical research agenda and promoting the early-career
development of the PIs, this planning grant will help develop a highly relevant
practical agenda that can speak to a broad audience within both academic and
policy circles.