* 1444493
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Detection and Presentation of Community and Global Event Content from Social Media Sources
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Mor Naaman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 113,512.00

Social media sites such as Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and Flickr host an ever-
increasing amount of user content captured or produced in association with real-
world events, from presidential inaugurations to community-specific events.
Unfortunately, the existing tools to find, organize, and present the social
media content associated with events are extremely limited. This project will
address critical end-to-end information processing and presentation methods that
will transform public access to real-world event information from social media
sources. In particular, this work will increase the digital presence of
currently underrepresented communities and address their information needs: for
these communities, events are often not covered by mainstream media, but are
increasingly available on social media services. As a distinctive
characteristic, the project will draw on several research areas, namely,
information retrieval and databases, human-computer interaction, and social
media, thus contributing to educating multidisciplinary students. The PIs will
continue to include undergraduate students and students from underrepresented
populations in the research.

The project will result in new data analysis and visualization techniques for
event-based information tasks, addressing human and computational factors in
social media systems to handle vast collections of noisy, user-contributed
content of widely varying structure and quality. To enable effective browsing,
search, and presentation of event content, this work will use the wealth of
social media documents to address several fundamental problems. The first
problem is the detection of events in repositories of social media content. Such
content, increasingly posted by users in real time, is noisy and highly
heterogeneous, but can help in the early detection of a wide range of events of
all sizes. The second problem is the comprehensive identification of content
related to detected or known events, currently fragmented across social media
sites and often hard to find and collect. The third problem is content
presentation, which requires the development of novel presentation and
visualization techniques for social media event content. The amount of content
available even for a single event can be overwhelming and hinder data
exploration and sense-making.

The project will create new tools that will transform the viewing experience of
the event information. These tools will allow users to create and share
personalized views of the event data as a story-telling practice. Finally, as a
main outcome, the data used in the research will be made available to other
researchers whenever possible. Moreover, another main outcome will be a publicly
available prototype system based on this research, designed to help connect
computing and information science challenges to the activities and natural
interests of a diverse set of users.