* 1444021
* EARS: Achieving Spectrum Efficient Broadcast Under Cross-Technology Interference
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Tian He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2017
* USD 464,985.00

Wireless technologies have percolated into people's daily life for personal
communication, mobile Internet surfing, global positioning, digital media
broadcasting, and smart home automation. These technologies are deployed in
environments ranging from well-controlled laboratories and residential houses to
highly dynamic urban surroundings. This work aims at improving a range of
wireless technologies so that information can be broadcast more reliably,
quickly and cost-efficiently in highly crowded WiFi, Bluetooth and LTE
environments. Research has shown that uncoordinated wireless coexistence in
overlapping channels leads to severe inefficiency in spectrum utilization.
Although a few coexistence designs have been done recently to deal with cross-
technology interference (CTI), those studies focus primarily on improving
spectrum utilization in unicast communication. Unlike in one-to-one unicast
communication, network topological features in one-to-many broadcast
communication significantly impact broadcast spectrum efficiency. With the
increasing demand for broadcast support, the field is facing an urgent need to
investigate broadcast spectrum efficiency in the context of wireless
coexistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project conducts a systematic cross-layer
study of broadcast under CTI, contributing novel designs across physical, data
link, and network layers. The research topics include: 1) conducting extensive
measurement studies to collect traces regarding cross-technology interference
patterns in a wide range of environments; 2) building synthetic models to
generalize instances of measure traces into a set of parameterized models that
precisely characterize features of cross-technology interference; 3) empirically
and theoretically modeling how uncontrolled CTI affects multiple wireless links
simultaneously and proposing mitigation methods through network topology
management; 4) delivering a spatial, temporal, and spectral CTI mapping device
that exposures CTI information as a service to surrounding wireless ISM devices,
so that these devices can seek white space opportunities in spatial, temporal
and spectral domains for effective broadcast, and 5) supporting cross-technology
broadcast by embedding side-channel information through cross-technology
modulation. The broader impact of this work is amplified by (i) improving
curriculum development with enhanced course projects; (ii) disseminating
research results through high-profile tutorials and open-source sites; (iii)
raising interest in technology among K-12 students and under-represented
minority groups through open houses; and (iv) supporting talented female and
minority PhD students to successfully accomplish their doctoral studies.