* 1444503
* An Integrated Genomic and Functional Analysis of the Plant Hypersensitive Response
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Brian Dilkes, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 3,121,102.00

Co-PIs Gurmukh (Guri) Johal (Purdue University) and Brian Dilkes (Purdue
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many diseases that can infect crop
plants, leading to lower yields and even crop loss. The ability of crop plants
to fight off diseases is therefore a very important agricultural trait. Farmers
can avoid some diseases with pesticides, or breeders can develop crop varieties
that resist diseases. Crops have the ability to fight off diseases by reacting
to the disease-causing microorganism with defensive mechanisms, known as the
plant hypersensitive response (HR). This refers to a process whereby an infected
cell dies before the infection can spread to other cells in the plant. Despite
its importance to maintain healthy crops, much remains unknown about the HR. In
this work, a multi-disciplinary approach involving a number of field and lab-
based techniques will be used to gain a better understanding of the HR in corn,
the most economically valuable crop in the US. The genes and processes involved
in controlling the HR will be identified and characterized. While this work will
be performed primarily in corn, it is likely that many features of the HR are
shared among different crops. As such this work will provide fundamental
insights into one of the most important ways plants defend themselves against
diseases, and the knowledge will be useful to develop improved crop plants by
making them more resistant to diseases. Outreach activities with the North
Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences will focus on educational activities on
genetics, plant breeding, biotechnology and associated societal implications and
will build on an existing collaboration with the museum that has developed
several instructional modules for middle, high school, home school and mature
students and their teachers. These continuing programs will be supported and
several new programs will be developed around DNA sequence analysis,
biotechnology and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work, a novel
genetic screen was used to identify loci, genes and pathways associated with
natural genetic variation that controlled HR. In this project, a multi-
disciplinary approach involving mutagenesis, field genetics, high-throughput
genomic and transcriptomic sequencing, metabolomics, bioinformatics, microscopy
and molecular biology will be used to gain an understanding of the HR from
molecular genetic, transcriptional, biochemical and histological perspectives.
Genes and pathways controlling the HR response will be identified and
characterized. The HR will be observed at cellular, transcriptional and
metabolic levels. The utility of a novel and potentially widely-applicable
approach for the identification and characterization of mutations conferring
quantitative phenotypes will be demonstrated. Public access to sequencing data
generated this project will be made possible through deposition at the Short
Read Archive (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra). Information on the position of genes
controlling the HR at the transcriptional level (expression Quantitative Trait
Loci ? eQTL) will be made available at MaizeGDB (maizegdb.org). Biological
materials will be disseminated via the Maize Genetics Coop and germplasm
descriptions will be included in MaizeGDB.