* 1444233
* RAPID: GPS Observations of Co- and Post-seismic Deformation in the Argentine Puna from the 1 Apr 2014, Mw 8.2, Pisagua, Chile, Earthquake Sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Robert Smalley, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2017
* USD 38,087.00

An unusual sequence of earthquakes began in the northern Chile subduction zone
on March 16, 2014 with a 10-day long swarm of earthquakes that migrated to the
north - a pattern similar to the swarm of earthquakes that presaged the 2011
magnitude 9.0 Tohoku Japan earthquake, which provoked concern in Chile because
this megathrust zone last failed in a magnitude 8.8 earthquake in 1877 and is
thought capable of producing a magnitude 9 earthquake again. So far, the largest
event in the sequence is the April 1, 2014 magnitude 8.2 Pisagua, Chile
earthquake. The ground deformation caused by this large earthquake will persist
long after the earthquake and decay over a period of years. Measurements of the
surface deformation during and after the event can provide important information
about the properties of the Earth in the region, improve understanding of
deformation processes, and aid in determining regions with a high likelihood of
producing large aftershocks. Large dense GPS networks installed by U.S., German,
French, Peruvian, and Chilean groups in Chile will record this deformation close
to the earthquake epicenter but significant deformation is expected farther away
in northwest Argentina. This rapid response project will install new GPS
networks and collect data from existing GPS stations in the Argentine Puna
Plateau to fully capture the ground motion associated with this event. These
data will contribute to understanding the physics and hazard potential of large
megathrust earthquakes in Chile and elsewhere, such as Cascadia, Alaska, and
Japan.

The April 1, 2014 Mw 8.2 Pisagua, Chile earthquake was the largest event in an
unusual sequence of earthquakes, which began in the northern Chile subduction
zone on March 16, 2014. Based on the USGS preliminary teleseismic and surface
wave inversion, slip occurred along a 250 km along-strike and about 150 km down-
dip section of the Chile megathrust that last failed in an M 8.8 earthquake in
1877. U.S., Chilean, Peruvian, German, and the French groups have built
relatively dense continuously operating GPS (CGPS) and survey mode GPS (SGPS)
station networks in this region, thus the near-field inter-, co- and post-
seismic transient signals will be well observed in northern Chile. However,
there will be significant co-seismic and post-seismic transient motion up to 700
km from the main event, incorporating nearly all of the Altiplano and at least
much of eastern Cordillera in Bolivia, and the Puna of northwestern Argentina.
Measuring the mid- and far-field co- and post-seismic signals in the Altiplano
and beyond will be critical to any geodynamic modeling effort. In rapid response
to the April 1, 2014 Mw 8.2 Pisagua, Chile earthquake, this project will install
4 new CGPS stations and retrieve data from 10 CGPS stations in the Argentine
Puna Plateau. Data will be made immediately available to the international earth
science community through the UNAVCO Facility Archive. These geodetic data could
be important in determining regions with a high likelihood of producing large
aftershocks and for hazard mitigation efforts because the largest aftershock (M
7.7 on April 3) was larger than expected, potentially indicating continued
unusual activity with the neighboring segments thought to retain a large slip
deficit.