* 1444195
* Collaborative Research: U.S.-Brazil Planning visit: Facilitating collaborative research on the Southern Brazilian Continental Shelf
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2015
* Clifton Buck, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2015
* USD 10,430.00

The southern Brazilian continental shelf is the site of important marine
fisheries, supporting economic resources for Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina.
Regional population growth is expected to result in continued development of
coastal areas along the shelf therefore prudent resource management requires a
comprehensive assessment of present day conditions. Changes in the flux and
sources of nutrients supporting the base of the regional food web could upset
these economically important fisheries. Nutrients are transported into this area
through outflow of the Rio de la Plata and the Patos Lagoon as well as submarine
groundwater discharge but the relative contribution of nutrients and trace
metals from each of these sources remains unknown. This project will support
travel for three early-career U.S. investigators to establish an international
collaboration with Brazilian researchers. During the visit, the U.S. research
team will conduct meetings, seminars and field trips to gather regionally-
relevant information. The outcome of this planning visit will be the development
of an international collaborative research plan to investigate biogeochemical
cycling along the southern Brazilian continental shelf. &lt;br/&gt; Recent
evidence suggests that submarine groundwater discharge contributes a substantial
amount of nutrients and trace metals (especially iron) to the coastal waters of
this region but the importance of this source relative to surface outflows
(e.g., Rio de la Plata plume and Patos Lagoon drainage) remains unknown.
Seasonally-varying coastal currents likely disperse biogeochemically-relevant
constituents differently therefore this visit will involve planning how to
investigate the potential use of various water mass tracers to characterize the
sources and transport mechanisms across the continental shelf. The planning work
will involve developing an international collaboration to address the following
questions: 1) What are the relative contributions of the Plata Plume, Patos
Lagoon and submarine groundwater discharge of freshwater, nutrients and trace
metals to the southern Brazilian continental shelf as determined by water mass
tracers? 2) What is the seasonal effect of these sources on coastal water column
dissolved and particulate trace element chemistry along the southern Brazilian
continental shelf? 3) Is there a significant leachable particulate trace metal
fraction available for deposition on the shelf and supply micro-nutrients during
upwelling? 4) What are the characteristics of Fe-binding ligands associated with
plume waters? 5) Are iron isotopic signatures useful for quantifying processes
in the Plata plume system? The future proposal from this group will have results
extending to larger research programs such as GEOTRACES. The planning visit will
foster an international collaboration between Brazilian and U.S. researchers,
and will allow a U.S. Ph.D. student to gain international experience in research
project development including hypothesis formulation, objective defining and
methodology verification.