* 1444630
* Student Support for User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Bamshad Mobasher, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,330.00

User interfaces that adapt themselves to available user information (such as
special needs or individual preferences) are becoming increasingly important, so
much so that adaptability has become a selling point for software products. A
system with the ability to construct and consult a user model (an explicit
representation of properties of a particular user or group of users) can adapt
diverse aspects of its performance and enhance its effectiveness, usability
and/or acceptance in a variety of situations (e.g., to reduce information
overload, to improve the quality of information retrieval, filtering and
annotation, and to generate useful information visualizations). Applications for
user modeling range from electronic commerce and intelligent learning
environments to health care and assistive technologies. Relevant platforms for
user modeling include mobile and wearable systems and smart environments, as
well as individual desktop systems, groupware, adaptive hypermedia, and other
web-based systems.

The annual International Conferences on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization (UMAP) are the premier forum at which academic and industrial
researchers from all these fields gather to exchange their complementary
insights on user modeling issues. UMAP is a merger of the long-running and
successful International Conferences on User Modeling (UM, 1986-2007), and the
more recent important series of Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based
Systems Conferences (AH, 2000-2008). This is funding to support travel for up to
5 students currently enrolled in PhD programs in U.S. institutions, to present
their accepted papers and posters and/or to attend the Doctoral Consortium
associated with the 22nd UMAP Conference (UMAP 2014), to be held in Aalborg,
Denmark, on July 7-11. More information about the conference is available at
http://www.um.org/umap2014/.

This year's UMAP will once again include a Doctoral Consortium session, thereby
continuing the tradition established at UMAP 2009 and before that at both the UM
and AH conferences. Lively and useful discussions have enabled students to
receive suggestions about their ongoing research and allowed more experienced
participants to hear some fresh ideas and view some of the new trends in the
field. Students whose work has been selected for presentation at the Doctoral
Consortium will be invited to write a paper that will be published in the UMAP
2014 conference proceedings. They will have 15 minutes to present their work
(which may include a short demonstration if appropriate), to be followed by an
additional 15 minutes for questions and discussion. During both the
question/discussion period and in subsequent informal interactions, organizing
committee members and other participants will provide constructive comments on
each student's work and attempt to address aspects on which the student has
requested advice.

Attending and presenting their work at UMAP, the top conference in its field,
will have a significant impact on the careers of the future generation of user
modeling, adaptation, and personalization researchers. Students who participate
in the Doctoral Consortium will also benefit from that experience in several
ways. First, they will have the opportunity to present their work to a
knowledgeable audience and get useful comments at an early stage of their
research when it will be most useful. Just as importantly, they will have an
opportunity to meet established researchers and other graduate students doing
similar work, to exchange ideas, and to make contacts that will be invaluable to
them as they progress in their scientific careers. Interacting with the young
researchers is also useful to more experienced investigators, by providing new
perspectives. Thus, the Doctoral Consortium is a great confidence builder for
the students involved, and highly stimulating to the established researchers who
participate. Many past participants in the UMAP Doctoral Consortium have gone on
to become well-regarded researchers and practitioners in the field. The
organizers have reaffirmed the long-standing and demonstrated UMAP commitment to
diversity; to this end, they will make special efforts to recruit participants
who are women and members of under-represented groups, and they will ensure
institutional diversity by supporting no more than one student from any given
university.