* 1444345
* The 8th Japan-U.S. Joint Seminar on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena, July 13-16, 2014 in Santa Cruz, California
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Chris Dames, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2015
* USD 23,000.00

CBET-144345&lt;br/&gt;Dames&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of this proposal is to support participation at the Eighth U.S Japan Joint
Workshop on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena. This proposal requests support to
subsidize the travel and lodging expenses of several investigators from the US,
and the registration fees for all students and postdocs. The workshop is
scheduled to be held July 13-16, 2014 in Santa Cruz, California. The workshop
will focus on a broad array of technologies will benefit from a better
understanding of nanoscale transport and energy conversion processes. The
workshop will provide future research directions and catalyzing new interactions
and collaborations of researchers in both countries. It is anticipated that this
workshop will result in joint research papers, exchange of students,
postdoctoral fellows and faculty, as well as sharing of research facilities
between the U.S. and Japan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will additionally
provide a cross disciplinary and international forum for discussing and
identifying outstanding science and technology issues in the area of nanoscale
thermophysics and energy conversion. Some topics scheduled for discussion are:
thermal transport in emerging 2D materials; nanoelectronic devices; thermal
phenomena in novel nanostructured thermoelectric, optoelectronic, and
photovoltaic devices; thermal transport in biological systems and transport in
nano and bio fluidic systems; and theoretical and computational methods
including density functional theory, molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo
simulations for energy conversion and transport in nanostructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will offer three specific features with
direct benefit to NSF and the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(I) The
sessions are designed to focus discussion on emerging/unidentified research
areas that are currently within reach due to the technical advancements in
recent years. The results of these discussions will be published in a leading
journal and will be made available to NSF. &lt;br/&gt;(II) The talks will be
recorded and made publically available via the internet (contingent on obtaining
approval from individual speakers). This will enable much broader dissemination
of the technical detail presented at the conference. &lt;br/&gt;(III) To
quantify and document the overall priorities of this expert technical community,
an anonymous survey of conference attendees will be conducted during the first
two days,, with results rapidly compiled and discussed on the final day of the
workshop, and further disseminated as part of an archival journal paper.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preference of funding support will be given to young
investigators. The NSF travel support will primarily be given to junior
participants, who include at least five graduate students, two post doctoral
researchers, and eight assistant professors.