* 1444894
* I-Corps:  Solutions for the Global Cooking Problem: Developing Stored Solar Stoves
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* J. Bruce Elliott-Litchfield, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The World Health Organization asserts around 3 billion people still cook and
heat their homes using solid fuels in open fires and leaky stoves. Such cooking
and heating produces high levels of indoor air pollution with a range of health-
damaging pollutants, including small soot particles that penetrate deep into the
lungs. In poorly ventilated dwellings, indoor smoke can be 100 times higher than
acceptable levels for small particles. Exposure is particularly high among women
and young children, who spend the most time near the domestic hearth. Nearly 2
million people a year die prematurely from illness attributable to indoor air
pollution due to solid fuel use. Fuel gathering consumes considerable time for
women and children, limiting other productive activities and taking children
away from school. In less secure environments, women and children are at risk of
injury and violence during fuel gathering. Non-renewable harvesting of biomass
contributes to deforestation and thus climate change. Methane and black carbon
(sooty particles) emitted by inefficient stove combustion are powerful climate
change pollutants. The proposed technology addresses this large market and a
corresponding domestic market that seeks green cooking alternatives with a no-
fuel and no-flame device that stores energy to cook when the user needs it.

In this proposal, the team proposes a strategy of concurrent (a) research, (b)
development, and (c) field testing, with each of the three efforts informing the
others. This three-pronged approach uses the lean start-up model which advocates
interaction with end users and avoids prolonged R&D around solutions that may
not be adopted in the field. The team intends to work with state and national
parks to develop prototype grills/stoves for testing, and will also work with
local parks, campgrounds, and university/campus facilities to gain input for
development of prototypes. Preliminary feedback from park facility managers
indicates a very high level of enthusiasm for a green, clean, fuel-free cooking
alternative that reduces fire risk, and there are 215,000 state park campsites
alone.