* 1444104
* US-Korea Planning Visit: On-the-Fly Manufacturing of 3D Shaped Particles
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2015
* Aram Chung, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2015
* USD 27,582.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is to
establish a new collaboration between Dr. Aram Chung at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute (RPI) from the US and Dr. Sunghoon Kwon at Seoul National University
(SNU) in Korea for collaborative research on "Optofluidics". The two research
groups will develop a new manufacturing paradigm based on interactions between
fluids and light, which is referred to as Optofluidic Manufacturing. In short,
Optofluidic Manufacturing is comprised of two coupled processes: (1) Inertial
flow in a microchannel, and (2) Light activated polymerization. The Chung group
has a strong expertise in understanding inertial flow for flow cross sectional
engineering (Step 1). On the other hand, the Kwon group has pioneered the light
activated polymerization process termed Optofluidic Maskless Lithography (OFML)
(Step 2). Therefore, two research groups with distinct and complementary
disciplines in fluid mechanics (Dr. Chung) and photonics (Dr. Kwon) make an
ideal collaborative relationship. This synergistic "Opto+fluidic" integration
will open new scientific directions to solve complex unconventional problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex shaped particles can provide unique properties and
additional functionalities that can be of great practical use for applications
such as self-assembly, photonics, biotechnology, structural materials, and
pharmaceutics. However, it still remains challenging to fabricate large
quantities of uniform 3D shaped particles with scalability, tunable geometries,
and adjustable functionalities. Optofluidic manufacturing proposed in this
project has the ability to precisely control flow and light conditions, allowing
for dynamic reconfiguration of the fabrication. The process generates various
scalable and tunable shaped particles using a single device with high-throughput
and full automation. Briefly, flow streams of photosensitive fluids in a
microchannel are horizontally engineered via fluid inertia and then exposed to
orthogonal patterned UV light, synthesizing complex 3D shaped particles. The
benefit of the proposed manufacturing system is its ability to be readily
reconfigured. In contrast, most of the current particle manufacturing systems
have a lack of tunability for particle shape, but by modulating flow and light
settings on-the-fly, arbitrary particle shapes can be generated in real-time.
Therefore, through this collaboration, full controls of fluid and light will be
demonstrated, enabling a new paradigm of complex shaped particle generation.