* 1444800
* Smart and Connected Health Principal Investigator Workshop 2014: From Discovery to Dissemination and Implementation Research
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Julie Kientz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 66,822.00

Smart and Connected Health Principal Investigator Workshop 2014: From Discovery
to Dissemination and Implementation Research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
supports the NSF Smart and Connected Health (SCH) principal investigators
meeting in Arlington, VA in August 2014. The meeting brings together principal
investigators of projects awarded by the Smart and Connected Health program
during 2011, 2012 and 2013. The SCH program was setup in order to bridge gaps in
fundamental science and engineering necessary to transform health and healthcare
in accordance with the with recent PCAST reports (2010), as well as to be
focused on prevention and person-centered care. In particular, the workshop
addresses a wider range of challenges in advancing health with foundational
research from the computer science, engineering and the social, behavioral and
economic disciplines. An objective of the workshop is to provide an opportunity
for the principal investigators to explore research progress in a diverse set of
funded projects and discuss important current issues, as well as future
challenges associated with research in transdisciplinary scientific areas. The
discussions will be supported by projects-related posters and further stimulated
by a number of invited speakers in relevant fields that will explore the
scientific frameworks in moving findings from discovery to dissemination and
implementation research. It is anticipated that the meeting will stimulate
discussions, connections, and collaborations that will facilitate progress in
the area of Smart and Connected Health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
should have a significant impact on the participants and the future of the Smart
and Connected Health program (SCH). The focus of the workshop is on the science
of discovery through dissemination and implementation research. The workshop
results are likely to include new research directions that will be publicized to
the research community through publications and a workshop website. The results
dissemination should inform and the developing Smart and Connected Health
research community in their transdisciplinary collaboration, educational
activities, and spur other innovative research directions. The broader impacts
of the workshop are to facilitate progress in the field and stimulate
conversations, connections, and collaborations that will lead toward better
informed and effective smart and connected health research and resulting
technologies for the broadest possible user populations.