* 1444209
* CNIC:  U.S.-Netherlands Project Development of Experimental and Theoretical Tools to Investigate the Non-equilibrium Mechanics of the Cell Nucleus
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Maria Kilfoil, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2017
* USD 42,180.00

This U.S.-Netherlands project development visit will catalyze new collaboration
between the PI's experimental group at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
and the theoretical group of Prof. Fred MacKintosh at the VU University, in
Amsterdam. Working with the PI's data from experiments on chromosomal/spindle
motion during cell division, new theoretical models will be developed jointly to
interpret her data and extend UV University's active network models. The goal of
the new collaboration is to ceate a bridge going from theoretical models to
results with biological implications for advancing our basic understanding of
how chromosomes move during cell division. With preliminary results, the
partners expect to establish a theoretical and quantitative framework to
characterize and help explain the mechanics of the microenvironment of the
living cell nucleus. Involvement of one U.S. graduate student in this activity
will provide valuable early career research experience with both experimental
and theoretical approaches, as well as exposure to a range of biophysical
systems and methods, including advanced microscopy. If successful, findings
should contribute to our ability to address the challenges currently posed by
quantitative intracellular microrheology and prepare a foundation for the
U.S.-Netherlands team's longer term research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growth in
organisms, from embryo to old age, proceeds from cell division. It is a
fundamental part of the biology of organisms and obtaining an appropriate model
for the motion of chromosomes during the process could help with understanding
of this basic event. During research visits to Amsterdam, U.S. experimental
results on the nonequilibrium motions of fluorescent probes (in the cell nucleus
and in an in vitro minimal model for activity in the nuclear mechanical
environment) will be analyzed theoretically. Cooperative efforts will focus on
the frequency dependence of the fluctuation enhancement and the dependence on
the size scale of the probes, attached to a chromosome locus or spanning the
entire spindle. These experiments and theory on the dynamic behavior of
condensed DNA in living cells and in vitro could lead to a new way of thinking
about the vital motion in living cells and about its role in the way DNA behaves
in the nucleus.