* 1444133
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Origins Of Modern Human Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Benjamin Schoville, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,722.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Curtis Marean at Arizona State University, Benjamin
Schoville will study how early modern humans used stone tool technology to adapt
to changing climates and coastlines in the Middle Stone Age (MSA, ~280-40
thousand years ago) of South Africa. This time period and region is critical for
our understanding of modern human origins and documents when the unique set of
cultural and behavioral traits common to all human populations today began to
appear. Genetic and archaeological data indicate modern humans originated in
Africa, but not every population survived and spread out of Africa. It is not
well known how the environments of Africa influenced human biological and
behavioral evolution in the MSA; however, several breakthrough technologies such
as stone-tipped spears and long-range projectiles appear during this time
period. By analyzing a cross-section of archaeological assemblages from the
coast and interior, within enclosed spaces such as caves and on the open
landscape, the researchers will provide clarity on how early humans used such
technologies to forage for food. &lt;br/&gt;A defining trait of the human
lineage is the creation, use, and transmission of cultural and technological
knowledge. Understanding the interactions between technology and the environment
is essential to illuminating the role of culture during the origin of our
species. This study is focused on understanding ancient tool use from the study
of lithic edge damage patterns at archaeological assemblages in southern Africa
by using innovative image-based quantitative methods for analyzing stone tools.
An extensive experimental program of modern tool use using replicated stone
tools provides the comparative linkages between the archaeological artifacts and
the tasks they were used for. The use of digital photographic methods makes
advances in functional analysis while also allowing easy sharing with other
researchers and archival accessibility. Together, the archaeological and
experimental data produced by this project will provide new insights into how
and why stone tools were made, used, and discarded - with important implications
for the evolution of hunting, foraging, landscape use, warfare, and cooperation.
The south coast of South Africa has a rich and complex MSA archaeological record
including early evidence of complex behaviors and of occupation during cool and
variable climates. By coupling their research with other researchers working on
the paleoenvironments of southern Africa, transdisciplinary questions about how
early humans structured their landscape tool-use behaviors will be addressed.