* 1444806
* Federated Plant Database Initiative for the Legumes
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Christopher Town, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2021
* USD 2,951,151.00

PI: David Fernandez-Baca (Iowa State University)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Steven B. Cannon (USDA-ARS/Iowa State University), Christopher D. Town (J. Craig
Venter Institute), Andrew D. Farmer (National Center for Genome Resources) and
Jeremy DeBarry (University of Arizona).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel:
Ethalinda K.S. Cannon (Iowa State University)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Legumes play
a central role in food security and nearly every cropping system worldwide.
Among cultivated plants, legumes such as beans, peas and lentils are unique in
their ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen which is converted into a soluble
organic form that can be taken up by plants through symbiosis with a soil
bacterium. Approximately 33% of all nutritional nitrogen comes from legumes
which are the most important source of protein in most developing countries.
Genomic resources have been or are being developed for many legume crops, but
the fragmented nature of these data resources limits the ability of researchers
to leverage information generated in one species to infer function or identify
candidate genes in another species. The overarching goal of this project is to
address this deficiency by developing software and methods for a "Legume
Federation" (LF) of diverse, independently funded and geographically separated
genomic data portals (GDPs). The LF will facilitate utilization of genomic,
genetic and phenotypic information across a wide range of legume species that
will allow researchers and breeders to take full advantage of the data that are
currently available at the GDPs. The project will provide research training
opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds at different educational
levels. In the context of outreach, the project will pro-actively engage the
community of legume data providers through presentations and workshops at
national and international meetings as well as through a central web portal that
will provide information describing project goals, methods of implementation and
progress reports to the community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The pace of data
collection across crop and model plants has increased dramatically. Most crop
species have both a data management problem and great opportunities to access
genetic "big data". The objectives of this project are to develop a federation
model for legume databases, to facilitate data exchange across a wide range of
legume species to enable cross-species translational genomics, and to adapt an
existing set of open-source tools for biological information management that
will provide a framework for project-oriented data management enabling both
long-term integration and widespread use. The specific goals are to: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1). Adopt and port the data currently managed in each of the custom
frameworks into a set of well-integrated, open source model organism database
tools;&lt;br/&gt;2). Define data formats, metadata standards, data exchange and
Web service protocols to facilitate communications between species-centric
databases at various levels; &lt;br/&gt;3). Utilize orthology, synteny, and
mappings of other significant features to integrate genetic, genomic, and
phenotypic data across legume species, to enable identification of common
molecular bases for important traits and enable traversal across database
projects;&lt;br/&gt;4). Improve the capacity of organism database projects to
collect and manage complex phenotype data using ontologies, controlled
vocabularies and well-defined protocols and schemas; and, &lt;br/&gt;5).
Facilitate productive data exchange by implementing a common, open, virtualized
Data Repository for data exchange across sites and for stable, long-term
archiving of data sets, standardized metadata, and robust methods for archiving,
searching, and accessing data sets from federated GDPs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It
is anticipated that the LF will provide a model for a well-accepted open-source
technology stack that can be adopted by other research communities that have
limited resources or technical expertise. All data will be freely available to
the general public through the project web site and through the associated GDPs
that include but are not limited to MedicagoGenome (http://medicagogenome.org),
SoyBase (http://soybase.org), PeanutBase (http://peanutbase.org), and the Legume
Information System (http://legumeinfo.org).