* 1444549
* Genome-wide Analysis of Small Signaling Peptides in Medicago truncatula with an Emphasis on Macro-nutrient Regulation of Root and Nodule Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Patrick Xuechun Zhao, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 3,319,729.00

PI: Wolf Scheible (The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Michael Udvardi and Patrick Xuechun Zhao (The Samuel Roberts
Noble Foundation) and Hideki Takahashi (Michigan State University)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators: Michael Sussman (University of Wisconsin-Madison),
Hiroo Fukuda (University of Tokyo, Japan), and Fiona McAlister (Southern
Oklahoma Technology Center, Ardmore, OK)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Small signaling
peptides (SSPs) emerge as an important class of regulatory molecules in plants,
especially in the control of plant growth and development in response to
environmental cues. Only a few of the many SSPs encoded in plant genomes have
been characterized functionally in plants. In this respect, SSP-encoding genes
represent some of the potentially most important "dark matter" of plant genomes.
Medicago truncatula is a premier model legume species, which is closely related
to the most important forage species in the USA, Medicago sativa (alfalfa), and
to food legumes such as soybean and common bean. Legumes are key components of
sustainable agricultural systems because they form symbioses with bacteria
called rhizobia that reduce molecular nitrogen to ammonium in specialized root
organs called nodules. Symbiotic nitrogen fixation provides legumes with a
source of nitrogen, obviating the need for synthetic nitrogen fertilizers for
these important crop species. Recently, it has become clear that SSPs can
control both nodule and root development in legumes and the hunt is on for more
SSPs that control important developmental traits in legumes of importance to
agriculture. A priority objective of this project therefore is to identify novel
SSPs that affect root and nodule development in M. truncatula, with a long-term
view of using SSPs in non-transgenic approaches to improve plants for
agriculture. Datasets and biological materials generated in this project will be
made available through appropriate biological databases and stock centers. A
database (MtSSPdb) will be developed and maintained for both project and public
access to store, link and present the information on the comparative genomics of
peptide-coding genes and to integrate and manage all experimental data emerging
from this project. With regard to outreach and training, the project will
leverage existing programs to provide research training for postdoctoral
associates and graduate, undergraduate and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary strategy will be implemented, including
bioinformatics, chemical genomics, genetics, biochemistry, molecular and
developmental biology. Activities of this project comprise a genome-wide survey
of SSP-encoding genes in Medicago truncatula and the identification of
macronutrient (N, P, S, and K) -responsive SSP-encoding genes from transcriptome
data. A library of genome-encoded, synthetic peptides will be established as a
community resource for biochemical genetics and used to screen for developmental
and molecular phenotypes in M. truncatula. Constitutive overexpression lines
will be produced in Arabidopsis thaliana and M. truncatula for selected SSP-
encoding genes that are prioritized because they have been shown to be either
strongly responsive to macronutrients (N, P, S, K), produce strong
visual/molecular phenotypes when chemically synthesized peptides are exogenously
applied to M. truncatula, and/or have their mature peptides predicted to be
produced through posttranslational modifications that make chemical synthesis
and/or exogenous application impracticable. The synthetic peptides will be
further tested for their effects on root nodule development and nitrogen
fixation in M. truncatula. The Medicago HAPMAP genotypes will be employed to
identify genetic loci associated with natural diversity in response to bioactive
peptides, and specific SSPs will also be tested for their efficacy in improving
alfalfa performance in the field. Identification of a peptide receptor through
genetic or chemo-proteomic approaches is another activity included in this
project.