* 1444435
* Center for Research on Plant Transporters (CROPS) - A Plant Community Resource for the Structure and Function of Plant Membrane Transporters Underlying Important Crop Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Milton Saier, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 6,064,596.00

PI: Geoffrey Chang (University of California-San Diego)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
PIs: Erin Connolly (University of South Carolina), Leon Kochian and Miguel
Pi√±eros (USDA-ARS/Cornell University), Michael Stowell (University of Colorado-
Boulder), Julian Schroeder and Milton Saier (University of California, San
Diego)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants need to take up nutrients from the soil and
transport these nutrients to specialized cells throughout the whole plant. These
nutrients are transported across plant cell membranes and organelle membranes
inside of each plant cell. Transporters are proteins that mediate the passage of
virtually every molecule and ion across plant cell membranes. Many natural
variants of transport proteins have been shown to be important for key agronomic
traits associated with plant growth and yield, and tolerance to abiotic and
biotic stresses. However, the fundamental biochemical, functional, and
structural characteristics of these proteins are largely unknown. To address
these questions and the glaring need for new tools in this research area, we are
establishing a new center called the Center for Research on Plant TransporterS
(CROPS), devoted to the functional and structural characterization of plant
transporters prioritized by their agronomic importance. This center will
leverage an existing advanced research infrastructure to produce purified plant
transporters on a large-scale and rapidly discover/generate novel single-domain
antibodies that can be used as valuable tools and potentially transformative and
enabling resources for the greater plant science community. In addition, CROPS
will determine the molecular structures of key plant membrane transporters and
their natural variants, providing a new framework for understanding their
functions in the context of their in planta roles, underpinning agriculturally
important traits in diverse crop species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding
of plant transporters has increased dramatically over the past quarter century.
This has led to a growing awareness that plant transporters play important roles
in many agronomic traits, such as efficient acquisition/use of water and
nutrients and crop tolerance to adverse soil environments arising from salinity,
acidity, and the presence of heavy metals. Natural genetic variation is the
foundation for breeding a wide variety of agriculturally relevant traits.
Understanding how genetic variation translates into transporter structural and
functional changes is critical to provide for a more efficient exploitation of
this variation in crop improvement. CROPS will focus on key questions regarding
agronomic traits that relate to food security and sustainability under marginal
conditions and human health/nutrition and food safety. Specifically, through
external collaborations and internal expertise, CROPS will target key
transporters including those involved in micronutrient acquisition, aluminum
tolerance, phosphorous acquisition efficiency, nitrogen acquisition efficiency,
salt tolerance and pathogen and insect resistance. As a first step, CROPS will
establish an efficient pipeline based on proven technologies for the production
of plant membrane transport resources for the plant scientific community. These
resources include large quantities of purified plant transporter proteins, a
powerful in vitro production platform for nanobodies, novel synthetic single-
domain antibodies, and state-of-the-art structural determination techniques.
CROPS has a strong commitment to providing access to all data and biological
resources to the broader plant membrane transport community. Access to proteins,
antibody reagents, and information about protein structure will be provided
through a project website/database and by dissemination through long-term
repositories. Specifically, all structural x-ray and EM structural data (GC and
MS) will be deposited in the Protein Data Bank (http://www.pdb.org) and the
EMDataBank (http://www.emdatabank.org). All plant and synthetic nanobody DNA
sequences will be annotated and deposited in GenBank and Gramene. Plasmid
constructs will be deposited in Addgene (https://www.addgene.org), a not-for-
profit plasmid repository. With regard to outreach, CROPS will provide
mechanisms for inviting the wider community to tap into its pipeline as a basis
for their own research. Researchers will be invited to submit nominations for
specific plant transporters of interest. Graduate students and postdocs will
receive training and access to some of the most state-of-the-art techniques in
rapid antibody (nanobody) evolution, membrane protein structural/functional
biology, and molecular-based trait analysis for advancing independent careers.
CROPS will have a strong emphasis on providing research training and laboratory
experiences to high school and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups, with a focus on development of writing and presentation skills as well
as mentoring students to take personal responsibility and gain scientific
educational and project management skills.