* 1444755
* Urban resilience to extreme weather related events
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 12,151,904.00

Abstract SES-1444755&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban areas are vulnerable
to extreme weather related events given their location, high concentration of
people, and increasingly complex and interdependent infrastructure. Impacts of
Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy, and other disasters demonstrate not just
failures in built infrastructure, they highlight the inadequacy of institutions,
resources, and information systems to prepare for and respond to events of this
magnitude. The highly interdisciplinary and geographically dispersed Urban
Resilience to Extremes Sustainability Research Network (UREx SRN) team will
develop a diverse suite of new methods and tools to assess how infrastructure
can be more resilient, provide ecosystem services, improve social well being,
and exploit new technologies in ways that benefit all segments of urban
populations. Starting with nine network cities (six continental U.S. and three
Latin American, home to over 35 million residents) and expanding in future
years, the vision of the UREx SRN is to co-produce the knowledge needed to
promote resilient, livable cities in a future that will look very different from
today. The extreme events that this project will focus on include urban
flooding, coastal storms, regional droughts, and extreme heat waves. These
events are already occurring with shocking frequency in U.S. and global cities.
Infrastructure is viewed as an important line of defense against hazards and
disasters, yet current urban infrastructure is aging and proving inadequate for
protecting city populations. The UREx team will link SRN scientists, students,
local practitioners, planners, industry, NGOs, and other stakeholders across
&gt;25 institutions and &gt;70 collaborators to co-produce data, models, images,
stories, and on-the-ground projects that show how a new resilient infrastructure
can be developed. Infrastructure that is flexible, adaptable, safe-to-fail,
socially equitable, and ecologically based will enhance urban resilience in the
face of a higher incidence of extreme events, more culturally diverse
communities, and continued urbanization pressures. Ultimately, the UREx SRN will
help accelerate knowledge generation and application to encourage innovative
strategies towards urban sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Urban Resilience to Extremes Sustainability Research Network (UREx SRN) will
develop a novel theoretical framework for integrating social, ecological, and
technological system (SETS) dimensions for conceptualizing, analyzing, and
supporting urban infrastructure decisions in the face of climatic uncertainty in
a more holistic way. The primary research question is: how do SETS domains
interact to generate vulnerability or resilience to extreme weather related
events, and how can urban SETS dynamics be guided along more resilient,
equitable, and sustainable trajectories? The foundation of the network is eight
working groups (WG) who will work together to answer this question. Network
activities include: assembling comparable datasets for the cities; doing
advanced climate and hydrological modeling and downscaling; conducting
comparative analyses; further developing the SETS conceptual framework;
experimenting with new visualization and computation approaches for representing
the data and the SETS framework; using these products in participatory modeling
and scenario analysis for each city; and developing the science and practice for
transitioning infrastructure to meet 21st century resilience and sustainability
goals. Continual network and educational evaluation will allow realignment and
adjustment of the work based on iterative assessments. The program will develop
a suite of interactive educational activities spanning institutions across the
network, and including local practitioners as well as university students and
young professionals. Working Groups include integral educational,
communications, and diversity-enhancing activities for graduate and post-
doctoral fellows, early-career researchers, and city professionals aimed at
developing a model for co-producing effective and robust decision-support tools
and educating the next generation of scientists and practitioners to carry out
this work. These programs are expected to be especially attractive to Hispanic
students and practitioners due to the project's focus on understanding the
increasing cultural and intellectual connections of the U.S. and Latin
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategic goals of the UREx SRN are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1)Build a network of cities, institutions, and student, post-
doctoral, and faculty researchers to explore resilience of cities to extreme
weather related events;&lt;br/&gt;2)Develop novel theoretical frameworks that
express a vision of sustainable, integrated urban infrastructure that is
flexible, adaptable, safe-to-fail, socially equitable, and ecologically
based;&lt;br/&gt;3)Work with practitioners and decision makers, as well as a
cadre of graduate and post-doctoral fellows, to co-produce knowledge that
facilitates data-driven visioning and ultimately transitions to a sustainable
future for urban infrastructure and, by extension, the fabric of urban social-
ecological-technological sustainability; and &lt;br/&gt;4)Create a model for
incorporating assessment, learning, and adjustment in response to evaluative
feedback in a large, transdisciplinary, multi-institutional, multi-national
research network.