* 1444094
* TUES: EAGER: Scaffolding Big Data for Authentic Learning of Computing
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Dennis Kafura, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2016
* USD 97,658.00

The continued rapid evolution of computation and its impact on the world creates
new challenges for the design of learning experiences in computation at the
university level. Deeply informed skills and knowledge about computation are
increasingly needed in all fields of study, including emerging fields like the
"digital humanities." Growing awareness of "computational thinking" as a 21st
century competency requires that learning the basics of computation becomes a
part of every university student's education. However, weaving together the
curriculum, pedagogy, and tools that engage learners with different dispositions
and expectations about their learning of computation is a critical challenge.
This exploratory project will investigate an approach to meeting this challenge
by crafting authentic and engaging learning experiences using "big data" that
are about real phenomenon and are realistic in scale and complexity. This
approach stimulates motivation to learn and places real world problems at the
core of the learning experience. The real world focus encourages additional
study of computation and is believed to be especially useful to recruit and
retain women in computing-intensive fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will create curriculum and technologies for use in a computational thinking
course and two introductory computer science courses. The work will (1) develop
novel curriculum resources leveraging "big data", including interactive learning
materials integrating graphical programming, visualization, and in-line
execution; (2) expand and enhance a framework used to scaffold access to big
data streams by adding many new streams and including interfaces to
visualization and other critical services; and (3) develop, apply, and analyze
an extensive set of assessment measures including assessments related to
achievement of learning objectives, student motivation, and the dynamics of
student cohorts. This work can serve as a national test-bed that: (1) offers a
model for other universities grappling with the challenge of providing education
in computation for all students, (2) provides an on-ramp for developing minor
courses of study in computer science, (3) creates resources that infuse existing
computer science courses with engaging big data projects, and (4) contributes to
evolving discussions of theories on how students are best introduced to the
computer science.