* 1444147
* US-Canada Planning Visit On the Hurwitz Spaces and Isomonodromy Deformations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Vladimir Dragovic, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2017
* USD 14,571.00

US-CANADA PLANNING VISIT ON THE HURWITZ SPACES AND ISOMONODROMY
DEFORMATIONS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We establish an international collaboration
between PI, Vladimir Dragovic from the University of Texas at Dallas and Prof.
Vasilisa Shramchenko ? from the University of Sherbrooke in Canada, to study
interrelations between the Hurwitz spaces of the hyperelliptic curves, the
isomonodromy deformations, the Somos sequences, and the Pade
approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a new direction in
a more than a decade long scientific program of the PI of extending and
expanding the theory of planar Poncelet polygons related to the elliptic curves
to arbitrary dimensions and to the hyperelliptic curves of any
genera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this joint venture, the calculus techniques on
the Hurwitz spaces will be made effective in a way they can be used to attack
problems in different fields that before were unapproachable directly. The key
problem is a construction of a new algebro-geometric approach to 2x2 Fuchsian
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical content of the proposal is focused
on exchanging scientific visits between the PI, his PhD students, and Prof.
Shramchenko; this will include mini-courses delivered by the PI and the foreign
collaborator. The milestone of the proposal is an informal meeting-workshop
which is going to be organized in Spring 2015 at the University of Sherbrooke,
in Sherbrooke, Canada, and is devoted to the topic of this proposal. The idea is
to gather several experts from Canada to discuss the related topics.