* 1444336
* Threatened Indigenous Languages:  An analysis of tribal perspectives and responses
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Paul Boyer, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2019
* USD 291,275.00

Improved opportunities in STEM education must be coupled with supportive
approaches and conditions to help students succeed. Studies have shown that
students who are fluent in a tribal language have greater academic success than
students who are semi-fluent in two languages. The enhanced academic performance
of Native students in STEM studies will result in more indigenous STEM
professionals entering the workforce, thereby both strengthening and
diversifying the study and application of STEM knowledge. The work of this
project will increase the body of knowledge around ways to preserve, foster, and
restore Native languages, particularly among American Indian
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Threatened Indigenous Languages: An analysis of
tribal perspectives and responses, will investigate why and how indigenous
communities (especially those with tribal colleges) promote the survival or
revival of their ancestral languages. Although most language survival efforts
focus on the specific task of recording and documenting threatened languages,
this study will, instead, examine larger social and cultural forces in Native
societies that encourage or inhibit community awareness and community-based
action. Site visits will examine how various tribal communities perceive the
value of indigenous languages, how these communities define language survival
goals, and how they develop policies and programs to reach established goals.
Finally, it will examine the degree to which current language survival efforts
are succeeding and, based on these findings, to identify lessons learned and
next steps.