* 1444611
* Sequencing and Annotating the Valley Oak Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Victoria Sork, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,976,532.00

PI: Victoria Sork (University of California-Los Angeles)

CoPIs: Matteo Pellegrini (University of California-Los Angeles), Paul Gugger
[University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES), Appalachian
Laboratory] and Steven Salzberg (Johns Hopkins University)

Senior Personnel: Shawn Cokus and Sorel Fitz-Gibbon (University of California-
Los Angeles)

Oak trees, which contain more biomass in North American ecosystems than any
other tree genus, provide major economic and ecosystem value to society. Valley
oak, a keystone species for biodiversity in California, provides an excellent
study system for the development of genomic tools that can inform management for
economic use, conservation, carbon sequestration, and restoration of resilient
forests threatened by climate change. This project will produce a high quality
genome sequence for valley oak and annotate the structure and functions of
different parts of the genome as an intellectual resource for the scientific
community and resource managers. The data will be helpful to forests geneticists
working on oaks throughout the Northern Hemisphere, and it will also provide new
insight about the evolution of adaptation to climate and contribute to the
current understanding of which parts of the genome are important in adaptations
to different environments, and which provide information important in managing
oak forests under climate change.

The ability of plants within the same species to grow across heterogeneous
environments is a major topic for plant science. Given the rapid rate of climate
change, the ability of long-lived plant populations to respond to these changes
is an urgent question. The major goal of this project is to use state-of-the art
whole-genome sequencing approaches to develop genomic resources for
understanding local adaptation of valley oak (Quercus lobata) to different
environments, as well as provide a resource to the broader scientific community
and natural resource managers. Taking advantage of unique features of this
keystone California oak, this project will (1) provide a complete, high-quality
sequence of the valley oak genome with structural and functional annotations of
genic regions and repetitive elements; (2) whole-genome sequences and genome-
wide single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data from 190 trees from natural
populations, and (3) candidate SNPs that are under natural selection along
climate environments, which will contribute to understanding local adaptation to
climate and provide further annotations relevant to environmental adaptations.
In addition to addressing the fundamental question of how individual plants
adapt to different climates, a long-term significance is that the project will
provide new knowledge on how genomic diversity can respond to changing climate
conditions. The materials generated in this project will be made publically
available through NCBI, Dendrome (dendrome.ucdavis.edu/), and a newly created
oak genome website and FTP site (valleyoak.ucla.edu).