* 1444994
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Adaptation In Cross Cultural Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Jeffrey Dobereiner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2015
* USD 10,163.00

In diverse contexts of the ancient and modern worlds, the study of culture
contact has proven critical to understanding political trajectories and the
emergence of ethnic and class identity. To reconstruct how these phenomena
developed, scholars have increasingly looked to archaeology as a methodology
capable of exploring the long-term impact of culture contact on ethnic groupings
and social inequality in early societies. The archaeological project described
here had been designed to study one of these contexts: a Preclassic (1000 BC -
AD 250) borderland center from the time of Mesoamerica's early urban
settlements. The site was located on the cultural frontier between the emergent
Maya and Olmec civilizations. By demonstrating how different social classes in
this frontier center variably adapted some customs from their neighbors while
combining and developing unique practices of their own, the researchers will
demonstrate how borderland groups can flexibly integrate foreign practices
through time as they work to maintain and improve their social position. This
research is relevant to ongoing studies of both historic and modern-day identity
and will help improve understanding of frontier contexts today. The fieldwork
will be conducted by Jeffrey Dobereiner, a Harvard University graduate student,
and will provide data for his doctoral dissertation. Thus it will further his
education as a scientist. Because of close collaboration with Mexican students
the project will strengthen long term scientific ties between the US and Mexico.

As a frontier community between several emergent Preclassic cultures, the
decisions made by these borderland residents provide a critical data set from
which to explore how non-local connectivity affected different parts of ancient
Mesoamerican society in different ways. Throughout the site, unique
architecture, burials and ceramics that draw upon several separate cultural
identity groups have been found, alongside a wide range of sources for imported
goods such as marine shell and obsidian. While this evidence indicates that site
residents articulated with varied cultural currents of Preclassic Mesoamerica
while maintaining their own independent identity, the mechanism of this
independence is unclear. Through field research in households at diverse social
levels, the researchers will explore whether elites or commoners were the
primary actors controlling how and when these foreign practices were adopted,
rejected, and modified. This project at Rancho BÃºfalo, Chiapas, Mexico will use
field work, laboratory analysis and chemical techniques to demonstrate who was
mediating these variable adaptations, and in which social strata foreign customs
first arrived. By reconstructing how the people of this region variably
integrated these customs to negotiate their tenuous social position, the final
results will provide a case-study in research on culture contact and frontier
peoples more broadly.