* 1444621
* EAGER: Elaborating Data Intensive Research Methods through Researcher-Practitioner Partnerships
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Mingyu Feng, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 278,808.00

Data-driven decision making and the use of 'big data' in education are two
practice and policy areas that have yet to be studied carefully at the level of
teacher classroom instructional decision making. The researchers will partner
with the Summit Public School, a charter management organization, to study the
ways in which teachers use data from student virtual learning experiences to
make decisions about instruction. The researchers will work with teachers,
administrators and information technology support staff in four schools that
employ an online learning platform that includes instructional resources and
content assessments as a central structure in students' learning environments.
Data intensive research methods will be used to mine the rich data arising from
the students' use of the online resources and performances to determine the
resources that a student needs next. The proposal seeks to determine the key
challenges facing practitioners in their use of data intensive research methods
and to identify what partnership activities best support evidence-based
practices. The findings from this study will lead to an understanding of the
utility and feasibility of a teacher's use of the volumes of data that come from
virtual learning environments.

The researchers in this study will be working with the students, teachers and
administrators from four schools, three high schools and one middle school using
a design research perspective. Practitioners will determine particular problems
of practice around which the identification and analysis of data will be
focused. Students in mathematics courses will be provided access to digital
resources that are aligned to content assessments. The researchers will examine
the correlation of the use of selected resources and outcomes from those
assessments as well as student surveys, and subsequent course taking patterns
and successes. Hierarchical cluster analyses, binary factor analyses and
hierarchical linear modeling techniques will be used to identify which resources
are linked to increased likelihoods of student success. The analyses will be
used to develop recommendations of particular resources teachers might make
available to students and to develop an early warning system that will help
teachers keep students on track.