* 1444100
* US-Taiwan Planning Visit: Interrogating Nanodiamond-Cellular Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Dean Ho, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 01/31/2017
* USD 67,107.00

The goal of this proposal is to bring together expertise from researchers in the
US and Taiwan to study how nanodiamonds, promising carbon particles that have
been shown to markedly improve the safety and efficiency of molecular imaging
and other applications, fundamentally interact with biological systems. The
ability to examine the basic biological response to novel materials remains an
important need in the bioengineering, materials science, chemistry and
engineering education communities, among many others. The information gleaned
from these studies can improve materials design principles for a broad array of
applications. This work will enable rational design and chemical modification of
the unique nanodiamond surfaces to realize improved biocompatibility and insight
into how cells respond following exposure to these agents. This study will
result in broad impact upon improving the safety and thus widespread
implementation of nanodiamonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major part of this
project is developing novel K-12 teaching materials, specifically a nanodiamond-
themed comic book. Graphic materials are a great way to facilitate student
learning of complex topics, and will help inspire a new generation to explore
future careers in science and engineering. Specifically, a team of graduate
students and the academic coordinator of UCLA will partner with Taiwanese
collaborators to create the Nanodiamond Nora and Neal storyline. The Nanodiamond
Nora and Neal will serve as the main characters of the book which will highlight
their story from serving as engine abrasives to journeying into cells as
explorers. Nora and Neal will be mentored by young scientists during the course
of their journey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanodiamonds have emerged as promising materials
for fundamental biological investigations. The faceted nature of the truncated
octahedral nanodiamond surfaces results in unique physical-chemical properties
that mediate marked improvements in the efficacy and safety of molecular imaging
agents. These properties include the ability to coordinate water, a key
requirement for optimizing imaging contrast. As such, nanodiamond-based imaging
has uniquely resulted in among the highest efficiencies compared to all
nanoparticle compounds. Given their promise as nano-labeling materials, it is
becoming increasingly important to better understand the mechanisms that
underlie nanodiamond-cell interactions. This work aims to bring together a team
of collaborators to provide the most comprehensive study to date of how broad
classes of nanodiamonds (amine, carboxyl-functionalized, fluorescent/N-V center,
etc.) interact with cells. Methodologies such as caspase assays, quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction, viability assays, and lactate dehydrogenase
assays will be implemented to provide new fundamental mechanistic insight into
the biological response to particle exposure. Furthermore, CyTOF, a powerful
single cell investigation platform that enables multi-pathway interaction assays
will provide the most elaborate view to date of how cell signaling components
crosstalk to collectively govern cell behavior. This work will play a major role
in technically training future scientific and engineering leaders.