* 1444461
* MCA-PGR: Spatial and Temporal Resolution of mRNA Profiles During Early Nodule Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* FRANK FELTUS, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,831,353.00

The signal transduction events in the legume-rhizobial symbiosis not only
involve two organisms of different kingdoms, but communication required to
establish the symbiosis occurs between cells layers in tissues, between organs
in the plant, and across time, from the induction of the first chemical
responses within 6-12 hours to the establishment of nitrogen fixation in the
nodules 10 days after inoculation. The result is differentiated bacteria living
inside the cells of a plant organ that allows the bacteria to reproduce and fix
nitrogen due to the provision of carbon skeletons and a low oxygen tension by
the plant. While transcriptome profiling of whole roots during nodule
development has expanded our knowledge of what genes are involved in initiating
symbiosis, such experiments are unable to resolve the progression of events at
the tissue/cellular level. In order to understand the signaling occurring
between these cells in space and time in a coherent manner, it is necessary to
analyze the transcriptome of the individual cells at specific points in time, as
neighboring cells may have very different transcriptomes. The training
components of this grant include training mid-career of the principal
investigator (PI) in genomic techniques, training postdoctoral scholars and a
graduate student in genomics and informatics through their participation in this
research, training graduate students, postdocs and PIs from underserved groups
in the summer workshop, and exposing underserved and economically disadvantaged
middle school students to science and higher education through field trip lab
experiences.

Transcriptomes will be measured for each cell type involved in nodule formation
at specific time points tied to critical events during the progression of nodule
development by use of laser capture microdissection (LCM) followed by RNAseq and
a systems biology analysis of the libraries. The following questions will be
addressed: What genes are differentially expressed relative to uninoculated
plants in a given cell type at a given time? What genes show conserved patterns
of differential expression from uninoculated plants over time within a cell
type? Is there a synergistic effect of multiple genes showing small changes in
expression but a conserved pattern? Which gene networks contain known nodule
regulatory genes and therefore, by association, what do these genes control?
What genes are misregulated in autoregulatory mutants at these early time points
that allow too many nodules to develop? Applying time series analysis and
systems biology tools, datasets will be created that will allow for these and
other queries. Understanding gene regulation during the establishment of
symbiosis is key to being able to recreate nitrogen-fixing symbioses in other
plants, and understanding at the level of individual cells is required to
generate a structure similar to a nodule. The work proposed here will provide
information about what genes are being differentially regulated in a specific
cell type in the part of the root responding to rhizobia, about what genes are
coordinately regulated within a cell type, and combined with published knowledge
from mutant analyses, will yield information about which groups of coordinately
regulated genes in which tissues are critical to early nodule development. The
end result will be a spatiotemporal model greatly expanding our knowledge of
nodulation signaling in roots and a data mining resource for the symbiosis
community.