* 1444295
* Conference on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics 2014, May 22 - 23, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Michael Siegel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,400.00

This project supports the participation of undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, junior faculty, and other researchers in a conference on
"Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics" (FACM) at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT). This successful conference series has been
organized over the past ten years by the Department of Mathematical Sciences and
Center for Applied Mathematics and Statistics at NJIT. The annual meeting has
established itself as a leading forum for the dissemination of research in
applied and computational mathematics and statistics. FACM conferences are more
intimate and student centered than large society meetings and a goal of the
organizers is to introduce future leaders of applied mathematics to established
investigators and emerging research areas. Participation among graduate students
and postdocs is greatly enhanced through a competitive application process by
which they can give presentations in minisymposia alongside leading scientists.
Past FACM conferences have an excellent record of participation of women and
underrepresented minorities, and special efforts will be made to continue this
trend.

FACM 2014 is focussed on mathematical biology and biostatistics. The meeting
features invited plenary talks, minisymposia, and poster sessions on areas of
great current interest, such as analysis of large data sets, computational
biology, circadian rhythms, and models of brain disorders. This conference
series brings together mathematicians, statisticians, scientists and engineers
in an environment where significant interaction and cross-fertilization take
place. For students and postdocs, this will be a major learning and networking
experience that will help them with their research and career paths.