* 1444533
* The Genetics and Genomics of Local Adaptation and Acclimation in Panicum Grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Jeremy Schmutz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 4,173,178.00

Co-PIs: Jeremy Schmutz (HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology); Phil Fay
(University of Texas Environmental Science Institute)&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Collaborators: Tim Keitt (University of Texas at Austin); David Lowry (Michigan
State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge facing the world is the
growing demand for energy along with increasing populations and changing
environments. Although predictions vary, it is likely that the future will bring
alterations to current weather patterns, with impacts on temperature and
precipitation in particular. Research is needed to understand how these changes
will affect agricultural productivity and to investigate whether the
geographical ranges of crops and native plants will shift. This project uses
genetic and genomic approaches to discover how the long-lived grass switchgrass
and its relatives are able to respond and adapt naturally to environmental
stresses in a range of diverse habitats. A major focus of the research is to
identify genes involved in local adaptation and drought tolerance across a
latitudinal gradient in the US. Ultimately, this information will provide a
basis for understanding how plants adapt to varying conditions and will provide
tools to engineer stress resistance crops. Undergraduate students will be
engaged in the project and will gain hands-on research experiences that span
disciplinary and continental boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there is
compelling evidence for local adaptation in plants, the genetic basis underlying
these adaptations is not fully understood. In particular, it is unclear how
genetic trade-offs at individual loci underlie the overall pattern of adaptation
or the spatial scale of those effects. Moreover, the role of epigenetic "memory"
of stress in perennial plants and their long term adaptation is largely
unexplored. The integrative research in this project investigates local
adaptation and acclimation in Panicum grasses. The specific objectives are to
(1) conduct field QTL experiments to test for divergence, local adaptation, and
genotype-by-environment interaction in upland and lowland switchgrass ecotypes,
(2) fine-map and clone drought tolerance QTL in diploid Panicum hallii, (3)
investigate the ecological and molecular drivers of drought legacy effects, and
(4) conduct genome scans of climate adaptation in Panicum hallii. Another major
goal is to train the next generation of plant scientists through an REU-type
program that engages Freshman undergraduate students in research at the start of
their education. The findings from this project will facilitate ongoing efforts
to engineer crops for higher performance under drought conditions, one of the
major limitations in agricultural productivity. All sequence data will be
deposited in the NCBI short read archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) and
at Phytozome (http://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html). Phenotypic and other
data will be publicly available through journal publications and the project
website (https://sites.cns.utexas.edu/juenger_lab/switchgrass).