* 1444339
* Role of the Unfolded Protein Response in Environmental Stress Tolerance in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Ann Stapleton, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2021
* USD 2,251,487.00

This research will investigate strategies for protecting maize, the major U.S.
food, feed and fuel crop, from environmental stress. Maize can perceive and
respond to adverse environmental conditions through a process called the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Folding is a critical, but delicate step in the
biosynthesis of proteins, and it can be easily upset by adverse conditions, such
as high temperature. When this happens, misfolded proteins accumulate and
activate a cascade of stress response genes. One of the objects of this project
is to characterize in depth the cascade of genes to better understand how they
protect maize from stress. Investigations in other plants has revealed that
stress conditions eliciting the UPR also activate a process called autophagy in
which plant cells repair stress damage. Therefore, another aim of this project
is to discover how stress signals activate the autophagy machinery. In response
to stress, other plants slow down protein synthesis to prevent overburdening the
process of protein folding. In this project an investigation will be conducted
to determine whether maize does this by degrading some of the messenger RNAs
encoding proteins. Finally, attempts will be made to modify the UPR and probe
more deeply into its operation by using new gene editing techniques. In
parallel, there will be a focus on links between learning and research at the
undergraduate level. This will be done through the development of easily
accessible training on line and peer-support learning communities.

In this project, it is expected that new gene targets involved in ER stress
responses in maize will be revealed through extensive transcriptomic analysis.
It is anticipated that those targets may provide a clearer picture of both cell
survival activities and cell death mechanisms in response to stress. In
addition, these analyses will aid in uncovering the signaling pathways by which
stress elicits the proliferation of the ER and activation of autophagy. While
some UPR responses involve the upregulation of stress response genes, other
responses result from the degradation of specific RNA transcripts brought about
by Regulated IRE1-Dependent RNA Degradation (RIDD)and microRNA action. In this
regard, the degradome as well as the transcriptome will be used to determine the
role of selective RNA transcript degradation in maize stress responses. This
research project is also expected to reveal through 'translateome' analysis
whether ER stress is also mitigated in maize by selective and/or global
regulation of the translation of RNA transcripts. A compelling reason for the
selection of maize as a model for these studies is that the UPR has already been
demonstrated in maize in the field. Therefore, variation in stress response in
different lines of maize will be studied both in the laboratory and in the field
with the goal of identifying genetic determinants that condition the UPR.