* 1444961
* AccessEngineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Maya Cakmak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 836,435.00

This engineering education research project focuses on the development of a
program called AccessEngineering, modeled after existing programs
Accesscomputing and AccessSTEM. This is a workforce development activity that
utilizes communities of practice, webinars, mini-grants, Capacity Building
Institutes and an on-line clearinghouse to broaden the participation of persons
with disabilities in engineering education and careers. Recognizing that there
is a need to both increase and diversify the engineering workforce, the
overarching goal of this project is to increase the participation of persons
with disabilities in engineering education and workforce. This is achieved
through a nationwide engagement of faculty and students in efforts to make
engineering content accessible to all students, including students with
disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of
this project is that by educating faculty about the importance of accessible
design, providing seed funding to enable incorporation of universal design
principles in educational content, and creating a community of practice linked
through Capacity Building Institutes, this project will address factors that
directly inhibit the participation of students with disabilities in engineering
education and the workforce. Engineering faculty will have access to a content
rich website of research and practice in broadening participation that was
developed as part of prior efforts. This project will enhance the content of
this widely available website to include case studies from faculty using
Universal Design in their course content development, proceedings from the
Capacity Building Institutes, a collection of biographies of students with
disabilities engaged in engineering and others artefacts from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goal of
broadening participation in engineering by increasing access to engineering
education for groups that are currently underrepresented in the engineering
workforce.