* 1444192
* US-Costa Rica Planning Visit: Evolution of Functional Traits in the Melastomataceae
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Frank Almeda, Wilkes University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 01/31/2016
* USD 26,975.00

As the earth's climate changes in response to accumulating greenhouse gases like
carbon dioxide and methane, plant species will adapt to changing climate,
experience changes in geographic distribution, or become extinct, with such
impacts predicted to be most severe in the tropics. Functional traits such as
the rate of photosynthesis, leaf thickness, and growth rate can be used to
assess the ability of plant species to respond to climate change. In this
planning visit, US researchers will work with Costa Rican collaborators to
collect preliminary data and plan a larger project on functional traits found in
the tropical plant family, Melastomataceae. This is one of largest families of
flowering plants with species found from lowland forests to high elevation cloud
forest. The family exhibits extreme diversity in size, floral morphology, and
growth rate across such elevational gradients. Knowledge of how growth rate and
other functional traits are distributed among different lineages in this family
will help us understand how tropical plant species might adapt to variation in
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international team of physiological ecologists
and systematists will collect preliminary data on functional traits for
melastome species on Costa Rica's Volcan Barva Transect, which extends from
Atlantic coast lowlands at La Selva Biological Station to 2880 m near the summit
of Volcan Barva. Traits to be sampled include life history, growth form, and
plant height as well as characteristics important for plant response to climate
such as leaf area, the ratio of leaf area to sapwood area, leaf thickness, leaf
toughness, and wood density. For the most accessible sites, photosynthetic rate
will also be measured. This information will provide the basis for a proposal
for a larger project that will more intensively sample the transect. Such data
on functional traits would then be combined with phylogenetic data from other
sources to elucidate the potential for adaptation to climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators come from Wilkes University, the University
of Maryland, the University of Wisconsin, the University of Costa Rica, the
National University of Costa Rica, the California Academy of Sciences and the
New York Botanical Garden. U.S. and Costa Rican students will participate in
data collection and tropical field work, helping to develop of the next
generation of tropical field biologists as scientists and as advocates for
preserving functional tropical forests. Outreach activities will be performed in
the U.S. via museum and botanical garden partners, as well as in Costa Rica.