* 1444505
* Role of Mesoscale Convective Systems in Determining the Diurnal Cycle of Precipitation over Sub-Saharan Northern Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Kerry Cook, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 02/29/2020
* USD 597,381.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to improve our understanding of the
relationship between Mesoscale Convective Systems (MCSs) and the diurnal cycle
of warm season rainfall over sub-Saharan Northern Africa. The study specifically
addresses the observed warm season spatial and temporal distribution of MCSs; as
well as how the development, propagation and lifetimes of these systems are
influenced by local and regional environmental factors. This study combines
observational analysis with high-resolution mesoscale modeling to advance our
understanding of the development of warm season MCSs and their relationship to
the daily cycle of precipitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This study will add to our understanding of rainfall
variability, physical mechanisms and the processes associated with these
temporal and spatial differences. The statistics and other metrics that will be
developed will have the potential to impact present and/or future development of
weather model parameterization schemes. The results will be of importance to
rainfall forecasting, which will have implication for communities in the region.
The use of convective-permitting high space-time resolution weather model
simulations, with typical parameterization schemes turned off, will allow the
explicit calculation of the dynamics needed to generate convection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Improving empirical and
theoretical knowledge of the factors controlling precipitation in sub-Saharan
North Africa will allow those living in the area to better anticipate and
prepare for periods of both drought and extreme rainfall events. Efforts to
accurately reproduce observations with high-resolution weather models will
provide guidance on the most appropriate model settings for short-term
predictions of the development of large thunderstorm clusters and rainfall in
this specific region of the globe. This project is ideally suited to train
graduate students in state-of-the-art observational analysis and atmospheric
modeling techniques. Student participation in research activities will assist in
the development of important critical thinking and scientific communication
skills. This study offers the opportunity to teach many scientists about the
important factors controlling rainfall in this region of Africa.