* 1444198
* US-Canada Planning Visit: Investigating Multiphase, Multiscale Transport Phenomena in PEM Fuel Cells with Synchrotron X-Ray Radiography
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Ryan Anderson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 02/28/2017
* USD 29,835.00

Proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells are a promising alternative energy
technology that uses a fuel like hydrogen to produce electricity. The main
byproduct of this electricity generation is water, which can 'flood' the fuel
cell and severely limit its efficiency if not managed appropriately. Addressing
these water management issues in PEM fuels cells will lead to better
performance, longer lifetimes, and a higher likelihood of use as an economically
viable source of electrical power. Fuel cells are not transparent, so visual
observation inside a fuel cell is not possible. As a result, it is difficult to
manage the water produced since it is not clear where water droplets are or what
is causing them to stay trapped. One way to 'see inside' the fuel cell is to use
X-ray techniques. This research will establish collaboration between Montana
State University and the University of Saskatchewan, which is home to a
sophisticated X-ray facility for scientific measurements. The experimental data
will better inform computer models and ultimately lead to better fuel cells.
Broader impacts include integrating research into the classroom, placing women
and minority students in the lab, and scientific presentations for elementary
through high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport of water in a
PEM fuel cell remains an unresolved issue because the system is reacting,
multiphase, multi-scale, porous, and not amenable to direct visualization.
Connecting transport phenomena with performance currently relies on indirect
approaches or models with insufficient data for full validation. Collaboration
with the University of Saskatchewan provides access to Synchrotron X-ray
radiography, allowing this research to identify exactly where water accumulates
in a fuel cell to understand how to manage it effectively. The research will
study fundamental fluid transport in fuel cells from experimental and numerical
perspectives. Knowledge generated on multiphase flow will advance fuel cells and
provide additional insight into microfluidics, multiphase heat exchangers, and
porous media flows. The project will (1) allow travel to Saskatchewan to share
expertise and schedule time with the Synchrotron facility; (2) collect and
analyze initial X-ray radiography data; (3) establish an experimental and
modeling approach; and (4) continue the collaboration by leveraging these
results for continued research.