* 1444478
* Transforming Cereal Genomics: Tooling Up For Empowered Phenotyping Platforms
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2022
* Stephen Dellaporta, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 10/31/2022
* USD 2,128,996.00

PI: Albert P. Kausch (University of Rhode Island)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs:
Zhanyuan Zhang (University of Missouri-Columbia), Maria Moreno and Stephen
Dellaporta (Yale University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of cereal
crops to global agriculture, economy, food security and international stability
is well documented and widely understood. The functional development of a
genome-level knowledge base linking genes to traits through the use of
transgenics in cereal species is critical to understanding fundamental
physiological functions important to crop improvement. Transgenics are integral
to modern agricultural practices and to basic research for the assessment and
validation of plant gene function. Emerging technologies such as plant synthetic
biology and metabolic engineering depend heavily on transgenic technologies.
This project is aimed at discovery, design and assembly of a new innovative
paradigm for cereal transformation to empower whole genome-level basic research
by enabling critical transgenic technologies required for functional analyses
and phenotyping platforms. In addition to the training of students and
postdoctoral associates, the project will establish a Cereal Transgenics Working
Group for the development and rapid dissemination of cereal transformation
resources including germplasm, protocols, and training workshops. Nucleic acid
sequences generated will be deposited at GenBank. All biological materials
including germplasm, vectors and reagents will be available upon request and
through long-term repositories such as national germplasm centers and the
American Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC). Software tools developed during the
project will be made available for download at sourceforge.net. Details on
protocols and use of software will be available in supplemental materials
published in manuscripts, as well as available at the project's
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to expand cereal
transgenics capabilities and develop a set of comprehensive tools and resources
that will maximize the potential and utility of existing and new emerging
genomic resources in cereal crops. The specific objectives of this project are:
(1) to develop advanced cereal transformation technologies including efficient
event analysis of next-generation vectors, and expression cassettes for cereals;
2) to enable genome editing capabilities (CRISPR-Cas9) to cereals; (3) to
establish best practices for efficient transformation of selected cereal
genotypes including highly recalcitrant inbred lines of maize and (3) to
institute critical activities that will facilitate technology transfer to other
laboratories requiring cereal transformation including workshops and training
activities. These objectives will be achieved by an integration of technologies
across various fields of plant biology including advanced cell and tissue
culture, transgenic biology, molecular biology, genomics, information
management, and training to disseminate and facilitate actual technology
transfer.