* 1444215
* Control at the interface of strongly coupled partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/25/2013,07/31/2016
* Irena Lasiecka, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,197.00

The present proposal is focused on the study of control-theoretic issues for
systems of strongly coupled PDEs, where the (active, passive) control action is
exercised in the transmission conditions at the interface between two media.
They include: stabilization and long-time behavior/theory of attractors,
controllability, optimality, min-max game theory, inverse reconstruction from
boundary measurements of a single system component, etc. A preliminary question
is well-posedness of the overall dynamically interactive system, typically
consisting of components of different type, e.g., parabolic versus hyperbolic.
Emphasis is given to problems in mathematical and control-theoretic areas which
are rather unexplored, such as: gas flow-structure interaction in
aeroelasticity; elastic structure-flow interaction with moving interface;
structural acoustic interaction with a non-shallow shell as active curved wall
and a nonlinear acoustic Westervalt-Kuznetesov chamber (based on Fourier Law of
Heat Flux) or Jordan-Moore-Gibson-Thompson chamber (based on Maxwell-Cattaneo
Law), both arising in High Intensity Ultrasound
focusing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical control theory injects in the study
of differential equations the active viewpoint of an external agent or
manipulator, who is not satisfied with just passively observing or contemplating
the evolution of a natural phenomenon; but instead seeks to intervene as to
influence and modify its dynamical behavior, in order to achieve a preassigned
outcome. Celestial mechanics offers an established example of the passive, non-
controlled viewpoint: The astronomer may calculate orbits, predict time and
location of eclipses, but cannot alter these phenomena. In contrast,
governmental action on social or economic issues---such as reducing unemployment
or stimulating growth---illustrates the active, control-based strategy. Analysis
versus synthesis. The present project applies the active control approach of
synthesis to study complex multi-faceted phenomena or combined units---
ubiquitous in the physical world---consisting of systems of strongly coupled
partial differential equations, where the controlling authority has access only
to the interface between two different media. To suppress turbulence or flutter
in fluid-structure or air/gas flow-structure interactions. Or to achieve noise
reduction in an acoustic chamber, such as the interior of an aircraft. Or to
obtain high intensity ultrasound focusing in medical applications, ranging from
lithotripsy or thermo-therapy to ultrasound cleaning and welding.