* 1444167
* Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes: Sentinel Taxa for Southern Ocean Warming
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,254,470.00

Antarctic fish and their early developmental stages are an important component
of the food web that sustains life in the cold Southern Ocean (SO) that
surrounds Antarctica. They feed on smaller organisms and in turn are eaten by
larger animals, including seals and killer whales. Little is known about how
rising ocean temperatures will impact the development of Antarctic fish embryos
and their growth after hatching. This project will address this gap by assessing
the effects of elevated temperatures on embryo viability, on the rate of embryo
development, and on the gene "toolkits" that respond to temperature stress. One
of the two species to be studied does not produce red blood cells, a defect that
may make its embryos particularly vulnerable to heat. The outcomes of this
research will provide the public and policymakers with "real world" data that
are necessary to inform decisions and design strategies to cope with changes in
the Earth's climate, particularly with respect to protecting life in the SO. The
project will also further the NSF goals of training new generations of
scientists, including providing scientific training for undergraduate and
graduate students, and of making scientific discoveries available to the general
public. This includes the unique educational opportunity for undergraduates to
participate in research in Antarctica and engaging the public in several ways,
including the development of professionally-produced educational videos with bi-
lingual closed captioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the onset of cooling of
the SO about 40 million years ago, evolution of Antarctic marine organisms has
been driven by the development of cold temperatures. Because body temperatures
of Antarctic fishes fall in a narrow range determined by their habitat (-1.9 to
+2.0 C) they are particularly attractive models for understanding how organismal
physiology and biochemistry have been shaped to maintain life in a cooling
environment. The long-term objective of this project is to understand the
capacities of Antarctic fishes to acclimatize and/or adapt to rapid oceanic
warming through analysis of their underlying genetic "toolkits." This objective
will be accomplished through three Specific Aims: 1) assessing the effects of
elevated temperatures on gene expression during development of embryos; 2)
examining the effects of elevated temperatures on embryonic morphology and on
the temporal and spatial patterns of gene expression; and 3) evaluating the
evolutionary mechanisms that have led to the loss of the red blood cell genetic
program by the white-blooded fishes. Aims 1 and 2 will be investigated by
acclimating experimental embryos of both red-blooded and white-blooded fish to
elevated temperatures. Differential gene expression will be examined through the
use of high throughput RNA sequencing. The temporal and spatial patterns of gene
expression in the context of embryonic morphology (Aim 2) will be determined by
microscopic analysis of embryos "stained" with (hybridized to) differentially
expressed gene probes revealed by Aim 1; other developmental marker genes will
also be used. The genetic lesions resulting from loss of red blood cells by the
white-blooded fishes (Aim 3) will be examined by comparing genes and genomes in
the two fish groups.