* 1444400
* Roots and Root Hairs: Comparative Molecular Studies Across Land Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Richard McEachin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,355,691.00

Crop yields depend on effective uptake of water and nutrients by the roots. A
current challenge is to understand how crop plants regulate the formation and
function of their roots. An understanding of the genes that control roots at
this level would help plant breeders tailor root traits to match new
agricultural practices, land use patterns, and suboptimal soils. In this
project, genome-wide gene expression will be defined from roots and root hairs
from a wide range of crop plants and their relatives under various environmental
conditions. These gene expression patterns will be analyzed to identify key
genes that control the formation and function of roots. Further, these large
gene expression datasets will provide a valuable tool for scientists studying
many aspects of root biology. The knowledge obtained from this project is
expected to provide new insight into the origin, diversification, and
conservation of molecular mechanisms used to regulate the formation and function
of roots and root hairs of plants. Further, given the important roles of
roots/root hairs for plant growth and environmental response, these findings are
expected to assist the rational design of strategies to manipulate root and root
hair architecture in crop plants, a particularly important goal given concerns
about nutrient-poor soils and the impact of environmental change. This project
will provide strong interdisciplinary training for the participating
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows. A major outreach
activity of this project is a collaborative research visitor exchange program
with the College of Charleston (SC), a primarily undergraduate institution, to
provide large-scale genomic and computational biology experiences to students
who are unable to obtain this training at their home institution. The project
will participate in the Michigan Biological Scholars Program, a bridging program
assisting first-year undergraduates in the life sciences, especially
underrepresented minorities. Finally, aspects of this research will be
incorporated into a semester-long laboratory exercise as part of an advanced
molecular development course at the University of Michigan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rapidly expanding gene and genome sequences
available in plants, it is now possible to consider the ultimate goal of
defining the gene activities present in every organ and cell type in species
throughout the plant kingdom. This knowledge would dramatically improve the
understanding of plant processes and their diversity, and will likely lead to
new opportunities for manipulating crop plants. This project is designed as a
first step toward this ultimate goal by defining gene expression in a simple
plant organ (the root) and a simple plant cell type (the root hair) in diverse
plant species. In a preliminary study, expression data has been generated from
seven species (rice, maize, soybean, cucumber, tomato, Arabidopsis, and
Selaginella), demonstrating the feasibility and potential impact of the proposed
research. This project has two major objectives. The first is to identify sets
of regulatory genes associated with specific root structural and functional
traits, by defining transcriptomes from the three major zones of activity for
the primary roots and other root types from a diverse set of crop plants. In the
second objective, cell-specific regulatory genes will be defined by linking gene
expression and cell characteristics in the root hair cells from these same plant
species grown under normal and nutrient stress conditions. The results of this
project are expected to have a significant impact on the plant research
community, through the generation of root-zone-specific and root-hair-specific
expression data from many diverse species, which will assist efforts to assign
function to unknown genes, predict functional homologs, and assess gene
evolutionary history. The data and materials produced by this project will be
available at the project website (http://sites.lsa.umich.edu/PGRP-roots), the
NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA, http://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/), and
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).