* 1444507
* Genomic Analysis of Leaf Cuticle Development and Functional Diversity in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Laurie Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,255,807.00

CoPIs Michael Gore (Cornell University); Michael Scanlon (Cornell University);
and Isabel Molina (Algoma University)&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators Alisa Huffaker
(UCSD) and Andrew French (USDA/ARS Arid Land Agricultural Research
Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protecting crop plants from diseases and adverse
growing conditions is key to achieving sustainable food production. The cuticle
is a waxy, water-proof layer on the outer surfaces of plant leaves and stems
that plays a vital role in preventing water loss. It is also where plants first
interact with most insects and diseases. Therefore, the cuticle is important to
keep plants healthy while preventing them from drying out in the breeze. While
many prior projects have contributed insights into cuticle composition,
development and function, very few have focused on the adult leaves of cereal
crops, whose cuticle has a significant impact on the agricultural performance of
these key crops. This project will discover genes that control cuticle
development and function in corn, evaluate the potential for improvement of the
leaf cuticle to help produce crops with increased drought tolerance and
resistance to diseases, and generate tools to guide these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior studies have laid a foundation for
understanding cuticle biogenesis and function in plants, but very few have
focused on adult leaves of economically important cereal crops such as maize,
and none have yet been translated to crop improvements. This project will
analyze the biogenesis of adult maize leaf cuticle and its genetic basis, and
will elucidate the impact of genetically determined cuticle variation on drought
tolerance and pathogen penetration. The first aim is to relate genome-wide
analysis of epidermal gene expression to changes in cuticle structure,
composition, and function across a developmental timecourse. The second aim is
to identify loci controlling cuticular evaporation (CE) rate in adult leaves via
a genome-wide association study (GWAS). The third aim is to analyze maize lines
selected for diversity in cuticle function to elucidate relationships between
cuticle characteristics (histology, ultrastructure and composition), cuticle
function as a barrier against water loss and pathogen penetration, and drought
tolerance. The fourth aim is to elucidate, via network analysis, the
relationships between gene expression, cuticle composition, and cuticle
function. This final aim is expected to identify key genetic regulators and a
systems-level understanding of the genetic basis for cuticle biogenesis and
function in adult maize leaves. Project outcomes will include new insights
regarding adult maize leaf cuticle development and its genetic regulation, new
knowledge of the impact of cuticle modification on drought tolerance and
pathogen infection in maize, and genetic tools to guide such modifications.
Project outcomes and data will be communicated through multiple open access
publications, a project website housed at http://labs.biology.ucsd.edu/smith/,
and deposition of data to three long-term repositories: the NCBI Short Read
Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), Maize GDB (http://www.maizegdb.org/),
and an interactive database to be hosted by the UCSD library
(http://library.ucsd.edu/dc). Participation in this project will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities preparing young scientists at various
stages of their education to enter the science workforce of the future. It will
also broaden participation in science by involving approximately 120
undergraduates at all institutions combined, with a focus on students with
minimal prior access to research opportunities and/or awareness of science
career opportunities.