* 1444779
* Using a research center-based mentoring program to increase the participation of African Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans in engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Eduardo Santillan-Jimenez, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 11/30/2019
* USD 447,770.00

This engineering education research project focuses on involving
underrepresented engineering undergraduate students in mentored research
activities within research centers with the intent to improve retention and
create pathways for academic and research careers. Students have an assigned
department based counselor and a research mentor based in the Center for Applied
Energy Research. The proposed activity will advance our knowledge of how to
include research center faculty, staff and facilities in efforts to support the
undergraduate educational mission of the institutional home of the center. The
PI seeks to capitalize on the low student to researcher ratio within the center
and the focus on research activities that will excite the student and enhance
their learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of
this project is in its intent to build relationships between the undergraduate
students and the research center staff. The cutting edge research being
performed on a national level within research centers has the potential to help
students see beyond what they learn in the classroom environment, helping them
to see the applications of what they are learning to both basic and applied
research in their discipline. This in turn reinforces the importance of their
undergraduate curriculum leading to increased interest in, and efforts to, learn
new material. As a result of this project students will become more engaged in
learning and will consider careers in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of integrating research and
education to support development of a world-class engineering and science
workforce.