* 1444389
* NSF EAGER: Initiative for Physics and Mathematics of Neural Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Hasselmo, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

This project will foster collaborations between physicists, mathematicians and
neuroscientists to generate theoretical frameworks and statistical tools to
interpret genomic, anatomical and physiological data on brain function. A
community of researchers will be built through development of a seminar series
for discussions of problems in which the theoretical approaches of physics,
mathematics and statistics can be brought to be bear on specific research
questions regarding neural systems. In addition, a set of pilot projects will be
funded to foster collaborations between mathematicians, physicists and
neuroscientists. Specific pilot projects will use the techniques of theoretical
physics to address problems of understanding large scale functional anatomical
connectivity, with the objective of identifying constraints on the distance and
pattern of inter-areal connectivity in the human brain. Pilot projects will also
develop a theoretical framework for understanding neural activity on different
time scales during behavior, with the objective of understanding the unifying
neural principles underlying human memory behavior over time scales from seconds
to minutes to hours. Pilot projects will also develop mathematical and
statistical techniques to identify molecular networks underlying specific
features of neural function, with the objective of identifying specific network
modules in the prefrontal cortex. These pilot projects will provide example
interactions that can be expanded to further build a community of interaction of
physicists, mathematicians and neuroscientists.

The maturation of scientific fields such as physics required the development of
sophisticated theoretical frameworks to account for experimental phenomena at
multiple different scales of analysis ranging from particle physics to condensed
matter physics to astrophysics. The maturation of neuroscience as a field will
require similarly sophisticated theoretical frameworks that effectively account
for data at the different levels including the genomic, physiological and
behavioral levels. Current theories of single neuron function have not yet been
effectively extended to address physiological phenomena at the circuit and
population level or the behavioral function of these network dynamics. The pilot
projects in this grant will attempt to develop theoretical frameworks for
addressing these multiple levels of analysis. The intellectual merit of the
proposal will be the application of mathematical and statistical techniques to
the interpretation of neuroscience data, including the development of
theoretical models to account for existing data and to guide the design of
future experiments. The field of neuroscience needs more extensive development
of a theoretical framework for understanding the structure and function of
neural systems at different levels, including genomic, physiological and
behavioral. Successful interactions in the pilot projects could provide a model
for further interaction of physicists, mathematicians, and neuroscientists
throughout the field. More specifically, these pilot projects will provide a
framework for development of new theories for analyzing the connectivity
patterns of neural systems, the dynamics of brain function underlying behavior,
and the molecular networks underlying these neural properties. The resources
provided by this grant will serve to recruit additional mathematicians and
physicists to address relevant questions concerning brain function.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Mathematical Biology program in the Division
of Mathematical sciences.