* 1444875
* Building Capacity for 21st Century Social Sciences; Washington, D.C., Spring, 2015
* SBE,SMA
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* C Michael Barton, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Olster
* 11/30/2016
* USD 47,845.00

This workshop will bring together experts to address a national program of
capacity building for dynamic and transformed social sciences. It responds to a
growing need across multiple scientific disciplines, policy making institutions,
and private enterprise for a richer understanding of complex human social
systems. Such a program will provide a more thorough scientific assessment of
risks and uncertainties in social policies, including unexpected and,
especially, undesirable policy consequences. It will also help to better
anticipate the potential for rapid and disruptive change (i.e., tipping points
and phase changes) that are characteristic of complex systems. Building
significant capacity in transdisciplinary science, and employing advanced
technologies to understand the dynamics of human society, will promote United
States leadership in basic and applied research on the social dimensions of the
grand challenges we face in the twenty-first
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop participants will be charged with
developing a roadmap for building national capacity in the social sciences that
is needed to meet global challenges facing our world and society in the twenty-
first century. There are important scientific problems pertaining to the
organization and dynamics of human social systems that are of such scale and
complexity that they are intractable to individual researchers, and require a
community-scale research organization. The challenges of a world in which human
actions are significant drivers of earth systems requires a global-scale science
of human society to lead interdisciplinary research by collaborative teams that
span social, behavioral, and natural sciences. It requires advanced concepts and
methods to manage, synthesize, and model data at the size and complexity needed
to match human socio-ecological systems, and computational tools to process the
vast quantities of information being generated and captured by these systems
today. The rapid pace of technological and social change that is transforming
both the domesticated earth and its human managers in unprecedented ways demands
an equally dramatic transformation of social science.