* 1444962
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Beamspace MIMO Transceiver Prototype for Millimeter-Wave Gigabit Mobile Wireless Links
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Chad Navis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2017
* USD 204,633.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
multi-antenna MIMO (multiple input multiple output) wireless transceiver
architecture to meet the exploding data rate requirements of emerging wireless
applications driven by the proliferation of mobile devices such as smartphones
and tablets. The new continuous aperture phased (CAP)-MIMO transceiver
architecture is important because it represents a promising and practically
viable approach for realizing the full potential of emerging millimeter-wave
(mmW) technology, operating in the 30-300 GHz band, in addressing the wireless
data rate challenge with dramatically enhanced power and spectrum efficiency
compared to existing systems operating below 5 GHz. The project will result in a
prototype of a millimeter-wave CAP-MIMO transceiver. This CAP-MIMO prototype has
the following unique features: a hybrid analog-digital architecture, an analog
front-end for spatial multi-beamforming, and a multi-beam selection mechanism.
These features provide several advantages when compared to the leading competing
designs based on phased-array principles in the emerging millimeter-wave
wireless technology market including: multi-Gigabits/second speeds,
unprecedented electronic multi-beam steering and data multiplexing capability,
and a viable architecture for optimizing the fundamental performance-complexity
tradeoffs inherent to millimeter-wave MIMO systems. This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. Electronic multi-beam steering and data multiplexing
capability is critical to realizing the full potential of millimeter-wave (mmW)
MIMO systems both in terms of performance (power and spectral efficiency) and
functionality (point-to-multipoint network operation in both static and mobile
environments). However, existing approaches to mmW MIMO systems ? including
conventional designs based on digital beamforming and phased-array-based
extensions to multi-beam MIMO ? fail to address fundamental performance-
complexity tradeoffs that are critical to technology translation. The CAP-MIMO
prototype developed in this project will provide a definitive demonstration of
the critical multi-beam steering and data multiplexing capability and help
identify viable pathways for technology translation. The hybrid analog-digital
prototype will leverage two key translational elements for filling the
technology gaps: a lens-based front-end antenna for analog beamforming, and a
digitally-driven multi-beam selection network that enables joint hardware-
software optimization of transceiver complexity. In addition, personnel involved
in this project, including graduate and undergraduate students and postdocs,
will receive invaluable inter-disciplinary training and experience involving
innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation through: prototype
design, development, testing and demonstration; market analysis, business plan
development, and evaluation and refinement of commercialization strategies; and
interactions with other students and faculty involved in both the engineering
and business aspects of technology development. The personnel involved in this
project will also engage various potential partners, including large and small
companies in the wireless industry, to get feedback on the project activities as
well as to facilitate technology licensing, development, and eventual
commercialization.