* 1444568
* Gene Regulatory Networks in the Maize Endosperm
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2024
* Gary Drews, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/29/2024
* USD 7,474,968.00

PI: Ramin Yadegari (University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Philip W.
Becraft (Iowa State University), Joanne M. Dannenhoffer (Central Michigan
University), and Gary N. Drews (University of
Utah)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endosperm is a major component of the seed, and is
biologically and economically important. In all angiosperms, endosperm provides
nutrients and signals to the embryo during seed development. In cereal grains,
endosperm composes a large proportion of the mature seed, and contains large
amounts of carbohydrates and proteins, which provide more than 50% of the
calories in the human diet, either directly or indirectly through animal feed.
Cereal endosperm also serves as a raw material for manufacturing important
industrial products, including ethanol. Maize is an excellent model system for
molecular genetic analysis of cereal endosperm and is the primary subject of
this research project which focuses on maize early endosperm development,
encompassing the time when the endosperm grows from a single cell into a
multicellular structure composed of different specialized cell types. Although
the molecular mechanisms that control this developmental period have not been
elucidated, they are likely to affect many economically important processes
including, but not limited to, the regulation of seed size, and accumulation of
starch and protein during grain filling. In addition to the training of students
and postdoctoral associates, the project will provide summer research training
internships for undergraduate students from Central Michigan University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify genetic pathways that control endosperm cell
differentiation, gene expression profiling will be performed on each endosperm
cell type at multiple time points; this will be accomplished through a
combination of laser-capture microdissection to collect specific endosperm cell
types and the RNA-seq method (high throughput sequencing of cDNA) to identify
all the genes expressed in the collected tissues. This information will be used
as a framework for gene-network analysis in two of the endosperm cell types: the
starchy endosperm and basal transfer layer. Starchy endosperm is the major
repository for starch and protein accumulation, while the basal transfer layer
is important for transporting sugar and amino acid building blocks into the
growing grain; both tissues are important for grain yield and quality. The gene
networks will be revealed by performing gene co-expression analysis and key
transcription factors will be studied with protein-DNA assays and genetic
analyses. Early endosperm development is highly sensitive to drought stress
which can decrease grain yield, even if favorable moisture conditions are
restored. To identify the gene-expression perturbations caused by drought stress
in maize kernels, gene expression profiling will be performed with kernels from
drought-stressed plants. In addition, this project will profile the genes
expressed during early endosperm development in a closely related cereal,
sorghum, and use comparative genomics with maize to reveal fundamental and
species-specific aspects of endosperm development. Data generated can be
accessed through the project website (www.grainendosperm.org) as well as through
long-term repositories such as MaizeGDB and NCBI's GEO and SRA.