* 1444853
* Lighting the Pathway to Faculty Careers for Natives in STEM
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2023
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,757,897.00

This award to the American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) is
aimed at increasing the number of American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN)
students who persist in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
The long term goal is to increase the number of AI/AN individuals who pursue
faculty positions in STEM disciplines at US colleges and universities. The
dearth of STEM faculty from the AI/AN group has been a long-standing national
problem. Many public and private entities have made investments to improve the
representation of Natives in STEM fields -- including in faculty positions --
and these investments have not made much of a difference in the percentage of
students persisting in STEM among AI/AN. This project, Lighting the Pathway to
Faculty Careers for Natives in STEM, will implement a 5-year pilot program at
the national level, using the extensive network of individuals who are engaged
in AISES national efforts or its 184 college student chapters. To continue to
maintain US competiveness in the global economy, the country must utilize all of
its talents in order to advance scientific knowledge and technological
innovation. This project will help achieve
that.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the AISES national network, this
project will recruit students majoring in the biological sciences, mathematical
and physical sciences, geosciences, computer and information science, and
engineering -- at all academic levels (undergrad, graduate and postdoc). Over
the course of 5 years, it is expected that an average of 35 students will
participate in the program each year. The students will be provided a strong and
persistent support and mentoring system so that they can overcome barriers to
the completion of their STEM degrees. Students will be provided information
relevant to success in a STEM career, research experience, leadership training,
role models, and other tools to help them advance to the next academic level.
Frequent face-to-face and virtual meetings will expose participants to topics
such as balancing life and career, effective study habits, overcoming geographic
and cultural isolation, graduate school and career preparation, strategies for
success as a STEM major, and writing successful graduate fellowship
applications. The network of Native scholars ranging from undergraduates to
senior faculty will create a supportive environment conducive to continued
success in the students' pursuit of a STEM career. Participants will attend the
AISES National Conference to foster strong professional and personal ties with
their peers, and a conference in their chosen STEM field in order to present the
results of their research. An external evaluation will assess the impact of the
program on student persistence in STEM before, during, and after students'
participation. These findings will serve as a guide for future, expanded-scale
projects and will also inform application to other underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Mathematics and Physical Sciences
(MPS), Engineering (ENG), Education (EHR), Geosciences (GEO), and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), and the Office of International and
Integrative Activities (OIIA).