* 1444206
* U.S.-Nepal Research Planning Visit:  Impacts of Climate on Rural Communities in the Gandaki River Watershed, Nepal
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Mark Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2015
* USD 30,820.00

Changing cimate has the potential to disrupt rural communities worldwide, and
there is a pressing need to test existing theories and conceptual models of
community resiliency to such changes. The remarkable variability in social and
ecological systems along the Gandaki River corridor in Nepal's Himalayan range
provides ideal conditions to test these theories, and the goal of this project
is to support a three-week research planning trip to develop collaborative
relationships with Nepalese partners and to finalize research hypotheses on the
impacts of changing climate on rural communities in the region. By supporting
U.S. researchers in Economics, Civil Engineering, and Earth Sciences to develop
new international collaborations, this project helps to strengthen the nation's
STEM capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus area for this planning
visit is the Gandaki River Corridor. The Gandaki is one of the major rivers of
Nepal and it transects remarkably diverse landscapes from the arid Tibetan
Plateau, through the Siwalik foothills, and into the humid Terai plains. The
U.S.-based research team includes an atmospheric scientist, an economist, and a
water resources engineer. The Nepalese partners include top researchers from
both social and physical science backgrounds. Specifically, the primary
collaboration coordinator in Nepal is Dr. Siddhartha Bajracharya, a senior
environmental research scientist at the National Trust for Nature Conservation
(NTNC), who has extensive experience working along the Gandaki corridor. Three
U.S. graduate students will also participate in the project. This planning visit
represents an initial step in the team's long-term research goal to advance
understanding of the linkages and feedback mechanisms between biophysical and
social factors that influence vulnerability and resilience to changing climate
across interacting spatial, temporal, and organizational scales.