* 1444863
* EAGER: Exploring Trade-offs in Cyber Offense and Defense Through the Lenses of Computer and Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Tyler Moore, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 210,506.00

This project examines the trade-offs governments face between engaging in cyber
offense and defense. Governments may exploit a somewhat less secure Internet to
gain intelligence and strategic advantage. But a more secure Internet encourages
more participation online and reduces citizens' exposure to cybercrime. Thus
governments face a difficult dilemma: Should they forego potentially useful
cyber operations and work on strengthening the Internet in order to provide a
global good? To answer this question, this project aims to construct a taxonomy
of offensive and defensive cyber operations, describing the range of attack
options and the possible collateral damage they may cause. The project's
findings may benefit U.S. national security by giving policymakers a way of
assessing the value of offensive cyber operations against the unintended
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed research project
has three related components: The first component is a summary and assessment of
different approaches to offensive and defensive cyber operations and classes of
vulnerabilities. The second is an examination of the suitability of two
political science theories to the debate over cybersecurity policy: hegemonic
stability theory and offense-defense theory. To evaluate these theories in the
cyber context, the researchers conduct qualitative and quantitative analysis of
historical Internet resiliency, retrospective accounting of prior cyber
operations, structured controlled comparative analyses, and counterfactual
analyses of past operations. The third part of the project uses the foregoing
analysis to develop guidelines for policymakers and intelligence organizations
about when to disclose or stockpile vulnerabilities, and how to choose among
several different strategies available to balance offense and defense. This
project has the potential to transform how we understand the international
politics of cybersecurity. It examines cyber warfare trade-offs by testing
established political science theories with rigorous computer science analysis.
This approach creates an opportunity for reaching an important theoretical
breakthrough by deriving parsimonious measures of internet resilience and the
offense-defense balance in cyberspace.