* 1444511
* Quantitative Trait Locus Editing for Crop Improvement
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Jan Leach, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2021
* USD 5,630,728.00

Milestone achievements in crop research now enable difficult challenges to be
addressed rapidly and effectively using innovative approaches. These
achievements include DNA sequences and measurements of traits relevant to
productivity and quality for large numbers of varieties within individual crop
species, powerful computational approaches and data management tools,
increasingly detailed molecular understanding of plant biology including
responses to the environment, and new methods to precisely test the function of
particular DNA sequences. Building on these resources and tools, this project
will address the longstanding challenge of identifying DNA sequences responsible
for traits that vary in a quantitative way, called "quantitative trait loci"
(QTL), and making them amenable for crop improvement. While QTL are key
determinants of crop productivity, they have been exceedingly difficult to
study, and very little is known about them. This project focuses on QTL for
disease resistance, disease susceptibility, and tolerance to acid soils in the
globally important crop species, rice. The project will isolate DNA sequences
associated with high levels of these traits and test whether those sequences are
responsible by moving them into rice varieties that show low trait levels and
measuring the result. The project will improve understanding of crop resistance
to stresses caused by pests and poor soil conditions and lead to improved crop
productivity. More broadly, the project will establish effective ways to connect
variation across individuals with the DNA sequences that cause that variation,
which will be useful not only for plant research, but other life sciences,
including medicine. The project will further benefit society by integrating its
research objectives with educational activities and materials that will engage
and inform the public and increase participation by members of underrepresented
groups. These include a combined classroom and research experience program for
small-college undergraduates, training workshops for plant biologists, multi-
media educational resources to engage middle and high school students, and a
project web site (www.ricediversity.org) for public access to project-related
materials, publications, and data. Moreover, the project will foster the
development of diverse junior personnel into independent
scientists&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compilations of genomic and other genotypic as
well as phenotypic and associated metadata for large numbers of rice, powerful
informatics approaches and data management tools, the unprecedented ability to
precisely edit plant genomes to probe gene function, and increasingly detailed
molecular understanding of rice responses to biotic and abiotic stresses,
together provide a foundation for this project. This project applies large-scale
statistical genetics and genome editing technology to examine distinct QTL for
disease resistance, disease susceptibility, and acid soil tolerance. Building on
genomic and phenotypic data, computational methods, and infrastructure generated
under previous NSF awards and elsewhere, including the recently released genome
sequences of 3,000 rice accessions, the project will connect genotype to
phenotype for each trait, using genome editing to functionally evaluate isolated
genetic polymorphism in new genetic backgrounds. Co-variation will also be
examined for each trait to test for genetic background effects on allele
viability, and in the case of disease susceptibility and resistance, allelic
variation in pathogen-targeted genes will be queried for evidence of purifying
or positive selection. Findings will be used to expand the tools and the
collection of genotypic and phenotypic data associated with the project, and
tailor these resources for the community, while improving understanding of and
the ability to enhance plant resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses. Under
the outreach objectives of the project, the combined classroom and research
experience program for small-college undergraduates will integrate computational
and molecular biology aspects of the proposed research and include summer
internships in the research laboratories at Cornell. The training workshops will
focus specifically on genome editing for plant biologists, especially those from
underserved and underrepresented groups; the multimedia educational resources
will include stories, podcasts, and interactive web modules and will be
distributed through major media outlets; the project web site
(www.ricediversity.org) for scientists, the general public, and educators will
provide access to project-related materials, protocols, publications, and data
(data will be released on or before publication of analytical results). Finally,
the development of diverse junior personnel into capable, creative, and
collaborative independent scientists will be fostered by a multi-institutional,
cross-disciplinary research environment.