* 1444552
* Sequencing a Reference-grade Genome of the Domesticated Allotetraploid Cotton: the World's Largest Source of Renewable Textile Fiber
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Jane Grimwood, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 03/31/2019
* USD 2,237,255.00

Cotton is the world's largest source of natural textile fiber and is a main
oilseed crop. The revenue resulting from annual cotton production is estimated
to be $100 billion in the USA alone. Cotton is an excellent model system for
studying fiber cell differentiation, cell expansion, and cellulose biosynthesis,
as well as polyploid genome evolution and crop domestication. Upland or American
cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) and Pima or Egyptian cotton (Gossypium barbadense
L.) have been independently domesticated from allotetraploid species. Improving
cotton fiber yield and quality will provide a sustainable alternative to
petroleum-based synthetic fibers. Generating a reference-grade genome sequence
for domesticated allotetraploid cotton will enable both basic and applied
research that will provide new insights into fiber development and cellulose and
wall biosynthesis with broad impact for biomass crops and biofuel production.
Since most crops are of polyploid origin, methods and principles being developed
from this project will also advance research in other crops with complex and
polyploid genomes. Genomic sequence and gene expression data will be made
available through public data depositories, including GenBank, GEO
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), miRBase (http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/), and
the NCBI's SRA (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/info/seq.html). Plant materials
and the final version of annotated sequence will be distributed through
CottonGen (http://www.cottongen.org/icgi/home), the cotton research community
website. Innovative and scalable education and training modules in plant
genomics and bioinformatics will be developed for middle and high schools and
undergraduate institutions in the Mississippi Delta. The effectiveness of
education and outreach will be enhanced through close collaborations with Alcorn
State University and Mississippi Valley State University, two Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to develop high-quality sequence resources to address fundamental
questions in crop plants that are of economic importance. The physical map-
guided hybrid approach in combination with whole-genome shotgun (WGS) and
genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) is among the best strategies to sequence and
assemble "gold-standard" reference-grade genomes of complex polyploid species
including cotton and other important crops such as wheat. The research team has
developed bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) resources including a physical
map and BAC-end sequences (BES), WGS, PacBio long reads, and single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) data of Upland cotton (TM-1). Moreover, the critical pilot
data have been generated, which are necessary in preparing a successful strategy
for sequencing the allotetraploid cotton. Specifically, the project will
sequence and assemble individual BAC inserts from the minimum tiling path that
covers ~85% of the genome. The gaps will be filled and/or reduced by the second
iteration of additional 3,000 or more BACs with integration of WGS contigs,
mate-pair and PacBio long reads. The sequence contigs and scaffolds will be
ordered by high-density linkage maps and BES-targeted GBS. The final sequence
will consist of thirteen pairs of homoeologous pseudo-molecules, including
validation by targeted GBS and BAC-fluorescence in situ hybridization. The
reference-grade sequence will be annotated by Phytozome with the RNA-seq data
collected from ~20 cotton tissues. This reference-grade sequence will be
immediately released to the research and breeding communities to improve Upland
cotton that accounts for &gt;95% of the world cotton production. The sequence
will be utilized for analyzing epigenomes and their roles in fiber development
of allotetraploid cotton.