* 1444958
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Multifocal Laser Tweezers Raman Spectroscopy for Parallel Spectral Analysis of Biological Cells
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* James Chan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2017
* USD 203,130.00

This PFI: Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) Technology Translation (TT)
project focuses on translating single cell Raman spectroscopy to fill the need
for new techniques in the cytometry market that do not require the use of
exogenous labels for analyzing the biochemistry of living cells. The multifocal
laser tweezers Raman spectroscopy (M-LTRS) technology is important because it
offers new capabilities for analyzing single living cells by directly
interrogating their intrinsic biochemistry to assess cellular composition,
structure, and function. Such unique capabilities have the potential to overcome
limitations of existing cytometry methods, which will lead to new advancements
in biological and biomedical discoveries that ultimately will have a significant
impact on healthcare. The project will result in a proof-of-concept M-LTRS
system that is capable of analyzing a two-dimensional (2-D) array of optically
trapped cells in solution. This M-LTRS approach has the following unique
features: parallel Raman spectral analysis of up to one hundred cells, non-
invasive and label-free chemical analysis of living cells, and long-term
monitoring of cell dynamics and response to environmental stimuli. These
features provide improved analytical efficiency, unique analytical capabilities,
and improved performance when compared to the current state of LTRS instruments
in the research community or when compared to the leading competing fluorescence
based cytometry methods currently in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Single cell Raman spectroscopy has a low analytical throughput due to
the intrinsically weak signals of a Raman scattering process. The ability to
analyze only a few cells at a time is currently a major limitation of Raman
spectroscopy for many biological applications, which often require the analysis
of a large number of cells in order to determine the heterogeneity of the
system. A technology gap currently exists on how to further improve the
throughput by detecting the Raman spectra of many individual cells
simultaneously. This project addresses this gap as the technology translates
from research discovery toward commercial application. The strategy applied in
this project is to develop a multifocal LTRS system that is capable of optically
trapping a 2-D array of cells and to simultaneously interrogate their spectra. A
novel detection scheme will be developed that involves the rapid shuttering of
different combinations of the laser foci, allowing for different superimposed
Raman spectral patterns to be detected by a single camera detector. A
deconvolution algorithm will be developed that, when applied to the superimposed
spectra, will enable the parallel retrieval of the individual Raman spectra from
each cell with no spectral crosstalk. At the conclusion of this proof-of-concept
project, demonstration of a 100-fold improvement in the throughput of single
cell Raman spectroscopy with this new detection scheme is expected. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, including undergraduate and graduate
students, will receive training in entrepreneurship through established programs
at UC Davis (e.g. Entrepreneurship Academy) that focus on commercializing
science innovations as well as through weekly interactions with the external
collaborative partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Desatoya, LLC to
provide essential guidance in both the commercialization and scientific aspects
in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.