* 1444893
* ABR-PG: Developing Advanced Genomic Tools to Accelerate Linkage of Structural &amp; Functional Diversity in Coffee
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Keithanne Mockaitis, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,623,758.00

PI: Herbert Aldwinckle (Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Marcela
Yepes (Cornell University), Keithanne Mockaitis (Indiana University), Aleksey
Zimin (University of Maryland), and James Yorke (University of
Maryland)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coffee is one of the most valuable and widely
consumed crops on earth. Yet, the diversity of cultivated varieties is very
limited. The lack of genetic diversity in cultivated coffee varieties makes them
extremely vulnerable to diseases and stress brought on by variable weather
patterns. The devastating disease and developmental stresses that cultivated
coffee is currently facing are reducing yield and quality at an alarming rate in
parts of Latin America and Africa, and bringing economic ruin to small-holder
farmers. Efforts are therefore urgently needed to improve disease resistance and
agronomic traits for adaptation to climate change pressures, and having complete
genome sequences is a very important tool for coffee breeding. Arabica coffee is
a complex species because it contains four copies of its genome, a legacy of the
cross between two ancestral species that gave rise to coffee. These additional
copies now complicate the sequencing process. The availability of complete
genome sequences for cultivated Arabica coffee and its ancestral species is
expected to make it easier to find additional genetic diversity in natural
populations and in populations used for breeding. Experiments will focus on
discovery of genetic variation for resistance to the fungal strains responsible
for the current coffee rust epidemic, and resistance to the coffee berry borer,
an insect pest newly arrived in the US, and whose population is expanding in
elevated temperatures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The current grant aims at (i)
sequencing, assembling, scaffolding, and annotating the genome of Arabica coffee
(the allotetraploid Coffea arabica), assisted by high quality assemblies of the
genomes of its putative diploid parents (C. eugenioides and C. canephora), (ii)
building a DNA sequence resource for detection of genomic polymorphism in highly
heterozygous breeding and natural populations, and (iii) generating and
analyzing transcriptome sequence resources enriched for comprehensive profiles
of gene expression in leaves, berries and flowers exposed to different stresses.
Broad genotyping and transcriptome analyses combined with refined phenotyping
performed on advanced breeding and natural populations of C. arabica will
identify the genes and their alleles responsible for phenotypic variation in
important agronomic traits. The research will generate the first highly detailed
datasets that associate relationships between genotype and phenotype for coffee
traits relevant to adaptation, furnishing a basis for molecular-assisted coffee
breeding. This grant will lead to the identification of single nucleotide
polymorphisms, small indels, copy number variants, and present/absent variants
that will provide the essential means to translate the unexploited genomic
diversity of the genus into coffee breeding programs without jeopardizing
desirable quality traits critical to consumers and the US coffee industry. The
project will also contribute importantly to the crop genomics community goals of
developing more high-quality genomic resources for research of phylogenetically
diverse polyploid genomes for evolutionary and genetics studies to gain better
understanding of how polyploidy affects the crop genotype and evolutionary
fitness. To promote research and education spanning biology, mathematics and
computer sciences, this grant will support training opportunities for students
at postgraduate, graduate, undergraduate and high school levels hosted at
collaborating partner institutions. Web-based educational resources and annual
workshops on coffee genomics will be developed to help promote the use of
bioinformatics and molecular-genomic tools in academic and scientific research
programs, as well as to demonstrate to coffee breeders the utility of genomics-
based tools. The project results will be widely accessible to the international
coffee and plant genomics community through the International Coffee Genomics
Network (ICGN) website (http://www.coffeegenome.org), which will link to other
public websites that have already curated coffee information, including open
source curated databases funded by NSF. Cornell University is founding member of
ICGN and supports actively with Bioversity International, the secretariat of the
network.