* 1444761
* Workshop on computationally intensive modeling of dynamic social interaction November 7-8, 2014  in Tucson, Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Emily Butler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,998.00

The ability to predict how people will behave during social interactions would
have implications for a broad array of domains, ranging across close
relationships, education, parenting, business management, work performance,
health behaviors, and conflict resolution. A major barrier to progress is that
behavioral scientists, who are experts at understanding social interaction, do
not usually have advanced mathematical modeling capability. On the other hand,
computational scientists, who have the mathematical and computational ability to
model complex systems, usually are not experts on social interaction. To address
this, Emily Butler (University of Arizona) and colleagues will host a cross-
disciplinary, collaborative workshop to bring together behavioral and
computational scientists with a shared interest in computationally intensive
modeling of dynamic social interactions. The workshop will be attended by
approximately 50 invited scientists and is designed to establish new cross-
disciplinary collaborations, and the sharing of information and resources across
disciplines. More broadly, the larger goal is to foster cumulative research that
supports pragmatic applications. Information about social interaction is
important for developing parenting classes, family counseling programs,
interventions for health behaviors, managerial and negotiation training,
reducing bullying in schools, and promoting constructive international
relations. Thus the workshop has the potential to inform theory and practice
across a diverse range of human experiences.