* 1444074
* 2014 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES)-National Science Foundation (NSF) Special Session in San Antonio, TX on Oct 23-25, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Gilda Barabino, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Barabino, Gilda &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1444074&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Biomedical Engineering Society&lt;br/&gt;2014 Biomedical Engineering Society
(BMES)-National Science Foundation (NSF) Special Session in San Antonio, TX on
Oct 23-25, 2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to support
travel for students, postdoctoral fellows, early career faculty and
professionals, inclusive of underrepresented groups and accessible to persons
with disabilities, to participate in a BMES-NSF Special Session planned for the
2014 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting. The 2014 BMES Annual Meeting
will be held in San Antonio, Texas, from October 23-25, 2014, and it will
feature 19 parallel technical Program Tracks focused on the overall theme of
?Bioengineering Innovations to Catalyze Affordable Health Care.? The BMES Annual
Meeting serves as a primary vehicle for scientific sharing and dissemination of
the latest advances in biomedical engineering, as well as a facilitator of
important cross-fertilizations between the life sciences and engineering
technologies, which fosters a multi-disciplinary approach in the practice of
Biomedical Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BMES-NSF Special Session in
particular builds on the success of a similar session held for the first time
during the 2013 BMES Annual Meeting in Seattle, WA. That session effectively
increased awareness of NSF-funded research in the area of Biomedical Engineering
and allowed investigators to gain a better understanding of NSF funding
opportunities and how to prepare successful grant applications. The session also
allowed for effective and in-depth interactions among attendees, NSF awardees
and NSF program officers who attended the session. The objectives of the session
planned for the 2014 Annual BMES Meeting are to 1) showcase NSF funded research
and researchers, especially young investigators with CAREER awards; 2) foster
collaboration and idea sharing through a networking reception; and 3)
familiarize participants with NSF and NSF funding mechanisms and provide insight
into strategies for preparing competitive grant proposals. It is expected that
this session will recur on an annual basis to contribute to a comprehensive
approach by BMES in partnership with NSF to ensure development of a diverse,
well educated, and technically competent biomedical engineering workforce.