* 1444758
* SRN: Urban  Water Innovation Network (U-WIN): Transitioning Toward Sustainable Urban Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Claire Welty, Colorado State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 12,741,385.00

1444758&lt;br/&gt;Arabi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States is one of the
most urbanized nations in the world with more than 80 % of the population
residing in cities. Reliance on water is why Americans express greater concern
about threats to water than about any other environmental issue and why nearly
half of all Americans worry a great deal about water, according to a 2012 Gallup
poll of environmental concerns. Urban water connects coupled natural-built
systems and underpins the long-term health and resilience of all human
settlements, from small towns to mega-regions. Indeed, all human life depends on
water. The complexity of urban water systems defies stovepipe thinking and
requires the systems approach proposed in the Sustainability Research Network
focused on urban water. The network links perspectives and resources from 14
institutions, each with longstanding programs in water research and education,
and close ties to water and urban sustainability stakeholders across the U.S.
The mission of the network is to advance the fundamental knowledge, build
capacity, and forge collaborations needed to find technological and behavioral
solutions that promote sustainable urban water systems. The network seeks
solutions that achieve widespread adoption consistent with inclusive, equitable
and sustainable urban development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban sustainability
depends on a supply of water in sufficient quantity and quality to meet the
needs of socioeconomic sectors and ecosystems. Sustaining cities also requires
water systems to be resilient to flooding, extreme weather events, and climate
change. Water pollution, consumption, and flooding produced by cities along with
other pressures can threaten the natural, social, and economic assets that are
essential for local and global development. Urban water systems draw from and
impact natural water resources and ecosystems Urban water systems draw from and
impact natural water resources and ecosystems and utilize vast and expensive
infrastructures to meet economic, social, and environmental needs. These
infrastructures, and their effects, are managed by a fragmented set of
institutions that is challenged with mobilizing collective action for systems
organization and management. Therefore the PIs propose a Sustainability Research
Network, Urban Water Innovation Network (U-WIN), focused on urban water systems
to forge the collaborations among researchers, educators, managers, policymakers
and stakeholders that will be essential to addressing the core challenges
inherent in these complex, interwoven systems. The mission of U-WIN will be to
advance the fundamental knowledge, build capacity, and forge collaborations
needed to find technological and behavioral solutions that promote sustainable
urban water systems. The PIs will seek solutions that achieve widespread
adoption consistent with inclusive, equitable and sustainable urban development.
The PIs will follow an adaptive and integrative research, education and outreach
program that facilitates stakeholder engagement in order to assess the
feasibility, impacts and tradeoffs associated with sustainable solutions. The
process will derive maximum benefits from using water synergistically in urban
planning and design. The process will derive maximum benefits from using water
synergistically in urban planning and design. The PIs will team with the Urban
Sustainability Directors Network (USDN) (http://usdn.org) includes over 100
local government professionals representing cities across the U.S. and Canada
with about 50 million residents, and Netwerc H2O (www.netwerch2o.eu) will
facilitate achieving our goals via linkages with more than 50 cities around the
world. Netwerc H2O is an association for European municipal and regional
governments promoting sustainable water management practices. Motivated by these
challenges confronting urban water systems, the PIs have formulated the
following research goals for the U-WIN network; 1. Develop a national Urban
Water Management Blueprint by creating a conceptual framework that defines the
essential characteristics of sustainable urban water systems across regions; 2.
Characterize interactions and feedbacks between urban development patterns and
the interconnected natural/socioeconomic processes that impact the
sustainability of coupled natural-human water systems; 3. Identify sustainable
technological, socioeconomic, and management urban water solutions that reduce
pressures, enhance resilience and maximize co-benefits in other sectors, and
measure their impacts and tradeoffs across time and space; 4. Explore and
explain the systemic institutional frameworks required for successful
transitions toward sustainable urban water systems in metropolitan regions
across the U.S. Given the diverse nature of the water sector of society, the
Network will adopt a multi-faceted approach to ensure the long term viability of
its approach to urban water sustainability. One strength of the Network is the
robust connection of investigators at all 14 institutions with local
communities, state and federal agencies and national NGO's. The PIs intend to
utilize these collaborations to develop sustained relationships that can turn
into valuable research and educational opportunities. Importantly, each
institution involved in the Network is committed to exploring options for
institutionalizing the network in close collaboration with their deans, vice
presidents for research and provosts. Additionally, the PIs will fully explore
membership, team building, and project development opportunities that the Urban
Water Sustainability Hub will present as a way to sustain research and
infrastructure support for the Network as a whole. Finally, the PIs will explore
opportunities for commercialization of products, technologies, and services
developed within the Network in close collaboration with water technology
incubator entities across regions in the U.S.