* 1444560
* Data Reduction and Inversion for the Imaging Vector Magnetograph Archive Database
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* K Leka, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 09/30/2016
* USD 30,899.00

The main thrust of this 1-year project is to debug and optimize the existent
codes that are used to process data from the Imaging Vector Magnetograph (IVM)
gathered during 1992-2006 (1.5 solar cycles). Historic data from the IVM have
contributed to major advances in understanding the photospheric vector magnetic
fields of active regions on the Sun. The main goal is to advance those data-
processing codes of IVM data, so that the released archive of IVM data is of as
high quality as possible for use by the broad solar community. Upon completion
of this project, the available IVM data archive will be treated consistently,
and it will ready for scientific analysis. This research project will contribute
to improved community knowledge on handling imaging spectro-polarimetric data,
which will have an impact on analyzing data from the future DKIST (formerly
known as the ATST). The project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division
in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A consistently produced archive of IVM data presents a
unique data source for studying the long-term behavior of the Sun, since it
allows for inversion-independent determination of magnetic field strengths in
sunspots over 1.5 solar cycles. The IVM data have featured prominently in novel
investigations of solar flares and their prediction --- a topic with societal
impacts that range from communications disruptions to power-grid outages. The
IVM data would contribute to the large statistical samples needed for further
progress, complementing present data from SDO/HMI. Predicting solar flares, and
quantitatively understanding the inter-cycle behavior of our Sun, are questions
with potentially major impacts on today's society.