* 1444045
* I-Corps Node:  Southwest Alliance for Entrepreneurial Innovation Node (SAEIN)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Juan Sanchez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,405,499.00

This project establishes an I-Corps Node that is focused on promoting innovation
in the Southwest region of the United States (the Southwest Alliance for
Entrepreneurial Innovation Node - "SAEIN"). SAEIN efforts will leverage the
combined entrepreneurial experience and extensive research capabilities of three
lead research institutions: The University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin), Texas
A&amp;M University (TAMU), and Rice University (Rice). Geographically, SAEIN
will serve an area of more than 268,000 square miles and help foster the
implementation of I-Corps methodologies across a collaborative group of more
than 30 institutions of higher learning. SAEIN will specifically engage numerous
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) to implement the I-Corps curriculum and
methods as both a standard for entrepreneurial training and a mechanism to
broaden participation in STEM fields. SAEIN has the potential to introduce NSF
I-Corps curriculum to more than 710,000 community college students and almost
4.8 million K-12 students in the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAEIN will engage
the use of I-Corps methodology throughout entrepreneurship-focused entities and
events, including regional academic incubators, the Small Business Development
Centers, high profile business plan competitions, and the international South by
Southwest (SXSW) event. SAEIN will augment the NIN capabilities by building on
the unique economic strengths, labor characteristics, lean manufacturing
capabilities, and the innovation ecosystem found in the Southwest region. The
Node will generate tremendous exposure for the I-Corps program nationwide and
provide a unique platform for innovation promotion and venture
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAEIN engages a strong alliance of
institutions that are already connected by a large volume of NSF-supported
research projects. It seeks to advance economic growth goals for the region and
nation through a variety of programs and activities that employ the business
model canvas and team-based discovery practice to best understand the
intellectual property resulting from these projects. SAEIN will study the
deployment of I-Corps methodologies into regional community college systems and
investigate ways to increase STEM participation and 4-year transfer rates from
community colleges through the application of I-Corps. Specific Level 3 research
thrusts will explore: 1) Lean LaunchPad research that is targeted at vetting the
impact of pivots and customer discovery on entrepreneurial success and
scientific outcomes; 2) development of a STEM research canvas model that is
focused on producing suitable STEM learning sets focused on K-12 STEM learners
(consistent with the Business Model Canvas and I-Corps methodologies); and 3)
I-Corps Team Modeling and Development, with a focus on exploring the
effectiveness of new teaming models around I-Corps methodologies from different
populations (i.e., community colleges, K-12, additional external groups).