* 1444586
* Effects of ADVANCE in the STEM Disciplines: Faculty Diversity, Women in Leadership, and Institutional Transformation
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2022
* Alexandra Kalev, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2022
* USD 669,028.00

Frank Dobbins, of Harvard University, proposes a three-year project to conduct
and analyze a survey of diversity policies and equity program reforms at 1,000
universities in the United States between 1990 and 2014. Building upon work that
he and his collaborators conducted on the effectiveness of diversity programs at
corporations in the United States, they develop several new survey instruments
to conduct a research evaluation of diversity programming at universities in the
United States. In particular, they will assess the impact of policies and
programs to promote diversity and equity on individual faculty members as well
as on the institutions themselves. These kinds of programs include mentoring
activities, networking, professional development activities, career life
balances policies and other policy changes. They further compare equity outcomes
for individuals and at the institutional level at institutions that have
received funding from the National Science Foundation to promote gender equity,
awards from the ADVANCE program. They will use data from the National Science
Foundation Survey of Doctorate Recipients and the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System as well as collect new data from the institutions
themselves. Using these databases, the PI and his team will conduct a
quantitative study to assess the effects of equity reforms, the persistence of
equity reforms, and the diffusion of such reforms across types of institutions.
Findings from this research has the potential to dramatically change the ways
that universities in the United States address issues of gender equity because
the study should result in identifying policies and programs that are most
effective at achieving equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team will use a
multi-level modeling methodology incorporating the data that they collect
through the new surveys with the big data sets already available to them to
fulfill the goals discussed above. In their research on corporate equity
programs the Principal Investigators developed an evidence-based theory of the
remediation of inequality built on four insights from sociology and social
psychology. They will test those theoretical premises in the academic context.
They incorporate insights from the work-autonomy and self-determination
literatures, the labeling and self-determination theories, feminist theory, and
accountability theory to build the models to test theories on how equity may be
achieved in university settings. Testing these theories will advance research on
gender inequality in academia and at work more generally. This will be the first
study to utilize comprehensive longitudinal data from ADVANCE and peer
institutions to evaluate the impact of diversity and equity programming.