* 1444060
* EARS: Future Wireless Broadband Access: Cross-Optimizing Hardware, Physical and Network Layers
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Hossein Hashemi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 10/31/2019
* USD 680,000.00

The availability of affordable and ubiquitous broadband connectivity is a
necessary condition for prosperity since broadband wireless access impacts
virtually all sectors of society and economy including education, healthcare,
transportation, and security. In a vast and mixed urban/rural country such as
the United States, providing high-speed broadband data access through the wired
infrastructure can be costly. On the other hand, wireless can cover large areas
and reach a large number of people very effectively. In addition, wireless is
the preferred medium through which we connect to the Internet and enjoy a whole
wealth of services such as entertainment, education, healthcare, e-commerce,
social networking, and remote working. In this context, the ability to handle
the predicted dramatic increase of demand for wireless data has become crucial
not only for the wireless industry but, more in general, for the growth of our
economy. While wireless connectivity has significantly improved over the past
few decades, it is quite behind the theoretical and technological achievable
limits and it cannot address future demand. With this in mind, this project
develops an innovative multi-tier hierarchical infrastructure for next-
generation cellular networks with densely deployed base stations, along with a
set of well-integrated cross-layer design techniques for interference management
and system optimization. This proposed approach may considerably improve the
rate performance and user capacity, and is promising in bridging the gap between
theory and practice for broadband wireless access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
support the drastically increased mobile data traffic in wireless broadband
services, this work focuses on a systematic cross-layer system optimization
approach that relies on three major pillars: 1) at the physical layer, base
stations with massive multiple-input multiple-output antenna systems are used;
2) at the wireless network architecture level, a multi-tier heterogeneous
network approach is selected, achieving unprecedented spatial spectrum reuse; 3)
at the cross-layer optimization level, a holistic network utility maximization
approach is proposed, that systematically obtains layered protocol architectures
from the structure of the global optimization solution. In relation to the above
pillars, the fundamental challenges that will be addressed in this project are:
1) the design of integrated and power-efficient reconfigurable massive multiple-
input multiple-output front-end antenna systems based on the concept of hybrid
beamforming, i.e., on the optimal splitting of multiuser precoding and inter-
cell interference management functions between digital baseband processing and
analog radio frequency beamforming; 2) the design of hybrid beamforming schemes
that exploit long-term channel statistics for inter-cell coordinated
interference management, and instantaneous channel state information to achieve
spatial multiplexing gain in each cell; 3) a user partitioning and scheduling
approach based on clustering the user space according to quality of experience
requirements, channel statistics and mobility, assigning network utility
functions to the different user groups, solving the combined network utility
maximization problem and systematically deriving a layered protocol architecture
from the structural properties of the optimization solution. In addition, the
work will significantly extend current mathematical performance analysis of
wireless networks, based on advanced tools from stochastic geometry and random
matrix theory, in order to assess quantitatively the performance gains over
current technology of the proposed approach. Last, small-scale experiments will
be conducted with software-defined radios equipped with the front end that will
be developed.