* 1444926
* Creating Future Female Engineering Leaders
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Karen Panetta, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,713.00

This engineering education research project focuses on developing a program that
will train two cohorts of female engineering doctoral candidates as teaching
fellows. Students will participate in workshops and other professional
development activities that will educate them in various teaching pedagogies.
Through various group activities the PI intends to develop a community that both
empowers and retains women, providing mentorship by more senior women faculty
and addressing gender related challenges. An important focus of this project is
the emphasis on multi-disciplinary education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each fellow will participate in an orientation
workshop followed by a week-long teaching boot camp. The boot camp focuses on
essential skills for academia such as teaching pedagogies and student
assessment. Each fellow then co-teaches a course with a Tufts faculty member who
also serves in a mentoring role. Monthly meetings of the fellows and their
mentors, led by a master teaching facilitator, provide the opportunity for the
group to discuss instructional topics from a continuous improvement perspective.
In their second year, the fellows are paired with an undergraduate student
researcher in a mentoring relationship. This tiered mentoring program will help
create a strong community of undergraduates, doctoral fellowe and senior faculty
that acknowledges gender-related issues in the academic environment and works
together to effect positive cultural change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance and importance of this project is the development and
implementation of a sustainable and adaptable model for interdisciplinary
graduate education. The doctoral fellows will become future leaders in our
academic communities, promoting use of appropriate teaching pedagogies that
create an inclusive classroom environment. Not only will they be excellent
researchers in their chosen discipline area, they will also be excellent
teachers that utilize learner centered techniques to convey the excitement and
potential of engineering to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project overlaps
with NSF's strategic goals of supporting, interdisciplinary, research and
education that are central to the discovery of emergent properties and
structures in physical, living, human, and engineered systems. This project
promotes partnerships across disciplines and seeks to equip those entering
academia with a skill set that promotes inclusivity and improved learning within
the classroom. The creation of a community of learners, incorporating a tiered
mentoring activity that reaches from senior women faculty to undergraduate
students supports NSF's goal to broaden participation in engineering.