* 1444499
* Evolution of Specialized Metabolite Biosynthetic Pathways in the Lamiaceae: Sources of Chemical Diversity for Molecules Essential for Human Use and Plant Defense
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Sarah O'Connor, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 5,091,370.00

Co-PIs: Natalia Dudareva (Purdue University), Sarah O'Connor (John Innes Centre,
UK), Douglas Soltis (University of Florida), Pamela Soltis (University of
Florida)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sixth largest flowering plant family, the
Lamiaceae or mint family, is the source of many familiar mint and culinary
flavors enjoyed by people worldwide. Many members of the mint family produce so-
called secondary metabolites, which are by-products of plant chemistry that
impart the familiar flavors of peppermint or spearmint in herbal teas or savory
culinary seasoning from oregano, basil, lavender and other herbs. Human
appreciation and consumption of these botanical compounds supports a growing
agronomic industry, with the market for peppermint and spearmint oil alone worth
over $200 million in 2011 (USDA); and yet how and why the underlying chemistry
of these compounds evolved in the family is unknown. This project studies the
chemical pathways required to synthesize flavor compounds using genome
sequencing and by identifying all the relevant factors produced in each species.
By comparing the resulting large datasets across family members, the project
will clarify how such chemical processes evolved in plants. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project requires the participation of experts in
biochemistry, genomics, genetics and evolutionary biology. In turn, high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students are trained at the frontiers of science by
learning cutting edge genomics research that links directly to products of
economic value. Through collaboration with the Michigan State University 4H
Children's Garden and the Florida Museum of Natural History, the project offers
informative displays and tours so the public can become citizen scientists as
they learn about the evolution and underlying "flavor" chemistry of the familiar
and much appreciated mint family. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lamiaceae represents
a large family of angiosperms with a high degree of chemical diversity. The
major subfamilies within the Lamiaceae, the Lamioideae and Nepetoideae, can be
readily distinguished morphologically and also show qualitative and quantitative
differences in the synthesis of two key specialized compounds, iridoids and
volatile monoterpenoids. These compounds play an essential role in plant
reproduction, defense, and signaling and are also the source of mint and other
herbal flavors for human consumption. This project integrates genomic,
metabolite, phylogenetic, and functional datasets to investigate the evolution
of the monoterpene and iridoid biosynthetic pathways in the Lamiaceae. In the
first phase, the transcriptomes and metabolomes of a phylogenetically diverse
panel of 50 species will be generated and analyzed to identify a robust set of
14 species for focused study. In the second phase, full genome sequencing,
expression, and metabolite levels will be conducted on the selected set, thus
providing resources to (1) identify specific genes involved in monoterpene and
iridoid biosynthesis, (2) elucidate key evolutionary events and mechanisms that
led to the extant chemical diversity represented in the Lamiaceae, and (3)
functionally test hypotheses about how variation in biosynthetic pathway genes
contribute to chemical diversity. All resources from the project, including
genome, transcriptome sequences and metabolite information will be publicly
available through publications, the NCBI sequence archives, the Dryad Digital
Repository and posted on a project website hosted at Michigan State University.