* 1444279
* Ongoing Development of a Human Population Genetics Resource with Forensic Application
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Kenneth Kidd, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 379,240.00

The current use of DNA in criminal forensics, in identification of individuals
in mass disasters, and in connecting individuals to their biological families
(e.g., childhood abductees) is already well established with good scientific
justification. Advanced molecular technology, however, is likely to make new
types of genetic markers even better at these tasks and provide useful forensic
evidence not possible with the techniques currently used in standard forensic
applications. Previous to such new implementation, the scientific basis for the
new markers and their interpretations must be developed. And because the United
States has such a large proportion of its citizens with ancestries from all
parts of the world, the science must have a global
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The core aspects of this research project
involve identifying data in the literature (and public databases) that are
potentially relevant to understanding human genetic variation broadly,
especially as relevant to forensic use of DNA variation. The most relevant data
from these widely dispersed sources will then be assembled and evaluated. The
extant large database, ALFRED (ALlele FREquency Database), currently inclusive
of 37 million allele frequency entries, will be enriched with the new data,
while the web-based interfaces to these data will be modified, in conjunction
with the forensic community, to make the data readily available for research and
useful in actual forensic practice. The research will provide additional
scientific support for existing forensic use of DNA, and will provide the
necessary scientific support of use of new scientific methodologies in the
likely expansion of forensic application of DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves computerization of existing and newly available data, a
significant task involving skills in bioinformatics and an understanding of the
necessary documentation. The ALFRED database and the web interface were
originally designed to allow the integrated documentation of the molecular,
population, and publication aspects of each datum; those functions have worked
well for several years and will be adequate for assembling the data in the
current project. FROG-kb (Forensic Resource/Reference on Genetics knowledge
base), which allows several specific forensic views of the data and actual
calculation of relevant statistics, will be enhanced through the project. And as
the interface currently exists only in a prototype version, a major aspect of
the research will focus on improving functionality based on the accumulated data
and analyses of those data.