* 1444858
* Collaborative Research: Career Development: From Senior Undergraduates to Navigating Assistant Professorship
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Teresa Cutright, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 28,275.00

This engineering education research project is implementing a series of one day
workshops at each of the three partner institutions (The University of Akron,
The University of Houston, and Mississippi State University), led by the PI team
with faculty from each institution. The goal of the workshops is to increase the
numbers of underrepresented engineering students who complete graduate degrees
in engineering and pursue academic careers. It is expected that approximately
200 students will attend each workshop which will include discussion of the
following topics: faculty careers, time management, the science of STEM
teaching, culturally responsive teaching, mentoring/career coaching and graduate
education. The proposed activity, if successful, will advance our knowledge of
best practices in the recruitment and training of underrepresented graduate
students for faculty careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
importance of this project is in its intent to have engineering students view
the engineering faculty profession as a viable career alternative. With the
preparation provided through these workshops, the potential for success of those
that choose to join the engineering faculty ranks will be strengthened through
knowledge of successful practices. By exposing workshop participants to the
concept of culturally responsive teaching, this project will result in
engineering faculty who practice inclusive pedagogies in their classrooms. This,
in turn has the potential to impact large numbers of undergraduate students,
improving their educational environment to facilitate improved learning
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals
of working with academic institutions seeking to enhance capability for their
faculty and students, sharing learning and expanding effective practices focused
on broadening participation. Additionally, NSF values and promotes the use of
inquiry-based instructional practices that improve the nation's capacity to draw
in and retain students in STEM fields, including students from underrepresented
groups and institutions.