* 1444111
* US-Italy planning visit to develop a new international collaboration to improve understanding of fault mechanics and earthquake hazards
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Richard Bennett, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 24,399.00

Large and damaging earthquakes are caused by abrupt displacement (i.e., slip)
across faults in the rocks near Earth's surface. However, not all slip across
faults is abrupt. Indeed, for some faults, appreciable slip may occur without
shaking the ground making them difficult to detect using traditional seismograph
instruments. Understanding the difference between these two types of fault slip
behavior is critical to our ability to gauge potential earthquake threats posed
by active fault zones worldwide, including numerous hazardous fault zones in the
United States. One of the best examples of a fault that appears to frequently
slip with and without creating large earthquakes is the Alto Tiberina fault
located in central Italy. The unusual geometry of this fault, which makes it
among the most accessible faults in the world to studies using near surface
observations, provides a unique opportunity to investigate the physical
characteristics of faults that slide with and without violently shaking the
ground. It is an ideal target for documenting the conditions under which faults
pose the greatest threat of damaging earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
collaboration that will be forged with support from the National Science
Foundation Catalyzing New International Collaborations (CNIC) program sets the
stage for the deployment of a network of modern strainmeter instruments designed
specifically to detect small but diagnostic slip events on the Alto Tiberina
fault across a very broad spectrum of fault behaviors. When combined with
existing seismograph and geodetic technologies that have already been deployed
by Italian partners, the new strainmeter network will allow for the first time
measurements of the frequency, duration, and magnitude of sliding events, and
their relationship to ground motion and earthquakes. The first task toward
understanding fault slip behavior is the establishment of a Memorandum of
Understanding outlining all aspects of the international collaboration,
including: the roles and responsibilities for funding, siting, permitting,
telemetry, data flow and archiving, routine site maintenance, data processing,
and scientific collaboration. The formal collaboration that will be established
will (1) enhance future research opportunities for early- and mid-career
researchers from US-based institutions, (2) prepare the next generation of
earthquake fault researchers in the United States, (3) provide future
generations of United States scientists with significant professional experience
beyond political borders early in their careers, and (4) generate a wealth of
new information that will inform earthquake hazards assessments throughout the
United States.