* 1444950
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Microheater-based Platform for Combustible Gas Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Roya Maboudian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2017
* USD 199,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating UC
Berkeley?s low power microheater sensor platform to fill the need for low-power
combustible gas sensors. Accurate detection of flammable gases is essential for
safe operation of many industrial processes, especially in the oil and gas
industry. Installing networks of combustible gas monitors in industrial settings
can allow for rapid leak detection and increased safety and environmental
protection. The construction and inspection cost associated with installing
wired gas monitors in a hazardous facility, such as a refinery, are prohibitive.
Battery-powered wireless monitors would eliminate this installation burden, but
the high power requirements for current combustible gas sensor technology
necessitate a large, expensive, heavy battery or represent a major inconvenience
to facility personnel who must replace the battery as often as every week. This
project focuses on addressing the need for combustible gas sensors with
significantly lower power consumption (at least 100x) than the best commercially
available sensor, while maintaining performance parameters such as sensitivity
and lifetime. The proposed ultra-low power combustible gas sensor with
competitive sensitivity and lifetime characteristics will enable ubiquitous
wireless monitoring of combustible gases in industrial settings, resulting in
enhanced safety. Furthermore, in the long-term, the technology may enable
embedding gas sensors in smart phones, which will result in increased personal
safety. Additional significant impact is on human resource development, in
particular in the training of graduate and undergraduate students.

The core technology in this project is a suspended microheater coated with a
sensing material that catalyzes hydrocarbon combustion. These microheater
sensors require only a few mW of power to reach operation temperatures of 500
Â°C. However, several challenges remain in developing a commercial prototype for
combustible gas sensing. These include stable adhesion of the sensing layer to
the microheater, stability of materials and sensor response in appropriate
atmospheric conditions, and reproducible catalyst deposition. This project
addresses these technology gaps as it translates from discovery research toward
commercial application.

The project will provide core training for graduate and undergraduate students
who will benefit from interdisciplinary training in surface chemistry, materials
science, electrical engineering and market analysis. The students will gain
experience not only in research but also in technical presentation through their
participation in meetings with industry leaders. This will provide the students
with a unique experience in the interconnectivity between research and
development and technology and the marketplace. In addition, the students will
be able to take advantage of resources at the Haas School of Business at
Berkeley (such as Launch: The Berkeley Start-Up Competition program) as well as
the CleanTech Open Accelerator program to gain entrepreneurial/technology
translation training.