* 1444456
* Enabling Cold Tolerant Maize Using Genomic and Machine Vision Phenomic Approaches
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/29/2020
* USD 5,569,161.00

PI: Edgar Spalding (University of Wisconsin-Madison)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Nathan
Springer (University of Minnesota); Irina Makarevitch (Hamline University);
Tessa Durham-Brooks (Doane College); A. Mark Settles (University of
Florida)&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Natalia de Leon (University of Wisconsin-
Madison); Nathan Miller (University of Wisconsin-Madison); Jeffery Gustin
(University of Florida); Gokhan Hacisalihoglu (Florida Agricultural &amp;
Mechanical University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout much of the northern
United States, cold spring temperatures can impede the successful transition of
planted corn seed into vigorously growing seedlings. Increasingly variable
spring weather works against the benefits to the farmer of planting early. This
project is designed to identify naturally occurring variations in genes that
make some corn plants more resistant to cold than others at this critical period
in the life cycle. Genetic variants will be identified first using all-new
imaging and computational tools being developed in the laboratory. By imaging
and measuring plant responses to cold using computer-based methods, the project
will access otherwise obscure information about how seeds take up water,
germinate, emerge from the soil and grow under varying cold conditions.
Molecular level differences will be identified using genomic methods that
associate cold responses to genetic variants. Genetic hypotheses about these
cold hardy candidates will then be tested in early-planted corn fields by
comparing growth and yield in plants carrying different versions of the
identified genetic elements. Undergraduate students from diverse institutions,
including rural and urban locations, will be trained through direct
participation at all levels of data generation and analysis. The critical role
of students will result in a project with highly integrated research and
education outcomes. For example, student-lead experiments will be conducted on
educational corn field sites, further advancing student learning about
scientific methods while at the same time providing critical research data. The
project stands to make a positive impact on an important limitation to US
agriculture by identifying the genetic basis of cold-resistance in corn and by
training the next generation to apply the knowledge to real world
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan integrates natural variation
in diverse populations, advanced genomics techniques, and custom machine-vision
methods to capture a systems-level understanding of the complex responses to
cold stress. Populations will include recombinant inbred lines, near isogenic
lines and doubled haploids, and includes parents of the Nested Association
Mapping population and the Wisconsin Diversity Panel. Cold tolerant alleles in
maize will be identified with genome wide association and QTL analyses, and
hypotheses about the genetic architecture and inheritance patterns of cold
response phenotypes will be rigorously tested. Aim 1 will refine machine vision
methods for measuring germination phenotypes, while Aim 2 will focus on chilling
stress during seedling growth. Aim 3 will determine transcriptome and chromatin
responses associated with cold treatment to identify genes and targets of
epigenetic regulation that affect tolerance. Aim 4 will determine the impacts of
contrasting alleles for cold stress response on life cycle traits in field
experiments to determine if early season cold tolerance translates to improved
yield. Data will be available through the project website
http://phytomorph.wisc.edu, sequence data will be uploaded to NCBI, and datasets
will be accessible through the maize community database http://maizegdb.org and
QTL archive http://qtlarchive.org.