* 1444843
* I-Corps:  Decorative power generation panels and related optoelectronics systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* L. Jay Guo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Most current solar cell panels are made by complex processes using expensive
materials. Lower costs and higher efficiencies have driven product decisions and
the result is most panels are rigid, heavy, and with a dull, black appearance.
As a result of their non-architectural aesthetic appearance and weight, they are
primarily installed on rooftops so as to minimize the negative building
appearance, and large surface areas of the buildings are not utilized for
potential power generation. The team proposes to develop a new hybrid solar cell
technology that is based on low cost materials and manufacturing processes; most
importantly, they offer appealing visual effects, e.g. the panels can be
designed to reflect or transmit desirable colors, or display colored images.
They can also be made semi-transparent and can be structurally flexible for
either a permanent specific shape or thin enough to be rolled and unrolled for
many multiple events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies that can provide
significantly improved energy efficiency are in high demand in our world today.
The team hopes that the multi-functional PV technology will be of significant
and transformative value to the community by providing a new way of thinking of
deploying photovoltaics. The new technology can be applied to existing and new
high-rise commercial buildings or residential houses. The transmissive type
colored or semi-transparent panels can be used as power-generating windows or
shades, and the reflective type colored panels for outdoor architectural glass
walls with specific designs, or interior colored/display type furnishings, and
both can provide electric energy by utilizing the absorbed portion of the light
spectrum. Another potential application is for greenhouses using the technology
on glass to absorb green light for electric power generation while passing
through blue and red light to be absorbed by the Chlorophyll for plants' growth.
The video rate large format photodetector array made based on the hybrid
structure can also lead to potential application in medical imaging.