* 1444908
* BPE-OT: Beyond the Basisc: Race and Gender Conscious Mentoring for Black Faculty Candidates in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 12/31/2016
* USD 340,663.00

This engineering education research project seeks to understand the degree to
which intersectionality within the engineering academic profession has been
addressed in minority mentoring initiatives for African American engineering
doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers. Intersectionality is defined as
the interplay of racial stereotypes, gender biases and other issues. A wide
variety of mentoring programs in various formats have not been able to alter the
slow progress of African Americans in engineering faculty ranks. This research
will closely examine existing mentoring programs through a single focused lens
of African American doctoral and postdoctoral scholars. The intent is to utilize
focus groups, surveys and interviews to synthesize their experiences with
mentoring programs. The PI will then design a holistic racial and gender
attentive mentoring program that will be implemented on a national scale with
approximately 120 participants. This effort will leverage a prior award to this
PI focused on both identifying the barriers and opportunities facing African
American engineering doctoral candidates aspiring to the professoriate, and the
issues facing African American faculty at all ranks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance and importance of this project is the potential for
development of a successful, holistic mentoring model that can be more broadly
adapted to other racial/gender groups. A successful mentoring model should
increase the persistence of underrepresented groups in the engineering academic
ranks. Increasing the numbers of faculty role models from diverse backgrounds
will create a more inclusive educational environment that will encourage an
increasing number of diverse students to pursue engineering
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals
of identifying, sharing and expanding best practices for broadening
participation in the engineering workforce. NSF focuses on broadening
participation of groups, institutions, and geographic regions underrepresented
in STEM disciplines, working with academic and private sector partners to make
certain that STEM education and workforce preparation, infrastructure, and
research opportunities are broadly available to ensure that the technical
workforce and scientists and engineers have the skills and opportunities needed
to flourish in a global knowledge economy.