* 1444160
* US-Japan Planning Visit for Complementary Experimental Programs Toward Validated Advanced Damping Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Brian Phillips, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 01/31/2016
* USD 38,821.00

This planning grant will establish complementary experimental programs between
US and Japanese researchers to improve seismic damage mitigation in light of
lessons of the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake. This earthquake produced the
most devastating long-period/long-duration ground motions ever recorded. These
motions led to large displacements in structures previously thought to be safe,
including high-rise buildings and base-isolated structures. A collaboration will
be developed between the PI and Dr. Kohju Ikago of Tohoku University, taking
advantage of the experimental expertise of PI in the area of real-time hybrid
simulation (RTHS) and the structural control device advances of the Ikago Lab.
The collaboration will investigate new supplemental control devices and control
algorithms, experimentally evaluated using both shake tables and RHTS. The
planning visit will open the door to the development and validation of new
devices that are robust to wider range of ground motions, improving the seismic
design of civil infrastructure and increasing resiliency under a broader class
of earthquakes. Two US students will also receive training under the
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semi-active devices have great potential in
mitigating structural damage from ground motion; they cannot destabilize the
structural system, offer similar durability as passive devices, and can adapt to
a wide range of input characteristics. This investigation into new semi-active
control systems will be coupled with experimental testing using both shake
tables and RTHS. RTHS offers a cost-effective tool to explore a wide variety of
structural configurations through easily swappable numerical substructures.
However, new considerations must be taken into account before RTHS can be used
for the proposed long-period/long-duration ground motions. Also, shake table
tests are widely accepted due to their simplicity while RTHS is a relatively new
experimental testing framework that requires extensive validation before it is
accepted by the engineering community and industry. RTHS will benefit from
rigorous benchmarking in parallel with shake table studies. Through this
partnership, structural control devices and control algorithms will be re-
envisioned to accommodate a wide range of ground motions. The proposed research
will include observing and participating in shake table experiments on small-
scale structural control devices at Tohoku University, RTHS of small-scale
devices (the same devices as explored in shake table testing), and establishing
long-term working agreements and plans for incorporating testing and development
at Maryland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capacity of the research community will
be enhanced by hardware, software, and algorithm development. The planning visit
is expected to lead to a longer term collaboration to develop (1) control
algorithms robust enough to include long-period/long-duration ground motion, (2)
new devices aimed at a broad array of ground motion characteristics, (3) new
RTHS capabilities, and (4) improved understanding of how to mitigate damage to
high-rise and base-isolated structures from long-period/long-duration ground
motion.