* 1444182
* CNIC: U.S.-Netherlands Planning Visit for Cooperative Research on Intelligent Methods Under Uncertainty for Renewable Energy Driven Smart Grids
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Prashant Doshi, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2017
* USD 33,608.00

This new, catalytic U.S.-Netherlands research collaboration addresses renewable
energy-driven smart grids. Renewable energy sources include resources that are
regularly replenished, such as sunlight, wind, rain, tidal waves, and geothermal
heat. To pursue innovative approaches for managing the uncertainty of renewable
energy sources, the U.S. principal investigator (PI) and a graduate student will
visit the Netherlands to begin a collaboration with counterparts at the Delft
University of Technology, a leader in European smart energy research. There they
intend to work together to improve current smart grid technology for better
prediction of consumer demand in the face of uncertain power generation, as is
often the case in renewable energy systems. If successful, their preliminary
results should contribute to improving bidirectional communication between grid
operators and consumers. Early results and follow-on research may have broader
impact by shaping management strategies through new approaches to modeling
consumer energy usage. Success could mean better long-term prediction by
employing new artificial intelligence approaches (AI), i.e., smart controls for
power grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team expects to identify the challenges
posed by the uncertainty of renewable energy generation and begin investigating
intelligent methods for meeting these challenges in two priority areas: (a)
planning for decentralized power generation and storage, and (b) managing
congestion in grids due to asynchrony between renewable energy supply and
consumer demand. The PI will work with an experienced team of eminent Dutch
researchers in AI, power systems, and technology policy. They will have real
operating and energy-use data from a medium voltage grid in Netherlands and
intend to start developing scalable algorithms for individual decision making in
multi-agent settings. Further, broader impacts are anticipated from this
collaboration with an introduction of smart energy systems into research and
teaching at the University of Georgia, thereby contributing to training U.S.
undergraduate and graduate students in an innovative and rapidly growing energy
sector with industrial relevance.