* 1444149
* CNIC: U.S.-Denmark Project Development in Wind Energy Systems Research and Engineering Education
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Kevin Lowe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Franklin Carrero-Martínez
* 07/31/2016
* USD 35,125.00

This catalytic project development visit led by principal investigator, Kevin
Todd Lowe, will initiate new collaboration between researchers at the Center for
Renewable Energy and Aerodynamic Testing (CREATe) at Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University (Virginia Tech) and counterparts in the
Department of Wind Energy at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Scientists at both institutions have well-established expertise and share common
interests in basic and applied research on wind energy systems. Their ongoing
activities and existing facilities are fully complementary for addressing
component scale wind energy testing (Virginia Tech) with full scale wind turbine
research (DTU). A balanced, mutually beneficial match of strengths would
position this U.S.-Danish team to make significant future contributions in
renewable energy. For broader impact, four U.S. graduate students will
participate in the Virginia Tech planning visit to gain valuable early career
experience through exposure to the full-scale testing capabilities at DTU. To
fully realize plans for follow-on cooperation and proposal preparation, the U.S.
and Danish researchers and students will anchor their visit, during September
26-October 4, 2015, with a core planning meeting at the DTU Risø campus where
the Department of Wind Energy facilities are located. The primary goal is to
jointly outline the next steps for addressing critical needs for research,
including education as well as technological development, for wind energy
advancement in areas such as noise reduction on wind tunnel
blades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These U.S. and Danish partners have significant and
complementary capabilities in wind energy engineering research and education.
The DTU team offers world class facilities such as full-scale wind turbine
testing up to the 10 megawatt scale and an extensive catalog of courses geared
specifically toward the details of wind energy science and technology. Virginia
Tech hosts a leading U.S. academic facility for research on wind turbine blade
aerodynamics and aeroacoustics, the Stability Wind Tunnel, while offering
courses on several fundamental topics in aerodynamics, aeroacoustics,
computational fluid dynamics and instrumentation. The partners envision
extensive opportunities for research cooperation and collaboration using the
unique strengths of both sides. Initial success is expected to produce the data
required for validating planned hybrid resolved/modeled turbulence simulations
from wind tunnel developments to turbine-scale and farm-scale. Furthermore,
integrated graduate student research visits in both directions are to be
organized to provide the broad perspective needed by the next generation of
scientists and engineers who must tackle important problems in renewable energy.
For broader impact, the partners envision incorporating a course exchange and
possibly research semesters abroad to more fully build the intended long-term
U.S.-Danish collaboration in research and education.