* 1444778
* Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory, November 22-24, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Frauke Bleher, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2015
* USD 11,500.00

This award supports participation in the Third Conference on Geometric Methods
in Representation Theory, held at the University of Iowa on November 22-24,
2014. Representation theory is a branch of modern algebra studying symmetries in
linear spaces. It interacts with many other areas in mathematics, mathematical
physics, chemistry, and theoretical computer science. Geometric methods have
become more and more fundamental in all of these areas. One of the main
objectives of this conference is to introduce beginning researchers in
representation theory to the power of geometric methods. The keynote speaker for
this conference will be Professor Gordana Todorov from Northeastern University
who will give two one-hour lectures which will be accessible to graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. There will also be several expository
lectures given by other well-known experts. The remainder of the lectures will
be research talks given by both senior and junior mathematicians. This will
include several talks by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers related
to their Ph.D. theses. The conference will provide an inviting atmosphere in
which new collaborations can be formed and young researchers have the
possibility to learn about cutting-edge geometric methods in representation
theory. Moreover, the conference will enable junior representation theorists to
present their work and interact with the broader community, which are crucial
activities in the pre-employment season in the fall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the last 40 years, the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras has
enjoyed a great impact of methods from algebraic geometry, in particular from
geometric invariant theory and transformation groups. At the same time, this has
allowed to feed back into geometry ideas and techniques from representation
theory. One of the goals of the Conference on Geometric Methods in
Representation Theory is to help strengthen and advance this interaction of
geometry and representation theory. The topics of this conference will include:
geometric aspects of cluster algebras; semi-invariants for bound quivers;
degenerations of modules and the geometry of orbit closures in module varieties;
moduli problems for finite-dimensional algebras; universal deformation rings and
their connection to moduli spaces. More information about the conference can be
found at http://www.math.uiowa.edu/~fbleher/CGMRT2014.html.