* 1444983
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Prototyping a Gene Transfection Tool, GeneTrain
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Kurt Becker, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2016
* USD 212,000.00

This PFI: Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) Technology Translation (TT)
project focuses on translating an engineered protein and lipid mixture that
addresses the need for highly efficient delivery of nucleic acids such as siRNA
and DNA into living cells. Delivery of nucleic acids into cells can be used as a
method to treat certain diseases or study natural cell behavior. This
innovation, entitled GeneTrain, is important because existing chemicals that
facilitate the delivery of nucleic acids into cells, known as transfection
reagents, are effective with only certain types of cells. The technology
proposed here will enable researchers to perform nucleic acid delivery
experiments across many different types of cells thereby expediting and
expanding the discovery of new siRNA or DNA-based therapies. In addition, such a
robust research tool will allow scientists to accelerate biomedical research en
route to a deeper understanding of diseases. This product has the following
unique features: the novel design and application of an engineered protein
bearing a highly positive charge for binding to negatively charged nucleic acid,
resulting in efficient delivery of siRNA and plasmid DNA, as well as uniform
effectiveness across a broad range of cell types. These features provide the end
user and customer with a solution that fulfills a wide spectrum of experimental
requirements, removing the necessity to use multiple reagents or spend countless
hours optimizing cell culture conditions when compared to conventional methods.

The project will result in a prototype of GeneTrain and addresses technology
gaps of formulation optimization and cell line/competitor benchmarking, which
both vastly hinder the commercialization progress of this innovation. The
initial data, while promising, suggests that the level limits of formulation
factors (engineered protein-lipid compositional ratios) have not yet been
adequately probed so as to yield optimal effects on transfection efficiency. In
addition to the multidisciplinary research environment, graduate students and
post-doctoral fellows will receive entrepreneurship and technology translation
experiences through direct and frequent communication with entrepreneurial
mentors in the life sciences, university technology transfer liaisons, patent
attorneys, and potential licensing partners/customers.

The project engages the management staff of the NYU Entrepreneurial Institute,
the NYU Office of Industrial Liaison, and Ascension Bio, LLC to assist in the
professional development of personnel, to guide partnership formation and
licensing negotiation, and to advise on customer and product development
strategy, respectively, in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality. Research partners at the inception of this
innovation include the NYU Langone Medical Center and the NYU College of
Dentistry, both providing in vitro and in vivo laboratory resources for
assistive development of the commercial innovation.