* 1444922
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Demonstration of parametrically robust wideband resonant reflectors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 273,453.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research
discoveries associated with a new class of wideband reflectors to fill the need
for new photonic components in a broad variety of applications including laser
manufacturing and infrared imaging systems. This innovation is important as new
fundamental physical effects will be applied to enable solutions not attainable
with current competing technology. The project will result in new designs and
prototype reflectors that will be tested in detail for operation in important
frequency bands. The proposed reflectors will have the following unique
features: high degree of parametric stability, large spectral bandwidth, compact
size, and high-yield manufacturing. These features provide advantages including
high efficiency, low loss, economy in fabrication, and robustness in
applications. These single-layer devices can be fabricated on substrates or as
membranes. They avoid the multiple interfaces and associated issues in
commercial thin-film multilayer reflectors; thus, thermal expansion effects and
adhesion problems are minimized. These reflectors can be applied in spectral
regions for which the deposition of thin-film multilayers is impractical or
impossible. Therefore, this innovation provides new solutions and is likely to
compete effectively in a sizeable market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application: (1) verification of the utility of the
proposed fundamental resonance effect in this context, and (2) verification that
practical prototype reflectors with high-efficiency wideband spectra can be
fabricated. The proposed resonant reflectors are designed with gratings in which
the grating ridges match to an identical material, thereby avoiding local
reflections and phase changes. As this critical interface possesses zero
refractive-index contrast, we call them "zero-contrast gratings." For simple
gratings with two-part periods, we use numerical calculations to show that zero-
contrast gratings provide extremely large flattop bandwidths and parametrically
stable spectra; this project aims to demonstrate these devices experimentally.
In summary, the main goals are to fabricate reflector prototypes operating in
the ~1.2- to 12- micron spectral region; verify bandwidths of ~600-1100 nm with
reflectance exceeding 99%; verify the predicted parametric stability;
demonstrate polarized and unpolarized reflectors; and verify theoretical
predictions of 99.99% reflectance for ~10- to 100-nm bandwidths. These devices
are designed using powerful electromagnetic optimization algorithms, and they
are made using standard nanofabrication methods including thin-film deposition,
lithographic patterning, and etching. They are characterized by spectral
analysis in the ~1- to 12- micron wavelength band. Hence, the project delivers
compact, robust, polarized and unpolarized resonant reflectors that work within
a broad spectral application space where classical methods fail to deliver
effective solutions. In addition, personnel involved in this project, including
undergraduate and graduate students, will receive entrepreneurial experiences,
including business planning, by enrolling in "Engineering Entrepreneurship" that
is taught by the PI on a regular basis.