* 1444220
* US-Switzerland Planning Visit: Gene Expression and Genetic Manipulation of House Fly Sex Determination
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Richard Meisel, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2017
* USD 48,695.00

This project will initiate a new collaboration between Richard Meisel's research
group at the University of Houston and colleagues in Switzerland and the
Netherlands. Meisel and his colleagues will study how male and female house
flies develop distinct sets of traits from the same genes. In particular, the
research will focus on how gene expression - the production of RNA and protein
from genes - differs between males and females. The house fly is well suited for
this line of experimentation because the developmental mechanisms that initiate
the production of male and female traits are characterized, the genome is
sequenced, and resources for genetic experimentation are available. Researchers
in the Meisel group will travel to Daniel Bopp's laboratory in Zurich,
Switzerland to learn techniques for the genetic manipulation of houseflies. They
will also work with European collaborators to design experiments that uncover
how mutations in the male and female developmental pathways affect the
expression of genes throughout the house fly genome. These experiments will
address fundamental questions about the structure of developmental pathways and
inform genetic control strategies for insect pests. A graduate student will
participate in the planning visit, and undergraduates from under-represented
groups in the sciences will be recruited to assist with the experiments. The PI
will further use examples from this research in training exercises for middle
school science teachers in Houston schools with large at-risk student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental networks often consist of
conserved central nodes that receive input from evolutionarily dynamic upstream
regulators. It is hypothesized that the central nodes are conserved because
perturbations to them have deleterious phenotypic effects, whereas the upstream
regulators are evolutionarily labile in part because the pathways are robust to
these changes. Sex determination (SD) is an ideal model for testing this
hypothesis because SD networks have the predicted pattern of evolutionary
conservation, and SD genes and the sex-specific phenotypes they produce are well
known. This new collaboration will allow for experiments in which RNAi and
transgenic approaches are used to manipulate the house fly SD pathway.
Organismal phenotypes, including gene expression, will be measured to test
whether perturbations to conserved nodes have more drastic phenotypic
consequences than changes in their upstream regulators.