* 1444449
* Genomics of Resistance to Mite Herbivores Associated with Drought Stress in Cereals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Richard Clark, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,069,975.00

Crop losses to pests, including animals like caterpillars or aphids, present a
major challenge for sustainable agricultural practices. Among herbivores that
feed on plant tissues, insects are by far the best characterized. However,
plant-feeding mites, which are distant relatives of insects, can also be major
pests in agriculture. In particular, many mite species thrive on and damage
drought-stressed plants, including major cereal crops like maize and wheat.
Under these situations, mites pose a significant challenge for control as they
are often resistant to commonly used pesticides. Plants can defend themselves
against attack and damage by herbivores. For example, for a number of plant
species, certain varieties are known to be more resistant to mites than others
because of their ability to produce compounds toxic to herbivores. The objective
of this research is to understand the genetic and genomic nature of plant
defense pathways that function to deter agriculturally important mites. The mite
species to be examined are the two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae) and
the Banks grass mite (Oligonychus pratensis) that are associated with
significant outbreaks on drought-stressed maize or other cereal species. The
research will use genomic and genetic methods to elucidate which plant defense
pathways in maize (Zea mays ssp. mays) and barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) respond
to mite herbivory, and how variation in these pathways impacts plant resistance.
Moreover, the effect of drought (water stress) on these defense pathways will be
assessed, an objective motivated by the observation that each of these pests can
be economically damaging during droughts. This project has relevance, therefore,
to efforts to develop more mite resistant crop plants. All data will be
accessible to the public through long-term public repositories such as the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and MaizeGDB. Biological resources generated during the
project will be available upon request. As part of the project, the work will
train undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate scholars. In addition,
educational material will be developed on plant-mite interactions for
distribution to the public on the Learn.Genetics website
(http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify genetic
pathways in plants that respond to spider mite pests, gene expression profiling
using the RNA-seq method (high throughput sequencing of cDNA) will be performed
on maize and barley leaves infested with both two-spotted spider mites (a
generalist pest on both dicot and monocot plants) and Banks grass mites (a
specialist pest on grasses). Further, to understand the effect of an
agriculturally important abiotic stress on plant defense pathways, expression
profiling for mite responses will be performed on both well watered and water
stressed plants. Comparisons of plant transcriptional response to the two
herbivores, and as a function of an abiotic stress relevant to mite outbreaks,
will shed light on the specificity of plant responses to generalist and
specialist herbivores, and how the environment affects the interaction in
plants. A specific outcome will be the identification of gene regulatory
networks underlying mite resistance. Further, susceptibility to mite damage is
known to vary among individuals within plant species, including maize. To
investigate this, a collection of inbred maize lines used to create the Nested
Association Mapping (NAM) community genetic mapping resource will be screened
for susceptibility or resistance to each mite herbivore. Gene expression studies
with sensitive and resistant maize lines will then be used to assess the genomic
basis of variation in plant mite resistance. In parallel, and to relate plant
molecular phenotypes of mite response to plant performance upon mite infestation
in an agricultural setting, field trials for resistance will be performed on
plants under high water and drought stress conditions for a subset of maize
inbred lines.