* 1444896
* EAGER: Advancing Human-Cyber Interaction: Development of Neuro-Physiological Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Javed Mostafa, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 139,431.00

The project aims to improve how humans, particularly those with degenerative
cognitive conditions or limited cognitive capacities, interact with complex
computing or computer-enabled services (broadly called cyber-systems). To
advance the state of user interfaces (UI) and create more adaptive interaction
modalities, the foundational knowledge regarding human-cyber interaction (HCI)
must incorporate more neuro-physiological evidence. The project proposes a
three-step plan for attaining this advance. First, three experimental subject
groups will be carefully selected and recruited for comparative analysis: 1)
healthy and young adults 2) demented or near-demented older adults, and 3)
adults suffering from mild brain trauma. Second, experimental sessions will be
conducted based on incrementally complex information searching and messaging
tasks that require executing the tasks inside an MRI machine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the experimental phase is to collect neuronal
activation patterns using fMRI, as well as behavioral data associated with
response time and accuracy. Third, the experimental findings will be analyzed to
establish potential association among neuronal evidence, behavior, and UI
performance. The broad technical aim of the initiative is to establish and
refine methods for gathering neuro-physiological evidence under complex HCI
conditions, and develop new user modeling techniques for supporting flexible and
effective interaction. Development of advanced user interfaces capable of
monitoring and establishing risk factors associated with impending or existing
brain-degenerative conditions is a longer term translational aim. The resources
and outcomes produced will be broadly shared among scholars in computer and
information science disciplines, with the aim of promoting and supporting
training of next-generation HCI researchers.