* 1444099
* Student Support for 2015 Gordon Research Conference/Seminar: Physical Virology: Integrating Global Significance with Atomic Level Understanding; Ventura Beach, CA; January 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Nicole Steinmetz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2015
* USD 12,600.00

This award is for the partial support of the International Conference on 2015
Physical Virology Gordon research conference (GRC) and Gordon research seminar
(GRS) to be held January 2015 in Ventura Beach, California. This major
international meeting will provide a single forum for discussion of the latest
developments in physical virology and recent advances in virus-enabled materials
synthesis. Regular meetings of the key researchers in this field are necessary
for the exchange of ideas, information, and state-of-the-art technologies, in
order to enable and accelerate advances and breakthroughs the fields of virology
and nanotechnology. This international conference is a key mechanism for linking
basic science with engineering towards the development of nano-enabled products,
which are of significant importance to the US and world economies. This
conference offers a forum for the open exchange of new and previously
unpublished scientific ideas. The conference includes presentations, free
exchange of ideas, and extended discussions and interactions among international
participants. This forum has been instrumental in the generation and incubation
of breakthrough and transformative ideas in many areas of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support the
participation of junior participants, including graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early career faculty members. The funds will support the attendance
at the conference of a total of 12 participants.