* 1444473
* Collaborative Research: Self-circulating, self-regulating microreactor for on-chip gas generation from liquid reactants
* ENG,CBET
* 12/29/2013,04/30/2017
* Desheng Meng, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 04/30/2017
* USD 125,834.00

PI: Likun Zhu(1), Huidan Yu (1), Desheng Men(2), Craig R.
Friedrich(2)&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: (1) Indiana University, (2) Michigan
Technological University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: (1) 1264739 and (2)
1264549&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Self-circulating, self-
regulating microreactor for on-chip gas generation from liquid
reactants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generation and handling of gaseous species with
reduced parasitic power consumption and parasitic mass has been a growing
challenge in many types of chemical reactors, including micro power sources, on-
chip cell culturing systems, gas-liquid synthesis, micro flame ionization
detectors, solar water splitting systems, and microbial electrolysis cells
(MEC). To address this challenge, a self-circulating, self-regulating mechanism
is proposed to generate gaseous species from liquid reactants on demand. The
system involves little or zero parasitic power consumption and needs no discrete
control system for regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to understand the process control and
dynamics of an integrated microfluidic gas generator with self-circulation and
self-regulation functionalities. This work is expected to establish the
engineering and scientific foundation for highly-efficient, autonomous, on-
demand gas generation systems for many applications. To achieve this objective,
the research efforts will first be focused on fundamental understanding of the
reactive multiphase flow in a microfluidic network with the proposed self-
regulation, self-circulation mechanism. Catalytic decomposition of hydrogen
peroxide will be employed as a basic model system to perform the fundamental
studies. The dynamics of bubble-driven liquid circulation, self-regulation,
mechanism of gas/liquid separation, and reactant utilization will be
experimentally investigated. A comprehensive lattice Boltzmann method (LBM)
model will be used to study the physics in the gas generator. Bubble dynamics is
a focus for the numerical study. The LBM model and the related numerical
simulation will be used to provide benchmarks for the experiments and to guide
future designs. The micro reactor configuration will then be tested on two
applications: high-performance small fuel cells for portable electronics and
energy reclamation/treatment of waste water by MECs. The issues related to these
two particular applications will be used to establish the foundation for future
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient management and utilization of multiphase
flow in microreactors have a broad range of applications. The successful
implementation of this research could directly facilitate the development of
high-energy-density power generation devices based on fuel cells, where hydrogen
storage and delivery remain major technical challenges. The proposed approach
may help overcome this problem by achieving autonomous pumping and control for
on-demand hydrogen generation with little burden on system complexity and
packaging. The work could also benefit a series of portable applications, such
as portable electronics, implanted biomedical devices, and distributed
microsystems with wireless communication capability. In addition, it could also
benefit the development of scalable microbial electrolysis cells for hydrogen
generation from renewable energy sources, while cleaning up waste water before
its discharge. It is expected to further inspire similar approaches in on-chip
cell culturing systems, micro flame ionization detector, solar water splitting
systems, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational efforts will benefit through the
involvement of minority students from the local community. Summer camps will be
organized on both campuses to provide local high school students an opportunity
to explore the interdisciplinary fields of micro/nanotechnology.