* 1444458
* Supercomputing Conference 2014 Broader Engagement Technical Session Poster Submission Workshop
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* MaryAnn Leung, Sustainable Horizons Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2016
* USD 35,317.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercomputing (SC), the International Conference
for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis is an annual
event established in 1988 by the Association for Computing Machinery and the
IEEE Computer Society. In 2012, approximately 10,000 people participated in the
conference. The conference attracts students and professionals from computer and
computational science fields from throughout the world with a large
concentration of participants from the United States. The conference has been
located in a variety of U.S. locations most recently in 2013 in Denver,
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 13 years, the SC conference series
committee has reached out to people in the U.S. who have been traditionally
under-represented in the main tracks of SC (African Americans, Hispanics, Native
Americans, women, and people with disabilities), initially through the Minority
Serving Institution, then the Minority Outreach and since 2007 the Broader
Engagement (BE) programs. The BE program has enjoyed a successful track record
at introducing High Performance Computing and related technologies to a wide
audience. The program's recent focus has been to build a stronger bridge between
the broader engagement program and the SC main technical track, thus
strengthening the SC commitment to reaching out to underrepresented groups by
promoting their full participation in main tracks of the SC conference series,
advancing their professional preparation, and providing important experiences
presenting research at a major conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will enable past BE participants to become more involved with the main technical
track of the conference by providing training for their submission to the
technical program poster session. Past Broader Engagement participants will be
encouraged to submit proposals for participation in this two-day workshop. The
workshop will include training and discussion on how to organize research
results, on available SC resources and on successful poster submission and,
consequently, a successful poster presentation. The workshop will also include
working sessions in which participants will prepare draft submissions and
receive feedback on their submissions. Each participant will be expected to
leave the workshop with a draft poster submission that can be finalized and then
submitted through the SC14 Poster Submissions application.