* 1444573
* Standards and Cyberinfrastructure that Enable "Big-Data" Driven Discovery for Tree Crop Research
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Jill Wegrzyn, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2020
* USD 2,983,307.00

Trees are fundamental for life, providing essential oxygen, carbon remediation,
habitat, lumber, shelter, energy, food and recreation. Contributing over $130
billion per year, tree crops are important to the US economy and are the
economic backbone for many rural areas. Like all crops, they face increasing
challenges from abiotic/biotic stresses including rapid climate change and
disease. Providing access to high quality genotypic, phenotypic and
environmental data and data-mining tools from a common, resource-efficient
platform will enable interrogation of this data for basic and applied research
purposes in ways currently not available. This project will create a model
"ecosystem" of community databases that can inter-communicate, and provide big
data analysis tools utilizing common controlled vocabularies. The significant
investment in big data generation, cyberinfrastructure, and comprehensive
semantic ontologies by federal agencies will be leveraged by this project to
bring richly annotated datasets and enhanced computing capabilities to
individual scientists. Adoption of these new capabilities will be promoted
through educational online modules for "guided" workflow analysis and
ontological curation that train scientists to effectively query existing data,
upload new data, assign metadata, and perform custom analyses. It is anticipated
that the outcomes of this project will accelerate both basic discovery and
improvement of important agronomic and silvic traits in tree crops. In this way,
it is the hope that this project will help raise public awareness of the
critical importance of healthy trees to a productive, sustainable planet and the
U.S. economy, and promote stewardship of these critical resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connecting high quality, curated, phenotypic and genotypic
data with geo-location and environmental data will enable fundamental questions
in tree biology to be elucidated. Providing access to these integrated datasets
and the tools to interrogate them in a fully targeted manner, is best achieved
through community databases where the crop curation expertise resides. The usage
of standard ontologies, cross-site querying functionality and web-services
driven interoperability with other database and resources will expand the
utility of data from community databases in an unprecedented way. Tripal is an
open-source, customizable, scalable, modular database platform designed to
address the constraints and resource inefficiencies of legacy database systems.
This project will both leverage and coordinate funded efforts to enhance or
update tree crop databases (Genome Database for Rosaceae, Citrus Genome
Database, TreeGene and Hardwood Genomics Web) to Tripal that will support cross-
site communication, adoption of existing standards, and "big data" integration
and analysis.