* 1444987
* Developmental Mechanisms Underlying Fleshy Fruit Diversity in Rosaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Stephen Mount, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 3,029,222.00

Co-PI: Sridhar Hannenhalli, University of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Chris
Dardick, Appalachian Fruit Research Laboratory, USDA-ARS&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Ann
Callahan, Appalachian Fruit Research Laboratory, USDA-
ARS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fruits that are so enjoyed by people are also
especially adapted for plant seed dispersal. Even closely related plants display
different types of fleshy fruits that accomplish dispersal through variation in
color, shape, size, texture and other traits. A major question for plant
biologists and fruit crop scientists is how these diverse fruit types evolved
and what factors control their development. If scientists could explain the
molecular basis of different fruit types, new breeding tools could be used to
increase the value of fruit crops and basic research could be advanced. The Rose
family (Rosaceae) is an excellent example of how fruits have been selected and
adapted to different types of dispersal. Members of the family, including the
familiar strawberries, apples, and roses, all have unique fruits and floral
structures from which the fruits are derived. This project investigates how
these different fruits develop at the molecular level. Using comparative genomic
and bioinformatics methods, the research will identify shared and unique genes
that control the pattern of fruit development among five representatives of the
Rose family: strawberries, peach, plum, apple and raspberry. Computational
methods will be used to identify regulatory gene networks that explain how and
when the diverse fruits form. High school teachers will be brought into the
research program during the summer to study fruit science and computational data
analysis, and curricula will be developed for use in the high school classroom.
By integrating teachers into the research, the next generation of students will
be impacted broadly and will gain hands-on exposure to genomics and
bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the molecular
genetic mechanisms that underlie the phenotypic diversity of fleshy fruits in
the Rosaceae. By leveraging the evolutionary conservation of genes within the
Rosaceae genome, the power of comparative genomics will be used to identify key
genes and mechanisms of fleshy fruit development. The recently published
Rosaceae genome sequences (apple, strawberry, peach, raspberry and plum) provide
an unprecedented opportunity to investigate this fundamental biological
question. First, detail morphological and histological changes during floral and
early stage fruit development will be characterized for the chosen Rosaceae
species. This knowledge will guide sample collection for RNA-sequencing methods
immediately before and after fertilization in specific floral tissues.
Innovative bioinformatic tools and strategies will be developed to identify
toolkit genes and regulatory gene networks, whose spatial or temporal shifts of
expression may alter fleshy fruit programs in different species. Functional
tests including RNAi, CRISPR, and tissue-specific ectopic expression will be
carried out to test predicted toolkit genes using the established transformation
systems in strawberry, FasTrack plum, and apple. The ultimate goal is to
identify causal relationships between changes of toolkit gene expression and
evolution of distinct fleshy fruit types. The research activities will be
integrated with several educational and outreach programs including training of
students and postdoctoral researchers in genomics and informatics,
bioinformatics workshops for high school teachers from rural West Virginia and
predominantly minority-serving schools of Prince Georges County of Maryland, and
outreach to the public about Genetically Modified Organisms and fruit genomics.
All sequence data will be made available through the public NCBI database and
through the community database for the Rosaceae.