* 1444832
* RCN: Plant Nitrogen Network (PlaNNet);Coordinating Research on Plant Nitrogen for Sustainable and Productive Agriculture
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* John Peters, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2021
* USD 499,792.00

Nitrogen (N) is an essential element of many biomolecules and is crucial for
life on earth. Nitrogen is a key driver of plant productivity for food, feed,
fiber and fuel, and insufficient N in soils often limits agricultural
productivity. Industrial/synthetic N-fertilizers have removed the N-limitation
in many agricultural systems, although over-use of N-fertilizers threatens the
environment and, ultimately, the sustainability of such systems. On the other
hand, millions of resource poor farmers, especially in developing countries,
cannot afford the expensive N-fertilizers to boost production and as a result
suffer from very low crop yields. There is growing international awareness of
these two main problems associated with N in agriculture as well as the need to
coordinate funding and research to solve the problems at an international level.
This project will establish the Plant Nitrogen Network (PlaNNet), an NSF
Research Coordination Network (RCN) of researchers and other stake-holders
within the U.S.A. and around the world that will play a leading role in
designing and implementing research and development (R&amp;D) strategies to
address the problems of N in agriculture in different parts of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global challenges require global responses. Feeding 9
billion people in 2050 and maintaining stable food supplies into the distant
future will require more-sustainable solutions to agriculture's N problems. Lack
of coordination in R&amp;D related to plant-N results in a global effort that is
not as focused, efficient, and effective as it could be. This RCN aims to
coordinate research activities related to the supply and utilization of N by
plants with the long-term objective of enhancing the efficiency and
sustainability of N-use in agriculture. Research challenges and opportunities
include improving nitrogen use efficiency (NUE) in crop and pasture plants and
exploiting biological nitrogen fixation in both natural and synthetic systems.
Optimization of N-use in agriculture will also require improved agriculture
management practices. PlaNNet will help to connect basic and applied researchers
to facilitate a concerted effort to solve agriculture's N-problems. Research
coordination network (RCN) activities will include: (i) development of a
networking website that includes information about hundreds of researchers
within the U.S.A. and around the world who are involved in plant N-related
research, opportunities for collaboration, and educational resources; (ii)
annual Workshops-Without-Walls, virtual meetings that will involve hundreds of
participants in presentations, discussions, and consensus-building related to
plant-N research and development; and (iii) satellite workshops at major
conferences focused on specific aspects of plant N and agriculture. The
activities of the RCN will be coordinated by a PlaNNet Steering Committee (SC)
that will be composed of a broad cross section of the nitrogen research
community balanced among different demographic groups.