* 1444080
* Los Angeles Regional I-Corps Node: Promoting Innovation and Entrepreneurship in the Southern California Region
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2021
* Morteza Gharib, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 4,315,244.00

The Los Angeles economy, the nation's second largest, is anchored by the health
care, aerospace and defense industries. It is now also home to the rapidly
growing Silicon Beach technology corridor, which spawns exciting new startups in
software, digital and interactive media, renewable energy and a plethora of
others. With one of the largest populations of graduating engineers in the
country and a large manufacturing base, the Los Angeles region is ideally poised
for a substantial transformation of its innovation and entrepreneurship
ecosystem. The Los Angeles Regional I-Corps Node will help accelerate this
transformation, by helping to increase the potential for leveraging the region's
products and services. The University of Southern California led Node,
consisting of a partnership between the University of Southern California, the
University of California Los Angeles, and the California Institute of
Technology, will improve the region's ecosystem by: modeling how to leverage
regional strengths to support commercialization nationally; studying team and
customer-network formation; aligning technology and organizational maturity
paths; and determining institutional support mechanisms to accelerate team
coalescence, technology-to-product transformation, and customer acquisition. The
Node will contribute to the NSF's mission of empowering STEM students, technical
professionals, researchers and entrepreneurs to actively and effectively
translate innovative ideas into large-scale commercialization. Annual I-Corps
training sessions will be created that combine the strength of the partner
institutions to offer new regional entrepreneurial opportunities and contribute
novel resources to the I-Corps National Innovation Network (NIN). Two efforts
will specifically focus on extending the Lean Start-up model to established
industries in the Los Angeles region. The first will focus on health-care
engineering, including a 'Mobile Demo Day' that will educate researchers on the
convergence of engineering and medicine, regulatory hurdles, insurance
strategies, medical industry distribution models, and related issues. The second
will focus on aerospace and defense; offering unparalleled access to insight,
mentoring, and opportunities to technologists in this area, along with
strategies that can be used to develop an alignment with large-scale system
integrators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Node will provide a vibrant research
center for commercialization processes and outcomes. It will examine founding
team formation, the coalescence of engineering talent with business skills, and
customer and alliance development that cultivates relationships with industry
incumbents. The research will also focus on evaluating and improving
entrepreneurial skills in technology maturity assessments, understanding the
level of technology maturity required for industrial adoption, and identifying
institutional support mechanism for accelerating commercialization. The
hypothesis that technology and organizational maturity proceed along independent
and often unsynchronized timelines will be tested to better understand their
interactions and identify factors that will increase success. Data from
investors, customers, and advisors will help provide an awareness of each
entrepreneur's stakeholder network and recognize correlations involved with both
the activity and duration of fundraising. In a similar vein, the Node will study
the duration to first sales, acquisition of government grants, and other
milestones in cash generation. These factors will be tied to technology
development milestones in order to identify relationships and key drivers, such
as the importance of prospective customers and investors in accelerating
operational cash flow to the company (i.e., through sales, rather than
financing). Short-term outcomes will contribute to an understanding of the
relative importance of various roles and dependencies. Longer-term outcomes will
contribute to an improvement in the performance of regional teams. The Node's
website will contribute videos, slide decks, and related materials to the NIN,
including a 'Needs and Deals' section where local deals that seek specialized
guidance will be advertised. The website will also post bios and contact
information for vetted mentors who can assist companies in other regions of the
country.