* 1444655
* "Physical, Engineering and Biological Limits to Brain Measurements" hosted by the University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, May 30-31, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Peter Littlewood, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2015
* USD 49,753.00

The three-day workshop "Physical, Engineering and Biological Limits to Brain
Measurements" hosted by the University of Chicago on May 29-31, 2014 will bring
together researchers from physics, computational science, biology, and network
theory to discuss the foundations of brain science and recent methodological
developments in the field. The meeting is inspired in part by ongoing
discussions surrounding the BRAIN initiative about the development of new
technologies and tools that will help us understand how the brain works and make
transformative progress in engineering and medicine. An important part of the
discussion will be how to substantially improve the spatial and temporal
resolution, miniaturization, numbers of probes or actuators, etc. in brain
related experiments. One of the questions that will be discussed is the
fundamental limits set by physics (e.g. electrical, optical and wireless methods
cannot violate Maxwell's equations), engineering and material science, and from
biology (e.g. one cannot over-heat the brain by dissipating too much power). The
meeting will bring together practicing experts to have a systematic discussion
about these limits, resulting in a written document that can be broadly
disseminated to help different parties in understanding the issues, to delineate
possible/impossible boundaries and to point to areas requiring further research.
This is a small, focused meeting with approximately 30 participants, with a
single session attended by the whole group over the meeting period. The meeting
will constitute sequential discussions of the different frequency ranges of the
Maxwell's equation (EEG/MEG at low frequencies, MRI, wired/wireless, optical,
and x-ray), with additional segments on electron microscopy, on a general
framework spanning the frequency ranges, and statistics/inverse problems. Young
scientists will have the opportunity to interact with the senior investigators
in the field.