* 1444978
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Geochemical Perspective On Productive Differentiation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 25,169.00

Researchers seek understanding of the processes that led to the very complex,
large-scale societies in which most of the world's population now lives, and of
the factors that bound their members together and fostered continued
development. Such societies began to emerge separately in many parts of the
world, providing an opportunity to investigate what underlying factors these
early complex societies share, as well as how different contexts shaped them in
varying ways. Archaeology is uniquely able to study the origins of complex
societies because their beginnings occurred far back in time - well beyond the
reach of written history. Since all human societies must provide their members
with at least the basic necessities of life, economic organization is one of the
keys to understanding why development flourished in some early complex societies
and just how their trajectories took the courses that they did. Research focuses
how some human groups initially built enough trust among different local groups
that they could rely upon each other to produce goods that all families needed
for their survival. This project will contribute to this effort by
reconstructing the economics of one set of villages as they underwent such a
transformation some 6,000 years ago. In the process it will further researchers'
ability to put advanced analytical techniques in geochemistry to work in the
effort to reconstruct ancient human relations better. It will provide training
in these techniques to archaeology students, and it will foster deeper
appreciation of anthropological research questions on the part of specialists in
applying physical and chemical techniques to archaeological materials. This
project will serve to further the scientific education of Mr. Tao Li, a doctoral
candidate and provide the data necessary for his to produce a dissertation
thesis. It will also serve to strengthen institutional ties between the
University of Pittsburgh and the University of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ancient pottery has always been a particularly
important material to archaeologists because it was widely used, it breaks
easily, and its fragments, once discarded, are preserved almost indefinitely. It
is usually the most abundant material archaeologists recover from ancient
complex societies. This project will use pottery as a window into ancient
economic organization. By identifying the chemical fingerprints of different
sources of clay for pottery making, the researchers will trace out the networks
of distribution that brought pottery made at different places to the families of
three Hongshan villages in northeastern China between about 4500 and 3000 BC. It
will determine how complex these networks were, how extensive was the economic
interdependence involved, and whether pottery production and distribution had
important connections to emerging leadership roles and the first regional
political integration.