* 1444641
* A workshop to implement GeoLEAD:  A multi-stakeholder initiative to increase the size and diversity of the Earth and space science talent pool
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Pranoti Asher, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2016
* USD 69,000.00

The GeoLEAD (Geoscience Learning, Engagement And Development) initiative is an
effort to bring together multiple resources to engage, retain, and prepare two-
and four-year college undergraduate students for the geoscience workforce.
Members of the geoscience workforce are involved in nearly all aspects of human
society, whether it be in developing and managing natural resources, preparing
for natural hazards, or planning for infrastructure development. As noted in
several high level reports, there is a need to increase the number and diversity
of students studying the STEM fields, but in the geosciences community that need
is growing at an alarming rate due to the impending wave of retirements of
senior scientists in government and industry. Community colleges offer an
important opportunity for recruitment of new geoscientists, both because of
their diversity and their growing significance as the venue where undergraduate
students are exposed to the introductory STEM curriculum. Reducing attrition of
students in the undergraduate pipeline by overcoming some of the known barriers
and issues can go a long way toward solving the workforce and diversity
shortfall of the future. As such, the goals of the GeoLEAD initiative are
critically important to the Nation's future economic well-being and community
resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of GeoLEAD is to leverage a
collaboration among a variety of institutions and stakholders (e.g., academic
institutions, professional societies, private sector employers) to co-develop a
centralized portal for delivering an integrated, multi-dimensional set of
resources for undergraduate students in the Earth and space sciences. This award
is funding a professionally facilitated, implementation planning workshop in
which the long-term framework of the GeoLEAD portal and detailed contributions
of individual partners will be fleshed out. The 2-day workshop, being held in
Washington, DC in April 2015, represents the culmination of community planning
discussions regarding collaboration on undergraduate education and retention
that have been underway since Fall 2013. When fully implemented, the GeoLEAD
portal will provide a valuable one-stop-shopping venue for finding information
about individual programs in the geosciences, including opportunities for
scholarship/fellowship opportunites, research experiences, and career planning
guidance. The portal also will offer bundled resources that together can provide
individual students with customized end-to-end support as they transition from
early engagement in the geosciences to preparation for a career.