* 1444951
* Magma Structure and Anharmonicity Controls on Iron Isotopic Fractionation in Igneous Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Nicolas Dauphas, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2018
* USD 308,835.00

Among planetary bodies, Earth is unique in that it possesses an oxygen-rich
atmosphere sustained by photosynthesis. Its mantle is also unusual in that it is
oxidized relative to the mantles of other planetary bodies (e.g., Vesta, Mars).
The redox evolution of the mantle may have influenced the redox state of the
present atmosphere as the raise in the oxygen content of the atmosphere
approximately two billion years ago could have resulted from a change in the
nature of the gases emitted by volcanoes. One challenge with understanding what
controlled the redox evolution of Earth is that proxies to trace the oxidation
state of the mantle are missing or inadequate. One way to measure the redox
state of the Earth is to study the redox state of iron, which can exist as
metallic iron under reducing condition, ferrous iron (as in olivine) in
intermediate condition, and ferric (as in rust) in oxidizing condition. One
difficulty with this approach is that iron can easy switch from one form to
another. For this reason, it is important to develop new tracers of the redox
condition of the Earth's mantle that are less easily obliterated, and iron
isotopes may be such tracers. However, the groundwork to establish iron isotopes
as tracers of magmatic and redox processes in the Earth is still missing, which
is the main scope of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which
iron isotopes can be fractionated in rocks and magmas can be predicted using the
synchrotron method of Nuclear Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (NRIXS), which
allows measuring the strength of the bonds that hold iron in position in a solid
(the mean force constant of iron bonds). Through theory, it is possible to
predict the extent to which iron isotopes can be fractionated based on such
NRIXS measurements. Previous work showed that there was a strong influence of
the redox state of iron and magma composition on the degree of iron isotopic
fractionation. These studies could explain why more evolved (more silicic)
igneous rocks tend to have heavier Fe isotopic compositions than less silicic
rocks. They however fell short of explaining why the oceanic crust is enriched
systematically in the heavy isotopes of iron relative to the underlying mantle.
One possible reason for this shortcoming is that the samples that are usually
measured by NRIXS at room temperature for practical reasons are not
representative of mantle-derived samples, which are at much higher temperatures.
Indeed, higher temperatures could affect the structure of the samples. It could
also affect the strength of the chemical bonds if the material shows some
anharmonicity. To quantify this, experiments will be done at the Advanced Photon
Source synchrotron to measure the force constant of iron bonds of materials of
geological relevance (glasses, melts, olivine) at high temperature. This will be
done by placing the samples on a heated wire in a controlled atmosphere and
bringing the detectors as close as possible to the samples without damaging
them. By measuring the apparent force constant of iron bonds as a function of
temperature, it will be possible to retrieve the quartic term of the interatomic
potential and learn about anharmonic and structural changes in igneous rocks and
melts. These measurements will help develop a quantitative understanding of iron
isotopic fractionation in mantle and crustal rocks. This is needed to use iron
isotopic variations in igneous rocks as tracers of the redox state and magmatic
evolution of the Earth.