* 1444161
* RAPID: Using an extreme climatological event to inform the evolutionary systems biology of thermogenic performance in deer mice.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Zac Cheviron, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 04/30/2016
* USD 155,756.00

Two of the primary goals of evolutionary and ecological physiology are
understand the mechanisms of physiological performance, and to assess the
ecological consequences of individual variation in physiological traits. In this
study, the PI will take advantage of a recent extreme cold weather event, the
southward incursion of the polar vortex during the winter of 2013-2014, to
extend his ongoing studies of the mechanistic underpinnings of thermogenic
performance in high- and low-elevation populations of deer mice (Peromyscus
maniculatus). The PI's current research efforts (recently recommend for funding
by NSF - IOS 1354934) are aimed at applying systems-biology approaches to
develop and parameterize hierarchical computational models of the adaptive
modification aerobic thermogenic capacity. In this study, he will complement
these mechanistic insights with direct estimates of the strength of natural
selection acting on various traits that influence whole-organism thermogenic
performance. The brutal winter of 2013/2014 represents an extreme selective
episode acting on thermogenic performance in small, winter-active endotherms
like deer mice. As a result, the researchers have a unique opportunity to
evaluate the strength of natural selection acting on traits that influence
whole-organism thermogenic performance in the wild, and to directly incorporate
data on selection intensities into their integrative analysis of the evolution
of thermogenic performance. This study will provide key insights into the
mechanisms underlying rapid phenotypic and evolutionary responses to severe
climatic events.

Although many studies have documented phenotypic changes in response to putative
selective episodes, none have used detailed mechanistic insights to predict
which phenotypic traits are likely to be the targets of natural selection on
this scale. The PIs ongoing mechanistic analysis of thermogenic performance will
allow him to identify phenotypic and regulatory changes that are most likely to
influence O2 flux and overall thermogenic capacity, while the work proposed in
this study will allow the researchers to make direct connections between the
intensity of selection acting on a trait and quantitative analysis of its
regulatory control over pathway flux. The researchers will use shifts in
phenotypic trait means to formally estimate selection differentials acting
various subordinate traits and regulatory network states that influence
thermogenic performance under hypoxia. The combination of these lab and field
studies will make important strides toward an integrated evolutionary systems
biology framework for understanding adaptive variation in complex physiological
traits.