* 1444794
* Collaborative Research: Student Travel Support: International Workshop on Big Data in Life Sciences, Newport Beach, CA, September 20, 2014
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Jaroslaw Zola, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 10/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to request funds that will be used to support
students and postdoctoral researchers from U.S. institutions to travel to the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) International Workshop on Big Data in
Life Sciences (BigLS), to be held on September 20, 2014 in Newport Beach, CA, in
conjunction with the ACM Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and
Health Informatics (ACM BCB). Funds will be used to support up to 10 students
and postdoctoral researchers, working in areas related to Big Data and life
sciences. Recipients of the support will be selected via a widely advertised
competitive process involving the submission of a travel grant application, and
review by the program committee. Preference will be given to women and
underrepresented minority groups, first-generation college students, and
undergraduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on five
key research themes that underline research in Big Data in life sciences: i)
scalable algorithms and techniques for Big Data analytics in molecular biology,
ii) statistical and integrative approaches to Big Data biology and informatics,
iii) high performance computing methods and software for Big Data biology, iv)
scientific workflows and platforms for Big Data in life sciences, v) software
and hardware solutions for managing Big Data in biomedical informatics. Big Data
problems and challenges have become a reality in modern day computational
biology and bioinformatics. This travel award will help orient students and
postdoctoral researchers in the emerging area of Big Data analytics in life
sciences. It will create a unique opportunity for supported students to present
their on-going work, network with experts and peers in the field, receive
mentoring, while contributing to the workshop's technical program. It will help
to prepare the future generation scientific workforce to meet the challenges of
this critical area of life sciences.