* 1444633
* EAGER: Physical, Social and Situational Factors as Determents of Public WiFi Users Online Behaviors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jonathan Katz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 215,002.00

The proliferation of public WiFi networks allows users to access the Internet
from various public locations. Unfortunately, many public WiFi networks are
unencrypted and insecure, posing risks to users' security and privacy, and
allowing users to potentially initiate illegal online behaviors. In this
interdisciplinary collaboration between social scientists and computer
scientists, the PIs build upon sociological, psychological, and criminological
models that leverage constructs of community, space, and time, and extend them
to study users' perceptions of and behavior on public WiFi
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study gathers data from public WiFi networks
across the state of Maryland, and explores whether public WiFi users' online
behaviors (both legitimate and illegitimate) and vulnerabilities to cybercrime
victimization are shaped by (1) time of day; (2) the speed and level of security
of the WiFi connection; (3) the socio-economic characteristics of the
neighborhood within which the WiFi network is located; (4) the type of business
operating the public WiFi; (5) the physical arrangement and number of
individuals present in the location; and (6) the presence of cyber-security
awareness cues in the physical environment. This project enables the development
of strategies, policies, and best practices for encouraging safe use of public
WiFi networks.