* 1444624
* Characterizing the Interplay between Maize Retrotransposons and the Epigenome
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2024
* Gernot Presting, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,412,428.00

Centromeres are DNA segments that ensure the faithful segregation of chromosomes
to daughter cells during division. The structure of centromeres is not well
understood, although coordinated changes in the DNA and associated factors are
necessary for centromere function. Furthermore, centromere structure and
function can change over time raising questions about how the genome responds
and adapt at the chromosome level. Centromeres are difficult to study because
they are composed of retrotranspons and other mobile elements that consist of
highly repetitive sequences. The ability to assemble spans of short repeated
sequences is notoriously difficult, so the centromere regions of chromosomes
have remained nearly obscure to researchers. This project will sequence and
analyze the centromere regions of all ten maize chromosomes using new sequencing
technologies and software tools that permit assembly and analysis of the
repetitive sequences and will permit study of the associated factors unique to
centromeres. The results of this project will add value to the already sequenced
maize genome and will result in an improved reference genome fully available to
the plant research community. By discovering the structure and function of
centromeres, the potential to construct artificial chromosomes will be expanded
and agronomic traits associated with centromeres may be identified. As part of
the project, undergraduate students will be trained in modern plant engineering
methods and synthetic biology. The team of undergraduate students will
participate in an international student research competition, thus promoting
student and public understanding of plant centromeres and synthetic biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the role of DNA in centromere
function and evolution. In a first step, the nature and arrangement of
centromere-specific repeats at all ten maize centromeres of the inbred B73
reference genome will be determined using PacBio technology. The impact of these
repeats on the deposition of centromere-specific proteins will be determined
using a number of different experimental approaches, including comparative
genomics and epigenomics, as well as biochemical and genetic assays.
Neocentromere formation is an epigenetic change that involves movement of CENH3,
the centromere specific histone H3, to a new genomic region. Rapid invasion of
neocentromeres by centromeric retrotransposons (CR) provides an unprecedented
opportunity to study the interplay of epigenetic and genetic changes. A large
number of epigenetic marks have been, or are being, mapped in the standard maize
genomes. Histone H2A.Z nucleosomes, which may represent persistent marks of
transcribed regions, will be mapped and integrated with all available epigenetic
signatures to determine the reciprocal effects of genetic (double-stranded DNA
breaks and retrotransposons insertion) and epigenetic (histone variants, histone
modifications, gene expression, DNA methylation). At least one additional
epigenetic marker that specifically binds centromeric repeats will be
characterized in detail. All data produced in the course of this research will
be deposited at MaizeGDB (maizegdb.org) and GenBank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/).