* 1444903
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Manufacturing of Pharmaceuticals by Fluidized Bed Impregnation of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients onto Porous Carriers
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Benjamin Glasser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2017
* USD 206,200.00

This PFI: Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) Technology Translation (TT)
project focuses on translating fluidized bed impregnation technology to improve
manufacturing of pharmaceuticals. This technology is important because
pharmaceutical tablets and capsules are manufactured primarily by an inefficient
process, which involves blending drug crystals called the API (Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredient) with inactive filler powders (called excipients). The
resulting mixture of powders is then further processed and fed into capsules or
compressed to make tablets. During blending, it is difficult to make sure that
the correct amount of the API is distributed throughout the excipient powders.
During subsequent processing of the powder mixture it is challenging to keep the
mixture mixed and prevent the excipients from segregating or flowing to
different regions from the API. This is a particular challenge for low dose
pharmaceuticals. If there is segregation or inadequate blending, it can lead to
tablets or capsules with too much or too little drug substance. The resulting
out-of-spec tablets and capsules must then be discarded. This project will
result in a prototype of fluidized bed impregnation technology for manufacturing
of pharmaceuticals. This technology has the following unique features: the
impregnation of porous excipients with a solution containing the API and
subsequent drying to produce excipients uniformly impregnated with the API. The
excipients impregnated with the API can then be fed into capsules or compressed
into tablets without concern for de-mixing or segregation of the API and
excipients since the API is now present in the pores of the excipients. These
features provide advantages of improved product quality and reductions in out-
of-spec product when compared to the usual method of blending API crystals with
excipients for making pharmaceuticals. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery
toward commercial application: 1) For very potent drugs, the amount of API in
the solid dosage form can vary from 1% to 0.1% by weight. These very low API
loadings pose one of the biggest challenges in pharmaceutical product
development: the control of dose uniformity. Low API content variability is
highly desired and strictly enforced by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
2) Another challenge in product development is that a large fraction of newly
discovered drug compounds have poor solubility which subsequently affects their
bioavailability. 3) Another important aspect of pharmaceutical process
development is the final product cost. As pharmaceutical companies strive to
develop more affordable drugs, any possible elimination of lengthy and expensive
unit operations becomes commercially advantageous. Fluidized bed impregnation of
APIs onto porous excipients can potentially address all of the above challenges
in drug substance and product development by improving dose uniformity,
enhancing bioavailability and reducing the number of manufacturing steps. In
addition, personnel involved in this project, graduate and undergraduate
students, will receive innovation and technology translation experiences through
specific training that will address these topics and by being involved with the
commercialization of the technology.