* 1444491
* EAGER:  New lower-cost technology to produce many entangled photons and test their properties
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Yanhua Shih, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Title: New lower-cost technology to produce many entangled photons and test
their properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new science of quantum entanglement
has opened up a wide variety of new, emerging and possible technologies, such as
quantum computing, secure quantum communication, quantum imaging, quantum
lithography (an approach to nanofabrication) and others. The cost of producing
two entangled photons is a crucial driver in the development and use of these
technologies. This PI has been one of the world leaders in producing high-
precision entangled photons. He (along with two other groups) has also been able
to produce three entangled photons. He has had a recent breakthrough, proven in
experiment, for producing two entangled photons by a radically new technology,
which promises a great reduction in cost, and also opens the door to entangling
more than two photons at an acceptable cost and precision. In this project, he
plans to demonstrate that this promise is real, and to undertake new studies of
fundamental physics made possible by the availability of more entangled photons.
It is hoped that these new studies will open the door to new paradigms and
technologies in quantum technology, based on the use of more than two entangled
photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past demonstrations of three entangled photons (in
a large laboratory in Sichuan province of China) have relied on complicated
systems using multiple steps of four-wave mixing in nonlinear crystals. This new
technique uses thermal effects and noise cancellation to achieve the same
effect. In experiment, it accurately reproduces the usual two-photon Bell double
coincidence rate. In the first stage of this work, the PI will produce the GHZ
"phi" state, and perform the equivalent of the Bell's Theorem experiment but
with three polarizers, and varying the order at which the polarizers are
reached, as a test of fundamental principles. He will then progress to
demonstrating larger and larger numbers of entangled photons, up to more than
100, and performing experiments relevant to possible applications.