* 1444166
* US-Korea Workshop on Security and Privacy for Internet of Things
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Hyeong-Ah Choi, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 02/29/2016
* USD 30,000.00

US-Korea Workshop on Security and Privacy for Internet of
Things&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the organization of an
exploratory workshop on establishing research collaborations between George
Washington University (GWU) and Korean researchers in Korea Internet &amp;
Security Agency (KISA) and Seoul National University (SNU) on the emerging area
of security and privacy for Internet of Things (IoT). IoT security and privacy
is a topic that cuts across many facets of the society, from agriculture to
transportation to health-care. Thanks to the unique IoT testbeds built by Korean
researchers, this proposed workshop has the potential to foster substantial
opportunities for future research collaborations that may lead to fundamental
research breakthroughs in IoT security and privacy. These breakthroughs can
bring about research and educational impacts with international reach. The
project will also have significant educational impacts on undergraduate and
graduate students from the US, especially GWU students who are involved in the
study-abroad program in Korea University, Seoul,
Korea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is expected to bring together
synergized research expertise from the following two groups of researchers: (i)
US researchers with extensive experience on foundational security and privacy
issues related to IoT. (ii) Korean researchers who are excellent partners for
the proposed workshop and the subsequent planned collaborations. Compared with
other countries, the research of IoT technologies has seen much faster growth
and adoption in Korea, provided a larger amount of funding, and accomplished
better and more advanced results. The workshop brings US researchers to Korea so
they can visit the Korean IOT testbeds and discuss with their Korean
counterparts about both visions and concrete (technical) plans for future
collaborations, which can in turn help realize major research impacts and pave
the way to a successful realistic deployment of large-scale IoT system with
proper security and privacy protection. Understanding the security and privacy
issues in IoT and realizing the ideas in a practical system constitute a strong
intellectual research endeavor.