* 1444210
* US-Brazil Planning Visit: An Integrated Approach to Resolving the late Paleozoic Ice Age in the Parana Basin, Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Isabel Montanez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2016
* USD 44,494.00

US-Brazil Planning Visit: A Collaborative Effort to Reconstruct the Climate of
the Last Icehouse in the Paraná Basin, Brazil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part1:
&lt;br/&gt;This international collaborative research will revolutionize our
ability to correlate geologic, paleoclimate, and biotic events throughout South
America and will permit assessment of the degree of global synchroneity of
events and the nature of teleconnections in the late Paleozoic climate system.
The geochronologic framework we will develop has the potential to also
contribute to unraveling the tectonic evolution of the Andes and shedding light
on the origin of economic metals and petroleum resources in South America. The
long-term international collaboration will facilitate the exchange of scientific
and education information and resources by the investigators and provide more
diverse training of US and Brazilian undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part2:&lt;br/&gt;The last icehouse on Earth (340
to 260 million years ago), prior to our current glacial world, was the longest
lived and most geographically extensive ice age of the past half billion years.
Despite substantially different geography than today, the late Paleozoic Ice Age
(LPIA) provides insight into the response of icehouse climate processes and the
biosphere to major perturbation, including CO2-forcing of climate. The demise of
this icehouse records the only transition of a vegetated and metazoan world from
a glacial state to fully greenhouse conditions. Studies of the past two decades
have raised fundamental questions and defined paradoxes regarding the climate
system and climate-life linkages during this time. Resolving these scientific
issues requires better time constraints for high-latitude depositional basins
that contain a rich record of the LPIA. The Paraná Basin is an ideal natural
laboratory as it contains one of the thickest successions of late Paleozoic
glacial and post-glacial strata and has long been considered a key geographic
piece of the puzzle regarding the nature and timing of glaciation in Gondwana.
Widely distributed volcanic ashes offer the potential to develop a U-Pb dated
higher latitude record of high temporal resolution and continuity. Sedimentary
deposits, which are rich in paleoclimate proxies and characterize the
successions above and between glacial deposits provide an opportunity to
evaluate, via fossil soil, geochemical and fossil leaf analyses, how the
regional climate conditions and paleo-atmospheric CO2 varied between glacial
maxima and glacial minima. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are carrying out a planning
visit and reconnaissance fieldtrip to initiate an international research and
education collaboration with Brazilian investigators at the Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande Do Sul (Roberto Iannuzzi) and the Universidade Federal do Paraná
(Fernando Farias Vesely). The longer-term collaborative project, which
integrates the group?s complimentary scientific interests and expertise, focuses
on three research objectives that will improve our understanding of the climate
system and climate-life linkages during this last icehouse. These include (1)
developing high-precision U-Pb ages for ashes within the Permo-Carboniferous
succession of the Paraná Basin, (2) integrating field evidence of the geographic
distribution of ice sheets with the U-Pb and Hf isotopic compositions of
detrital zircons from glacial deposits in order to reconstruct the ice sheet
history in west-central Gondwana, and (3) developing high-resolution climate
records for the Paraná Basin &amp; assess their linkages to the glaciation
history, Gondwanan paleobotanical records, and existing lower-latitude
(paleotropical) proxy records.