* 1444123
* CNIC: U.S.-Swedish Workshop on Assessment of Multimodal-Multilingual Development in Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Children
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Matthew Dye, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 12/31/2015
* USD 61,679.00

The goal of this U.S.-Swedish workshop is to catalyze new research
collaborations focused on how early visual and auditory experiences shape the
linguistic and cognitive development of infants and young children, especially
those born deaf or hard-of-hearing. Rather than examining only the auditory and
spoken language abilities of deaf and hard-of-hearing children, the workshop's
research framework will conceptualize these children as multilingual learners
who experience the world both auditorily and visually. The workshop participants
will address four key methodological questions: (1) what is the best
neuroimaging approach for deaf and hard-of-hearing children, (2) how can we best
assess communicative competence in multilingual children, (3) what are the
challenges for assessment of the language environment in homes, and (4) how
might effective intervention strategies be developed and validated? Swedish
partners from the Department of Linguistics at Stockholm University are ideal
counterparts in this endeavor because in Sweden's education system, there is
extensive experience in bilingual-bicultural education for deaf and hard-of-
hearing children and there are relatively high rates of cochlear implantation.
Initial success at the workshop should point the way for next steps to explore
the complex interplay between cochlear implantation and use of both a visual
sign language and an auditory spoken language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For broader
impact, another objective of the workshop in Stockholm is to provide a forum for
U.S. doctoral students and early stage researchers to network with Swedish
experts and other European academics, exposing them to new perspectives on the
development of deaf and hard-of-hearing children. Deaf academics and students
will be included in the workshop, alongside representatives of schools and
parent groups, to maximize the potential for broad scientific impact. By
shifting the framework for discussion and future research planning away from one
of deficit to one of diversity, the workshop participants aim to develop
innovative research proposals to address the societal problem of how to best
educate deaf and hard-of-hearing children.