* 1444127
* Catalyzing new international collaboration. US-Taiwan collaboration of experimental and theoretical study of rovibrational spectra of small hydrogen-containing molecules and ions.
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Ludwik Adamowicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2017
* USD 46,480.00

The majority of our knowledge of the astronomical world is derived from the
emission, absorption,&lt;br/&gt;and scattering of electromagnetic radiation from
atoms and molecules. The astronomical observations&lt;br/&gt;of atomic and
molecular spectra including transition energies, intensities, and light
polarization&lt;br/&gt;complemented with laboratory experiments and theoretical
calculations are essential in the study of&lt;br/&gt;stellar atmospheres. The
goal of this CNIC proposal is to catalyze an international
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;collaboration between the group of Prof. Ludwik
Adamowicz, at the Department of Chemistry&lt;br/&gt;and Biochemistry, the
University of Arizona (USA) and Prof. Jow-Tsong Shy, at the
Department&lt;br/&gt;of Physics, the National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) on
performing very accurate experimental&lt;br/&gt;and theoretical studies of the
rovibrational (rovib) spectra of small hydrogen-containing
molecules&lt;br/&gt;and clusters. These systems constitute a significant portion
of the mass of the universe and are&lt;br/&gt;key to the interstellar chemistry.
The goal of this collaborative is to characterize and assign
the&lt;br/&gt;rovibrational spectra of the studied molecular systems. The
obtained data can be very helpful in&lt;br/&gt;identifying spectral lines
recorded by telescopes and assigning these lines to particular molecules
and&lt;br/&gt;clusters. As a result, knowledge will be gained about the
compositions of various domains in the&lt;br/&gt;universe and about chemistry
occurring there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration brings together groups
with very different research profiles. The Taiwan&lt;br/&gt;group has been
concerned with high-precision experimental spectroscopy studies of small neutral
and&lt;br/&gt;charged molecular systems. The theoretical-chemistry Arizona group
has been involved in development&lt;br/&gt;and application of very accurate
quantum-mechanical methods for calculating spectra of small atoms&lt;br/&gt;and
molecules. Both groups are accomplished in their respective fields. In this
project, the theory&lt;br/&gt;and the experiment will be combined in elucidation
of the spectra of molecules and clusters involving&lt;br/&gt;hydrogen and its
isotopes. The studies are very fundamental in nature and as such they are
well&lt;br/&gt;suited for NSF funding.