* 1444949
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Clinical Predictive Model Based Smart Decision Support System for Congestive Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) related Re-hospitalization
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrew Duffell, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,594.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating smart
predictive modeling technologies to develop a Clinical Decision Support System
(CDSS) to fill the need for reducing re-hospitalization for patients with
Congestive Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). COPD affects almost 24 million
people in the U.S. and is the 3rd leading cause of death. The CDSS is important
because it provides better quality of care for patients while providing
significant costs savings related to hospital readmissions. The project will
result in a prototype of a smart CDSS, which will enable practitioners to better
understand if a COPD patient is expected to be a candidate for hospital
readmission within 30 days of discharge. This cloud-based CDSS will have the
following unique features: ability to utilize patient information available
either in electronic or plain text format, novel algorithms derived from big
data analytics, natural language processing and machine learning and ability to
provide alerts to healthcare professionals about high readmission risk patients.
These features provide the following advantages: improving the efficiency of the
care process through system accessibility, effectively utilizing and integrating
relevant patient information from various sources, reducing total cost of care
through early and preventative intervention, and improving the quality of care
and quality of life of the patients. Further, this CDSS will help reduce the
variability in care so that hospitals with historically lower performance can
benefit from best practices.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application in the area of clinical
decision support systems. The predominant technical gaps are a lack of fusion of
structured and unstructured data for the development of predictive models, a
limited use of natural language processing, and a significant lack of
integration of local and global clinical information. This project provides a
comprehensive platform to address these gaps by integration the structured local
and global clinical data available in either CCD, CCR or CCDA format with the
unstructured clinical data such as physician notes and laboratory reports.
Further the system utilizes UIMA based cTAKES natural language processing sub-
system that is developed for COPD to analyze this unstructured data. The
predictive capabilities of CDSS are based on multiple leading-edge technologies
including data mining, machine learning, natural language processing and data
visualization techniques. In addition, graduate students involved in this
project will have opportunities to learn the interdisciplinary domain of medical
information systems and their real-world applications. In addition, these
students will be mentored in technology transfer and commercialization
activities.

Larkin Community Hospital (largest D.O. program in the U.S.) and Humana (the
largest health plan in Florida) will provide clinical data and expertise to the
project. This project could be effectively deployed at hospitals, healthplans,
accountable care organizations and managed care organizations for avoiding
hospital readmissions related to COPD thereby, providing significant savings
related to hospital readmissions while improving quality of care.