* 1444214
* US-Belgium workshop: Atomic Switch Networks for Neuromorphic Reservoir Computing; Late Fall-2015/Early Spring 2016; University of Ghent-Belgium.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Adam Stieg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,117.00

NSF CNIC proposal #1444214&lt;br/&gt;US-Belgium Workshop: Atomic Switch Networks
for Neuromorphic Reservoir Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;The
human brain outperforms digital computers in a number of tasks such as image,
motion tracking and sound recognition and decision making in complex and often
noisy and error prone environments. Digital computers are by their nature
poorly-suited for tasks such as autonomous control (navigation, robotics),
pattern recognition (speech, vision) or prediction (weather, financial markets).
A biologically inspired approach to computing, called Reservoir Computing (RC),
on the other hand, has demonstrated the potential to perform complex tasks
efficiently. To perform RC, a newly developed hardware platform called the
Atomic Switch Network (ASN) uses nanotechnology to create billions of synthetic
synapses wired up in a fashion similar to that of the neocortex in the human
brain. The implementation of a functioning RC-ASN system requires the
collaborative expertise from recognized world leaders in RC methods at Ghent
University, Belgium and the UCLA team who have developed the ASN device. UCLA
has proposed a participant-driven workshop involving invited lectures, hands-on
tutorials with hardware and software and breakout discussions with the goal to
accelerate realization of this new form of computers system. This workshop will
provide international research opportunities to 5 US students and early career
researchers, while also promoting team-building skills, student-driven
collaboration, and cultural exchange. By combining concepts from nanoscience,
neuroscience, and machine learning, this proposal seeks to leverage the
collective expertise of all parties to advance this next-generation cognitive
technology. The successful outcomes of this research will also benefit the BRAIN
Initiative, which is a priority research area of the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;Atomic Switch Networks (ASN) are a unique class of
biologically inspired computing architectures designed to produce a complex,
dynamical system through the collective interactions of functional nanoscale
materials. These self-organized devices retain the intrinsic memory capacity of
their component resistive switching elements while generating a class of
emergent behaviors commonly associated with biological cognition. Their capacity
for non-linear transformation of input information, which is processed and
stored in a distributed fashion, generates patterns of dynamic spatiotemporal
activity that can be used as the basis for a computational platform. Recent
efforts to model, simulate, and measure the operational dynamics of ASNs toward
hardware implementation of reservoir computing (RC), a burgeoning field that
investigates the computational aptitude of complex biologically inspired systems
to address problems in which data is constantly changing, incomplete, or subject
to errors, indicate the necessity to establish a collaboration with experts in
the field of machine learning. The combined expertise of proposed workshop
participants will focus on a critical assessment of how to best utilize ASN
devices to overcome current operational limits on real-time signal processing in
the RC paradigm such as speed, network density, and scalability. Beyond lectures
and discussion sections, tutorial workshops delivered by participants from the
US and EU will be utilized to disseminate/demonstrate the current status of (1)
modeling/simulation of ASNs, (2) physical implementations of ASNs, and (3)
physical implementations of other hardware systems (memristors, optoelectronics,
etc.). Targeted outcomes include identification of specific areas for near-term
collaboration and follow-on funding within existing Core programs at the NSF.
This new collaboration will provide a tremendous opportunity to explore the
best-case scenario resulting from the world's leading RC research with a
potentially groundbreaking platform for hardware-based RC to contribute to novel
approaches in real-time information processing and computation.