* 1444266
* Leadership Support for the Board on Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2014,10/31/2019
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,589,166.00

With the baseline support provided by this grant, the Board on Science Education
(BOSE) of the National Research Council (NRC) will coordinate a series of
regular, structured meetings over the next five years between the leadership
within the NSF Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR) and the
leadership of units within the NRC that focus on STEM education. These meetings
will focus on emerging ideas or pressing issues in science education and science
education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematical Sciences Education
Board of the NRC was disbanded in 2008. This project provides support to re-
establish mathematics education expertise within BOSE, reflecting the growing
importance of improved practice in mathematics education. A group of six experts
in math education research will join regular BOSE meetings. With the inclusion
of mathematics expertise this project provides the resources to pursue ideas and
issues in a timely manner across the full spectrum of STEM. Providing evidence-
based strategies to address deficiencies in science or STEM education is one of
the major contributions of projects in the BOSE portfolio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In connecting NRC/BOSE to NSF/EHR, their complementary
missions form a context for developing a jointly designed agenda for both
investing in research on STEM education and for integrating the findings
obtained by the research community. Combining the discovery process supported by
NSF and the reflective, interpretive, independent work that can be conveyed in
NRC reports and through the convening power of BOSE will advance the relevance
and applicability of the national STEM education research agenda in significant
ways. This proposal will help to shape the focus of that agenda through greater
collaboration and interaction between the networks established by BOSE and the
expert advice gathered by NSF through its review panels, regular conferences
involving its PIs, and the expertise of its program officers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the last 5-year grant were very productive.
For examples, the reputation of BOSE for evidence-based, impartial guidance was
instrumental in two recent projects that hold promise for transforming K-12
science education in the United States: A Framework for K-12 Science Education
(the blueprint for the Next Generation Science Standards) and a two-report
series on successful STEM education that lays out recommendations for improving
STEM education and outlines a set of indicators that can be used to monitor
progress toward these improvements: Successful K-12 STEM Education (2011), and
Monitoring Successful K-12 STEM Education (2013). The 2012 BOSE consensus report
- Discipline Based Education Research (2012) - summarized findings from
education and learning research in physics, astronomy, chemistry, geo-sciences,
the biological sciences, and engineering. It provided recommendations for
improving the quality of undergraduate education in these fields that dovetail
with major reform initiatives throughout the country.