* 1444859
* EAGER: Exploring the Molecular Foundation for the Mechanics of Polymer Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Shi-Qing Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 248,619.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address
fundamental questions concerning the mechanical properties of common plastics
(polymers) that have become a most important class of materials in modern
society. Many billions of pounds of commercial products are manufactured
annually from glassy polymers such as polystyrene, poly(methyl methacrylate),
and polycarbonates. However, the mechanical strength of these glassy plastic
materials has yet to be understood in terms of molecular parameters (i.e.,
through the behavior of their individual polymer molecules). For example, there
is a distinct lack of knowledge about why materials such as polystyrene and
poly(methyl methacrylate) are so brittle while some polycarbonates are not and
can be highly deformed without breaking. This research aims to develop a
molecular level understanding of such important mechanical behaviors as brittle
fracture versus ductile deformation. Through an integrated approach combining
experiments, theory, and molecular dynamics simulations, a molecular model will
be subjected to tests to determine how it may or may not provide the framework
on which to develop a coherent and comprehensive knowledge base for the
mechanics of glassy polymers. If it is successful, it will provide a foundation
that will not only enable improved mechanical performance of existing polymeric
materials but also guide molecular design of next-generation polymeric
materials, thus potentially bringing about significant economic benefits to
society. This project will also contribute to the interdisciplinary education
and training of graduate students and potentially be incorporated in courses and
textbooks for undergraduate and graduate students as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore answers to important
questions on the mechanical behavior of polymeric materials such as why polymer
glasses can be ductile and what determines the ultimate mechanical strength of
amorphous polymer solids. The research program builds on and extends a newly
proposed molecular model to describe large deformation behavior of polymeric
glasses including yielding and fracture. The proposed work integrates both
experiment and computer simulation to test the molecular model by identifying
the essential ingredients in the theoretical description. Specifically, the
following sub-projects will be pursued to improve current knowledge and
understanding of glassy polymer mechanics: (A) Polymer glasses of low molecular
weight (MW) and glassy polymer mixtures containing a low-MW component will be
subjected to uniaxial compression to determine the possibility for ductile
behavior and large scale plastic deformation. (B) Compression tests will be
carried out below room temperature to find out whether there is also a brittle-
ductile transition (BDT) in compression and to address the questions of why
glassy polystyrene is ductile in compression at room temperature but brittle in
tensile extension. (C) The BDT will be studied as a function of the extensional
rate to explore how yielding may be a time-dependent activation process. (D)
Molecular dynamics simulations will be conducted to explore the existence of
load-bearing strands (LBS) in a chain network during external deformation and
characterize the predicted emergence of activated phases surrounding the LBS for
comparison with the physical picture contained in the molecular model.