* 1444571
* A Systems Analysis of Plant Growth Promotion by the Rhizosphere Microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2023
* Cynthia Weinig, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2023
* USD 3,277,565.00

Soil microbial communities represent a largely untapped source for yield
improvement in crops. In comparison to plants grown without microbes in the
soil, yields can be twice as great when plants are grown with their full
complement of soil microbes. Microbes may improve plant growth by making soil
nitrogen more available to plants. From the point of view of plant growth and
eventual yield, nitrogen is important as it is a critical component of one
enzyme, Rubisco, which takes carbon dioxide from the air and converts it to
sugars for growth through the process of photosynthesis. To identify how
microbes improve plant growth, the current research examines 1. how microbes
modify soil chemistry, 2. what plant genes are selectively turned on in response
to the presence of microbes, 3. how plant processes like photosynthesis respond
to microbes, and 4. what the identity and functions are of the soil microbes.
Connecting results from these four sets of data will reveal what it is that
promotes plant growth, from the soil to the whole-plant level. This research
also includes ways to predict plant growth and yield in response to soil
microbes when different amounts of nitrogen are added to the soil, which should
enable reduced use of fertilizers. The plant being studied is Brassica rapa,
which is grown around the world as root (turnip), leaf (cabbage, pak choi), and
oilseed (canola) crops; because of the diverse uses of this crop, results from
this species are expected to apply to a wide range of other crops. Soil microbes
are an important part of the ecosystem, and connect plants to the physical
environment. While much is known about the plants in natural and agricultural
settings, less is known about the distributions, types, and functions of
beneficial soil microbes, and how they help crops cope with poor growing
conditions such as drought or lack of nitrogen. The current research fills these
knowledge gaps, and will provide recommendations on how to manage soils for
beneficial microbes. Broader impacts to this work include development of guided
tours within the Williams Conservatory, Geology Museum, and Berry Center for
Biodiversity at the University of Wyoming as well as teaching modules related to
the study of evolution and crop domestication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil
microorganisms serve a range of ecosystem services that promote plant growth
under stressful abiotic conditions, including nitrogen limitation. Yet, soil
microbial communities represent a largely untapped source for yield improvement
in crop species. Analyzing plant transcriptomic and physiological responses to
taxonomically and functionally diverse soil microbiomes will provide insights as
to the mechanisms by which microbes enhance plant growth. Further, Bayesian
systems modeling of plant transcriptomic, hydraulic, and gas-exchange responses
to the soil microbial environment can provide a predictive understanding of
plant growth promotion by microbes under variable nitrogen amendments. When
grown with an intact vs. reduced soil microbiome, crops of Brassica rapa
upregulate gas-exchange and increase biomass accumulation up to two-fold,
suggesting one physiological link between plant transcriptomic responses to soil
microbes and eventual plant biomass accumulation. Because B. rapa is
domesticated as root, leaf, and oilseed crops, mechanisms of growth promotion
characterized in this species could translate to a range of other crops.
Further, the microbiome associated with the rhizosphere of B. rapa is highly
differentiated from that of bulk soils more distant from the roots, suggesting
the species is an effective model for studying the assembly dynamics, identity,
and function of beneficial plant-associated soil microbes. Using next-generation
amplicon and metagenome sequencing of rhizosphere DNA in combination with plant
genomic, transcriptomic, and physiological experiments, the research will
characterize mechanisms of plant growth promotion by soil microbes and test
predictive systems models. The research addresses the PGRP 2014 focal areas: to
develop a genome-level link between genes and physiological functions in crop
plants and to develop a genome to systems-level understanding of plant-
environmental interactions, especially with respect to abiotic stress. Broader
impacts to this work include development of guided tours and teaching modules
related to crop domestication and improvement as well as development of
management practices for beneficial microbes. Information on this project can be
accessed at www.RhizoBiomics.org.