* 1444009
* EARS: Intelligent and Cross-Layer Attack and Defense in Spectrum Sharing
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Peng Ning, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 479,993.00

With the proliferation of wireless applications and devices, most recently the
smart phones, the demand for wireless data, equivalently for wireless bandwidth,
keeps an exponential growth. Unfortunately, all our wireless vision needs to be
realized through the public radio spectrum, which cannot be further created but
has to be efficiently shared among various wireless systems and devices. While
significant progress has been made in efficient spectrum access and sharing
technologies, their successful deployment towards fulfilling the national
broadband plan relies crucially on the development of adequate security
mechanisms. Such security mechanisms should be able to protect the welfare of
all stakeholders in the spectrum sharing systems, in particular the federal
government and military users; meanwhile, they should also be able to address
the new challenges brought about by the advanced technologies and new access
paradigms that have enabled innovative spectrum sharing. At the current stage,
an effective security mechanism for spectrum sharing systems is lacking, which
significantly impedes their practical deployment and consequently the
realization of the anticipated wireless broadband revolution. This proposal
constitutes a solid step towards filling this gap, seeking to obtain a deeper
understanding of the emerging attacking strategy and behavior in this new arena,
and develop a holistic view and solution to the security of spectrum access and
sharing. The expected outcome will be valuable to all players in wireless
industry, as well as to all sectors of the national economy that benefit from
wireless innovation. The inter-disciplinary nature of the proposed research will
naturally help promote cross-disciplinary education and well-rounded training of
future IT workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be focused
on the security aspects of the dynamic spectrum access (DSA) paradigm and
cognitive radio (CR) technology, which receive major research interest and also
impose foremost research challenges. It is comprised of two thrusts. First,
cross-layer attack and defense in CR networks will be addressed. Current
research on CR security mainly focuses on attacks and defenses at individual
protocol layers, but cross-layer attack naturally fits the CR setting and can
lead to unprecedented detrimental effect. In this project, a general class of
cross-layer attacks will be investigated. In response to cross-layer attacks, a
cross-layer defense framework is subsequently proposed, for which two research
tasks will be focused on: advance in individual detection modules for attacks
unique to CR functionalities, and metrics-driven cross-layer fusion. In existing
studies, the assumed capabilities at CR are rather modest. With the further
development of CR technology, wireless devices will grow in reasoning and
learning capabilities. Meanwhile, such technology progress can also be exploited
by the adversaries to launch more sophisticated malicious attacks. In the second
thrust, assuming more intelligence and growing reasoning and learning
capabilities for both the CR user and the adversary, the arms race between them
will be explored through the stochastic game modeling and multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) methodologies. The proposed research will be
evaluated through theoretical analysis, numerical and network simulation,
prototype implementation, and experimentation on real testbeds.