* 1444448
* Physiological Genomics of Maize Nodal Root Growth under Drought
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Scott Peck, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2022
* USD 4,195,413.00

PI: Robert E. Sharp (University of Missouri)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: David
M. Braun, Felix B. Fritschi, Trupti Joshi, Scott C. Peck, Jonathan T. Stemmle
(University of Missouri) and Melvin J. Oliver (USDA-ARS/University of Missouri)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing drought-tolerant corn varieties that make
efficient use of available water is vital to sustain the estimated 9 billion
global population by 2050. Corn takes up most of its water through a particular
set of roots called the nodal roots. Under drought, the nodal roots must grow
through dry soil to reach available water to sustain the plant. However, very
little is known about the mechanisms that allow nodal roots to achieve this
essential feat. This project will use a combination of physiological and
genomics approaches to define the molecular mechanisms underlying how the nodal
roots are able to maintain growth under drought. The information generated by
the project will lead to the development of innovative approaches to enable corn
and other cereal crops to access more water and increase yield under drought,
and will thereby contribute to the essential goals of increased food security
and stability. In addition to the training of students and postdoctoral
associates, the project will provide summer research training internships for
undergraduate students from Fort Valley State University, a Historically Black
University (HBCU) located in Fort Valley (GA). The project will also disseminate
research findings and provide information to the general public through various
communication, technical training and outreach activities. These include but are
not limited to science communication workshops involving journalism students and
hands-on training workshops on metabolomics and the use of bioinformatics tools
to analyze and integrate multi-omics datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project integrates root physiology and functional genomics [transcriptomics,
plasma membrane proteomics, and metabolomics (including hormones)] to deliver a
comprehensive understanding of nodal root growth responses to water deficit
stress in both controlled laboratory studies and in the field. The project
focuses on a maize inbred line that has been shown to exhibit superior ability
for nodal root growth under water-limited conditions. A collaborative
interdisciplinary team will address the following specific objectives: 1)
elucidation of the physiological and molecular basis of nodal root growth
responses to water stress using a novel divided-chamber model system for precise
imposition of water deficit conditions around the growing roots; 2)
characterization of nodal root growth and root growth zone transcriptomic
responses in response to water stress in the field, using "drought simulators"
for precise imposition of the timing, intensity and duration of drought; and 3)
integration and analysis of all datasets using a suite of informatics tools to
identify candidate genes that will be genetically validated in plants. This
multidisciplinary strategy provides unique opportunities to greatly improve
basic understanding of root biology under drought, and to broadly train the next
generation of plant scientists. Data and biological materials generated by this
project will be accessible to a project website (to be developed) and through
deposition to long-term repositories such as the Maize Genetics Cooperative (for
germplasm), and MaizeGDB, Gramene and the NCBI's GEO and SRA (for sequence and
phenotypic datasets).