* 1444184
* US-Pacific Islands Planning Visits: Conceiving biocultural resilience with Pacific island communities: bridging disciplines, language, and culture
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Jennifer Newell, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 01/31/2018
* USD 59,896.00

US-Pacific Islands planning visits: Conceiving biocultural resilience with
Pacific Island communities: bridging disciplines, language, and culture

This project is designed to bring together individuals and communities from the
Pacific Islands that haven't worked together before. The principal investigator
proposes a combination of virtual and in-person meetings between scientists and
communities in the US (including Hawai'i), the Solomon Islands, French
Polynesia, and France to understand how communities can be resilient to future
change. One of the key values of this project is the opportunity it provides for
participants to think creatively and work productively across major cultural
divides. This project will support two early-career US scientists. At the local
level, it will contribute to the development of resource management plans and
capacity building in Pacific Island nations for decision making to manage
community landscapes for sustainability. Ultimately, this project will
contribute to linking short-term decision-making needs of communities and long-
term investment of researchers in understanding integrated biological and
cultural systems.

This project aims to unite disparate research groups and local communities to
better understand and manage Pacific Island system resilience in the face of
pending large-scale disturbances such as climate change and increasing market
pressures. This collaborative project is designed to bring together individuals
and communities across three existing gaps: those between cultural and
geographic boundaries in the Pacific, biological and social scientists, and
scientists and local communities. This project plans to develop "biocultural
resilience indicators" that are academically rigorous while also feasible to
implement for decision making by communities faced with imminent social,
economic, and ecological disturbances. Resilience is defined as the capacity of
a system or set of communities (biological, social, cultural, biocultural) to
absorb, resist, or recover from stress, and adapt to change while maintaining
valued functions and benefits. The term "biocultural" is used to emphasize
building on and moving beyond social-ecological theoretical explorations towards
applied collaborations with communities. The principal investigator proposes to
hold a combination of virtual and in-person meetings between scientists and
communities in the US (including Hawai'i), the Solomon Islands, French
Polynesia, and France. One of the key values of this project is the opportunity
it provides for participants to think creatively and work productively across
major cultural divides. Comparative research across the Pacific Islands is
largely lacking but can be critical to gaining a better understanding of
resilience in these coupled social-ecological systems. There is a growing need
for projects that recognize and work in step with the increased fluidity and
cross-fertilization of ideas across the breadth of the Pacific. Testing the
interaction among biocultural indicators and major pressures to understand
impacts on human and ecological well-being requires comparison across different
biocultural units. While there is incredible diversity across Pacific social-
ecological systems, Pacific communities predominately share large-scale
pressures such as oceanic fishing, demographic growth, and climate change.
Common indicators across these communities will help to illuminate the patterns
and relationships between changing pressures, biocultural states, and socio-
ecological benefits, such as ensured food security and effective adaptation to
climate change.