* 1444026
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Mobile Millimeter-Wave Networking: Distributed Cognition and Coordination Algorithms using Novel On-Chip Phased-Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Atilla Eryilmaz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2018
* USD 459,315.00

Due to rapid growth in ubiquitous connectivity in the past two decades, the
wireless landscape has become increasingly congested, leading to an impending
gridlock of the radio frequency spectrum. On the other hand, recent measurements
have also shown that the licensed radio frequency spectrum can be considerably
underutilized due to demand variations in time, space, and frequency slots. This
increasing congestion in the radio spectrum coupled with the inherent
inefficiencies in its utilization has recently spurred widespread interest in
the millimeter-wave band which could significantly expand the available
communication spectrum spanning 20-100 GHz. However, the implementation of
efficient and cost-effective millimeter-wave mobile networking technologies
require innovative solutions to technical challenges in antenna-design,
signaling, cognition, and coordination algorithms that are tailored to the
characteristics of these new bands. The overarching objective of this project is
to address the imminent radio spectrum crunch by developing an integrative and
innovative approach to harness the millimeter-wave band for future mobile
networks. The results of this project will help overcome the surge of data
service demands that are rapidly growing due to the smart device revolution and
will help relieve the impending congestion of the radio-frequency spectrum and
usher uninterrupted broadband connectivity to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the realization of next generation millimeter-wave
mobile networks, this project takes an inter-disciplinary approach spanning
antenna-design, cognitive communication, and mobile networking. In particular, a
novel ultra-wideband phased-array architecture will be developed for low-cost
on-chip realization of millimeter-wave mobile nodes. In conjunction, efficient
signaling, channel sensing and estimation schemes, decision-making strategies
will be determined along with energy-efficient operation principles, and
quality-of-service-aware algorithms that will usher in data-rates in excess of
100Gbps for future generation wireless networks. The novel on-chip phased-arrays
will be built with unprecedented ultra-wideband coverage with multi-user beam-
forming agility, while concurrently enabling 10-fold improvement in efficiency
compared to the state of the art. The developed phased arrays will enable
20-100GHz continuous coverage (i.e. 5:1 bandwidth) for spread-spectrum and/or
frequency hopping links, subsequently extending to the sub-millimeter-wavebands
(e.g. the 220GHz atmospheric window). Enabled by this novel ultra-wideband
front-end, new and efficient learning algorithms for mobile wireless nodes will
be explored with the goal of dynamically and opportunistically accessing the
20-100GHz spectrum in highly-dynamic environments. This new strategy will help
identify and utilize energy efficient transmission schemes between mobile
millimeter-wave nodes. Additionally, adaptive and low-complexity resource
allocation algorithms will be developed for effective quality-of-service
provisioning in the targeted millimeter-wave regime. As its transformative
feature, this collaborative and integrative effort will realize, for the first
time, highly efficient and extremely affordable next generation millimeter-wave
wireless networks, incorporating not only novel antenna front-ends but also
synergistically optimized signaling and networking algorithms to truly transform
a wide range of broadband mobile data and multimedia services.