* 1444125
* CNIC COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: US-Ethiopia planning visit for the investigation of non-marine Mesozoic ecosystems from the Northwestern Plateau, Ethiopia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Randall Irmis, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,078.00

This project, part of a three proposal collaborative, effort, will support a
planning visit to Ethiopia to determine if early Mesozoic non-marine fossils
from the Northwestern Plateau of Ethiopia can help fill a critical knowledge gap
regarding mammalian evolution and distribution at the time of the breakup of the
supercontinent of Pangaea. The project will look specifically at Upper Triassic-
Lower Jurassic formations, seeking to find vertebrate fossils that will provide
better information on the evolution, diversification and dispersal of
vertebrates across ancient Africa and into Eurasia and the Americas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall effort will support travel to Ethiopia by four
faculty members and four graduate students. In addition to their excellent
qualifications and diverse expertise in paleontology and geosciences, the team
includes two early career investigators, three underrepresented ethnic
minorities and a woman. The team will work closely with counterparts in Ethiopia
from the University of Addis Ababa. The month-long planning visit will include
several days for seminars and information exchange between the US team and their
Ethiopian collaborators in Addis Ababa, three weeks of collaborative field work
to conduct in depth reconnaissance at two sites, then several days to plan and
initiate sample processing and begin writing a larger follow-on proposal. This
specific project provides travel support to one of the PI's, Dr. Irmis, and a
graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mesozoic non-marine vertebrate
fossil record of Africa remains a virtual ?blank slate? in comparison to other
regions of the world; however, fossil data from this region is critical to
understanding how terrestrial communities responded to the breakup of the
supercontinent Pangaea about 100 million years ago. This part of the world
remains relatively un-sampled compared to fossil-bearing horizons of similar age
in North and South America and Asia. Ethiopia is strategically positioned with
extensive Mesozoic sedimentary rock formations and these fossils may prove very
valuable to improving understanding of the paleobiogeography and evolution of
many major non-marine vertebrate groups, such as dinosaurs, mammals, lizards,
snakes and amphibians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team has identified two target
sampling sites in Ethiopia where early Mesozoic formations are well exposed and
may be effectively explored and preliminary samples collected: the Late Jurassic
Mugher Mudstone of the upper Blue Nile (Abay) Gorge, and the Early Jurassic
Adigrat Formation of the Tigray Province. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US-Ethiopia planning visit provides a valuable opportunity to
begin the multidisciplinary effort that is required to expand the Mesozoic
fossil record from Africa. The fossils and science from this proposed project
are essential to testing hypotheses regarding early Mesozoic biotas,
paleobiogeography following the breakup of Pangaea, and the evolution and
dispersal of several modern vertebrate groups hypothesized to originate in
Africa. The effort will provide a valuable professional development opportunity
for the US team, especially the two early career faculty and the four graduate
students. This planning visit will also provide an opportunity for approximately
eight undergraduates to gain new research skills and training, in fossil
preparation and analysis, as well as experience in museum curation, education
and public outreach.