* 1444865
* CAREER: Designing for Enlightened Trial and Error
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Scott Klemmer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2015
* USD 195,302.00

In design, prototyping is the pivotal activity that structures innovation,
collaboration, and creativity. Designers prototype because "enlightened trial
and error outperforms the planning of flawless intellects" (David Kelley). While
a few leading-edge endeavors have shown the value of prototyping and learning
from alternatives, these design successes have been resource-intensive or in
niche contexts. Attempts to reach a broader audience have stumbled because they
were heavyweight, bespoke, or against the grain of important design practices
and values. Consequently, most interfaces today are launched with minimal
understanding of alternative design choices and their relative efficacy. In this
project the PI will explore, evaluate, and disseminate the techniques necessary
to make enlightened trial and error a cornerstone of user interface design. To
these ends, the project's technical and empirical research comprises three
thrusts which will unearth fundamental principles and evaluate them through
software tools that leverage web services&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating Designs
Analogically. Programming with traditional API documentation as the sole
resource has the same difficulty as creating a meal with only a grocery list.
The elements are all there, but none of the context necessary for composing a
coherent and complete whole. The PI hypothesizes that tools specifically
designed for creation by example modification would look quite different than
current tools and yield significantly higher-quality results. The PI will carry
out a systematic exploration of the design space for design-by-example tools to
identify major design decisions and tradeoffs, and provide a performance and
complexity comparison of important design points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploring
Alternatives Parametrically. Prototyping's concreteness benefit can also be its
Achilles heel when it encourages premature commitment. To address this, the PI
envisions parametric interfaces, a representation with lightweight semantic
structure for fast and broad design space exploration. Design stakeholders and
lead users lacking the time or expertise to design interfaces would be able to
parameterize and rapidly iterate them, thereby shifting the designers'
responsibility from creating a specific artifact to creating a context for
participation. The PI's initial research suggests that parametric tools increase
both broad exploration and fine-grained tuning. An additional benefit is that
parametric interfaces would facilitate appropriate adaptation to user abilities
and device characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing Pervasive
Interactions. How can tools enable the rapid exploration and evaluation of new
interactions that combine ubiquitous computing and web services? Such
interactions would allow designers to leverage information repositories and data
transformation (through web services), while engaging the user in the world
instead of in front of the desktop (through ubicomp). While software has almost
always been built with the assistance of toolkits and libraries, few software
tools have deeply embraced this reality and leveraged it. The PI plans to create
tools for designers to work opportunistically by foraging for and combining pre-
existing, high-level blocks of functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In each of
the technical thrusts, the PI will conduct both quantitative and qualitative
evaluation comparing the quality of designs produced with and without the
technique, as measured by independent raters, and he will also conduct longer-
term case studies for a more ecologically valid understanding of their use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Design has emerged as a critical engine
of innovation in today's multi-billion-dollar information technology industry.
The software tools resulting from this project will contribute a conceptual
understanding of how to most effectively create, manage, and learn from
prototypes by leveraging web services, which are widespread yet still evolving.
To enable ubiquitous access to enlightened prototyping, all of the software and
course materials the PI has created and will create at Stanford are open source
and available online. The PI will also serve as an advisor to the Stanford?s
K-12 Learning Lab, which is bringing design thinking into public schools.