* 1444974
* Genomics of Host-Microbiome Interactions in Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lyons
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,304,644.00

PI: Venkatesan Sundaresan (University of California-
Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Jonathan Eisen and David Mackill (University
of California-Davis), and Merle Anders (University of Arkansas-
Fayetteville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: James Garner (University of
Arkansas-Pine Bluff)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants grow in close association with
large communities of microbes called microbiomes, that influence nutrient
composition and uptake of nutrients in the soil, as well as disease
susceptibility. Major advances in understanding the health effects of human
microbiomes have resulted from using gnotobiotic animal systems, in which germ-
free animals are exposed to defined microbiomes to study their effects.
Gnotobiotic systems to study microbiome function in plants are harder to
implement because plant microbiomes are a combination of internal and external
(e.g. soil) components. This project will use a gnotobiotic system developed for
rice plants, in which root-associated microbiomes from different sources or
conditions can be transplanted, and established in plants grown under controlled
conditions. The project will enable the discovery of specific functions of plant
microbiomes at the molecular level, and the evaluation of the impact of
microbiomes on plant performance. Understanding the interactions of the host
plant with its microbiome, and subsequent effects on crop performance and
yields, provides possibilities for exploiting plant-microbe associations for
future crop improvement. A second aim of the project addresses the concern that
agriculture is a major source of global emissions of the potent greenhouse gas
methane. Rice cultivation worldwide is estimated to contribute nearly half of
these emissions by promoting the growth of methane producing microbes. The
project will examine the effects of different rice varieties on methane
producing microbes, as well as methane consuming microbes, found in rice root-
associated microbiomes. The findings can lead to strategies for reducing methane
emissions from paddy fields, and reduce the impacts of rice cultivation on
climate change. In addition to the training of students and postdoctoral
associates, the project will provide summer research internships for selected
undergraduate students from University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, a Historically
Black University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use genomic approaches
to understand the impact of microbial associations on the crop plant rice (Oryza
sativa). Preliminary data show that root microbiomes of soil grown rice plants
are modulated by several environmental factors, including soil type, cultivation
practice and drought, suggesting that changes to microbiomes constitute part of
the plant adaptation to the environment. The growth preference of rice for semi-
aquatic substrates has been exploited to establish a gnotobiotic rice model,
such that plants grown under controlled conditions can acquire a defined
microbiome. In this project, microbiomes used for transplantation will be
characterized by 16SrDNA sequencing to identify the constituent taxa, and the
transcriptomes of the treated rice plants will be studied using RNAseq. The
transcriptional responses of gnotobiotic rice plants with transplanted
microbiomes from different sources and stress treatments, including drought
stress, will be analyzed for global changes in gene expression, as well as
specific functional classes of genes that might reflect adaptive responses by
the plant induced by the microbiome. Lastly, the association of archaea with
cultivated rice, a significant contribution to planetary methane emissions, and
potentially to climate change, will be investigated. Specifically, the effects
of genotype on methanogenic archaea and methanotrophic bacteria, as well as
computationally identified associated microbial networks in field grown rice,
will be characterized, towards the goal of breeding low emission rice. Plant
transcriptomic and microbial sequence data generated by the project will be
released through public databases that include the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) and Sequence Read Archive (SRA), respectively.