* 1444644
* IEEE VIS Conference 2014: Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Jian Chen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,880.00

This is funding provides partial support to about 18 dissertation stage US-based
doctoral students to participate in the Doctoral Colloquium that is a part of
the IEEE Viz Conference to be held November 9-14, 2014 in Paris, France. The
Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VIS is a research-focused meeting which has taken
place annually at the visualization conferences since 2006, and has helped
launch the careers of a number of outstanding young researchers. The primary
goal of the Doctoral Colloquium is to allow students to discuss their research
directions in a supportive atmosphere with a panel of distinguished leaders and
with their peers, who will provide helpful feedback and fresh perspectives. The
workshop will support community building by connecting beginning and advanced
researchers and foster a network of colleagues across the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visualization, or the use of interactive graphics to
support data analysis and understanding, has become an integral part and
critical component of many application areas. IEEE VIS is the premier forum for
visualization advances in science and engineering for academia, government, and
industry, now bringing together about thousands researchers and practitioners
from around the world with a shared interest in techniques, tools, and
technology. VIS consists this year of the 25th Annual IEEE Scientific
Visualization Conference (SciVis), the 20th Annual IEEE Information
Visualization Conference (InfoVis), and the 9th Annual IEEE Visual Analytics
Science and Technology Conference (VAST). It will also include the IEEE
Symposium on Large-Scale Data Analysis and Visualization (LDAV), the workshop on
Beyond Time and Errors: Novel Evaluation Methods for Visualization (BELIV), and
the International Symposium on Visualization for Cyber Security (VizSec). The
papers will be published in the special conference issue of IEEE Transactions of
Visualization and Computer Graphics -- a widely cited venue. More information is
available online at http://www.ieeevis.org. &amp;#8232;&amp;#8232;