* 1444514
* Functional Genomics of Maize Centromeres
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Gent, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 4,630,545.00

PI: R. Kelly Dawe (University of Georgia-Athens)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs:
James A. Birchler (University of Missouri-Columbia) and Jiming Jiang (University
of Wisconsin-Madison)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All plant genomes contain
centromeres, structural regions that ensure chromosomes segregate properly
during cell division. Centromeres are a challenge to study because they contain
repetitive DNA sequences and few genes. The goal of this project is to develop
an understanding of how the sequences in centromeres relate to their function,
and how changes in centromere size or changes in a key centromere binding
protein (CENH3) can alter the behavior of centromeres. In particular the project
will study genetic crosses and mutants that can induce centromere failure and
chromosome loss in hybrids. Chromosome loss induced by centromere modification
can result in haploid plants, which are of great value to corn breeders, as they
can rapidly accelerate the production of new inbred lines. It is anticipated
that the information and technology generated will have direct applications to
agriculture - not only in maize but all other crops that utilize haploids as a
breeding tool. With regards to training and outreach, the project will provide
research training for undergraduate and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral fellows in plant genomics and biotechnology. In addition, a series
of training workshops will be held to disseminate techniques and materials
generated in this project. All project outcomes will be made available to the
research community through a dedicated project web site and through
dissemination by long-term repositories that include NCBI, MaizeGDB and
Gramene.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the project are to
understand the genetic and epigenetic components of maize centromeres and to
reveal the role of centromere size in uniparental chromosome elimination which
leads to haploid formation. The specific objectives are to: 1) determine whether
common centromere repeat sequences are sufficient to induce centromere function
using novel chromosome painting probes, chromosome visualization tools that
dramatically improve the ability to detect changes in chromosome structure; 2)
determine how a suite of chromatin markers are affected by changes in centromere
size and location using maize chromosomes transferred into oat as well as B
chromosomes that have undergone a cycle of inactivation and reactivation; 3)
test whether centromere size disparity can cause uniparental genome elimination
by screening lines with centromeres whose size have been modified by
manipulating genome size, and by using cenh3 mutants with specialized
transgenes; and 4) determine how maize centromeres behave in situations of
uniparental genome elimination, particularly in wheat X maize and oat X maize
crosses that are regularly used in haploid breeding schemes.