* 1444353
* EAGER: Developing and Integrating Advanced NEON AOP Data Products in the Yellowstone Ecosystem
* BIO,EF
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Robert Crabtree, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 11/30/2018
* USD 299,878.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and mitigating the effects of
climate change on living systems in the US requires scientists and natural
resource managers be informed about processes operating across multiple time and
space scales. New remote sensing technologies and multi-scale research
approaches are providing relevant data simultaneously at the centimeter to
kilometer scale. Historic data at key research sites allow for analyses of
complex data on the second to decadal scales. New approaches are needed to
combine and transform these data into useful and easy to understand information
using user-friendly tools to explore the data. The National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) is beginning to deliver ground based and remotely
sensed data at key locations throughout the US specifically designed to evaluate
the effects of climate change on living systems. The basic goal of this EAGER
proposal is to design and develop advanced remote sensing data products from
data that will be available from NEON and make their application easier for a
wide range of potential scientists and decision-makers. Data will be accessible
and ready-for-use by removing the need to perform tedious preliminary processing
and analysis tasks of raw remote-sensing data. These advanced data products will
also prove useful and understandable to non-remote sensing scientists, which
will increase their utilization and applications to NEON?s grand challenges. A
team of experienced ecologists who are aware of data needs and key applications
will be assembled to design and select these final data products. Case studies,
using NEON's Airborne Observatory Platform and AOP-like data in combination with
a time series of existing remote-sensing data in Yellowstone National Park's
Northern Range, will be conducted to demonstrate the utility of these data
products for ecological analyses, modeling and key research questions regarding
ecological forecasting.