* 1444991
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Amplified Bioelectronic Sensor for Neurotoxic Esterase Inhibitors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Paul Satoh, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 268,943.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research on
nanoscale bioelectronics to fill the need for cost-effective biosensor systems
that quickly, sensitively, and accurately measure concentrations of important
compounds. The amplified bioelectronic sensor platform being developed is
important because it offers an unprecedented combination of performance
properties, versatility, and customizability. By varying the architecture and
recognition molecules in the sensing interface, a broad range of commercially
important biosensor systems could be developed for applications including
screening for therapeutic agents, measurement of toxins and pathogens in food
and environmental samples, point-of-care testing of biological samples, and
real-time, on-site detection of chemical warfare agents for military and
homeland-security applications. The project will result in prototype amplified
bioelectronic sensors suitable for three types of commercial biosensor systems:
portable point-of-care meters, electrochemical multiwell plates, and flow-
injection analyzers. This patented bioelectronic sensor platform has the
following features: (1) multiple signal-amplification mechanisms, (2) multiple
types of biological recognition molecules, (3) compatibility with multiple
commercial biosensor systems, and (4) disposable sensing units. These features
provide the following advantages: enhanced sensitivity, versatility, user-
friendliness, convenience, and cost-effectiveness when compared to the leading
competing biosensor technologies in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Commercial biosensors are
needed to measure organophosphate (OP) compounds that target the human enzyme
neuropathy target esterase (NTE) and lead to catastrophic neurological
disorders. Such biosensors would need to measure NTE activity rapidly and
sensitively. The patented amplified bioelectronic sensor achieves this goal by
using a reaction pathway to convert NTE?s esterase activity into an electronic
signal and using a redox cycle to amplify the signal. However, technology gaps
must be addressed to adapt the bioelectronic sensor interface to widely used
commercial biosensor systems and to extend the underlying molecular sensing
mechanisms to a wide range of other important compounds. These technology gaps
will be addressed by (1) exploiting an enzyme-antibody linkage that translates
antibody-antigen binding events into a chemical reaction flux, (2) integrating a
redox cycle that converts the chemical reaction flux into an electric current
and simultaneously amplifies the current, and (3) incorporating conductive
nanomaterials that massively increase the sensor?s signal. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, including a Ph.D. student and
undergraduates, will receive innovation and technology-translation experiences
through participation in virtually all aspects of the research, including
entrepreneurial/innovation discussions and activities. The PI will also provide
training in entrepreneurship/innovation to students taking the Multidisciplinary
Bioprocessing Laboratory (MBL) course he developed with NSF funding. The MBL
course incorporates research into education and teaches students from multiple
departments to work effectively in multidisciplinary research teams.

The project engages Conductive Technologies, Inc., a leader in developing and
manufacturing electrochemical devices for sensing commercially important
analytes, to support the research effort by providing technical expertise in
designing and developing electrochemical platforms as well as providing samples
of printed electrodes to demonstrate biosensor performance. The project also
engages MSU Technologies, the intellectual-property unit of Michigan State
University, to help guide commercialization aspects in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.