* 1444219
* CAREER:  Extreme Weather Events and Emergency Medical Services: A Discrete 0ptimization Modeling Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Laura Albert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 05/31/2018
* USD 309,783.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award investigates how to
reformulate and reframe important service system models that have considerable
social relevance by considering the fundamental decision issues within their
social context. This career plan is motivated by important, timely resource
allocation problems in emergency medical service (EMS) systems, namely, how to
provide a coordinated EMS response to medical emergencies during extreme weather
events, thus integrating two types of hazard mitigation problems that have been
addressed separately in the literature thus far. In particular, this research
investigates how to optimally dispatch servers (medical units) to geographically
dispersed customers (patients) as well as how dispatching policies change during
normal and extreme weather events. Emergency medical dispatching protocols are
typically designed for systems operating under normal weather conditions. In
general, little guidance exists for how dispatching protocols may change for
systems operating under extreme weather conditions. The central challenges of
the research program are to reformulate and reframe new classes of hard discrete
optimization problems that capture the social context surrounding service
systems and to solve the discrete optimization models by exploring new
algorithms and heuristics as well as by characterizing the structural properties
of the models. The discrete optimization models developed in this project
provide novel formulations that reformulate and reframe new classes of problems
by investigating the particular demands of EMS systems. These new models and
algorithms can be used to provide fundamental insights into the design and
operation of EMS systems in response to medical emergencies that arise during
extreme weather events. Challenging extensions investigate how to simultaneously
locate and dispatch medical units and investigate game-theoretic aspects of
emergency medical dispatch using principal agent problem models. The central
challenges of the educational component are to create a portfolio of teaching
and outreach activities that educates public safety leaders through outreach, to
create a series of podcasts about applying advanced analytical tools to risk and
hazard applications, to use the research as a vehicle for outreach using social
networking tools (blogs, FaceBook, and Twitter), to develop a course on
mathematical models for homeland security and emergency management, and to
mentor students. Integration between the research and educational components
will be achieved by including the research models in the outreach and other
educational activities and by using the outreach and educational component to
better inform the research models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project are aimed at integrating research with teaching and learning on
important risk and hazard problems with application to emergency medical
services. The research component leads to new policies for allocating scarce EMS
resources in real-time, which have the potential to transform how EMS resources
are allocated during normal and extreme weather events. A collaborative
arrangement with an EMS community partner provides a wealth of real-world data
for this project, and this community partner will be the direct beneficiary of
this research. The educational component creates a portfolio of outreach
activities that are targeted at public safety leaders and that use online social
networking tools. The educational and outreach activities synthesize and feed
back into the research activities. A positive impact of this project is the
transmission of knowledge to public safety leaders and to students outside of
the investigator's field. Finally, research results, educational materials, and
outreach activities programs will be broadly disseminated to researchers,
practitioners, and to society at large.