* 1444240
* EAGER: Mobile-phone based single molecule imaging of DNA and length quantification to analyze copy-number variations in genome
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Aydogan Ozcan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,995.00

PI: Ozcan, Aydogan&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 1444240&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Mobile-phone
based single molecule imaging of DNA and length quantification to analyze copy-
number variations in genome&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this proposal is to
create a transformative fluorescent microscopy system that is integrated with
next generation mobile-phones for imaging single DNA molecules. This field-
portable imaging interface running on a smartphone will have the sensitivity and
contrast to image single molecule DNA fragments over a large field of view.
Demonstrating DNA imaging on a state-of-the-art mobile-phone would serve as a
stepping stone to next-generation mobile micro-analysis, sensing and diagnostic
tools and could lead to single molecule DNA sequencing on a
smartphone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed design will have the capability to
be broadly used in various clinical applications including early detection of
cancers (e.g. stomach and brain), nervous system disorders and drug resistance
in infectious diseases. This cellphone based single molecule imaging, DNA
platform could also assist health-care professionals, epidemiologists and policy
makers to track emerging trends and shed more light on cause-effect
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Description:&lt;br/&gt;Single
molecule imaging and DNA length quantification, both of which are currently not
feasible using mobile-phone based imaging systems; require extreme detection
sensitivity, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), spatial resolution and automated
sample handling and processing interfaces. To provide a transformative solution
to these important tasks, the PI will design a multifunctional portable imaging
device installed on a smartphone which will allow sample preparation and single
molecule imaging within the same opto-mechanical attachment. This fluorescence
microscope on a smartphone will be designed by integrating a laser diode, a
disposable nano-channel chip, an external lens and a thin-film based emission
filter in a robust attachment created by 3D printing techniques. High SNR
fluorescence signal detection will be achieved by implementing high-
angle/oblique illumination so that the direct excitation beam will not enter the
low NA collection lens. They will also develop a compressive sampling based DNA
length-estimation method which will utilize (i) the measured point spread
function of the fluorescent microscope on the mobile-phone; (ii) the spatial
sparsity of the objects (fluorescently labeled DNA molecules); and (iii) the
linearity of the stretched DNA molecules within the field of view as a-priori
constraints to estimate the length of the DNA fragment of interest with an
accuracy that is significantly better than the resolution of their initial
imaging system.