* 1444056
* EARS: Enhanced Spectrum Availability and MU-MIMO Coordination for High Spatial-Spectral Efficiency
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 597,125.00

Astounding spectral efficiencies exceeding 40 bits per second per Hertz have
already been achieved in multi-user MIMO systems. Unfortunately, the
coordination needed to facilitate transmissions in space, frequency, and time
can severely limit efficiency. Moreover, many spectral bands are today deemed
unavailable even if no active receiver is nearby and hence resources cannot be
used at all.

This project fuses three integrated thrusts towards achieving high spectral-
spatial efficiency (bits per second per Hertz per square meter) with high
spectrum availability (permission to transmit in a particular band at a
particular location). First, this project enables a new mode of spectrum
availability by exploiting smart primary receivers. The key idea is that a
typical primary spectrum transmitter such as a TV broadcaster does not have
active receivers in all locations. This thrust realizes an architecture and
algorithms for smart primary receivers to inform a controller of their usage,
creating vast new dynamically available spatial-spectral resources. Second, this
project overcomes fundamental limits in the coordination that is today required
for spectrum access. This thrust considers channel sounding and user-state
coordination to be a foundational resource of system design that must itself be
allocated. An integrated suite of new methods for coordination limited MU-MIMO
protocols is developed. The final thrust provides an implementation and
measurement study. This thrust yields the first demonstration of spectrum access
enhanced by smart primary users and the first multi-user MIMO diverse spectrum
system enhanced by coordination limited protocol mechanisms. The platform
targets "at scale" experiments via use of maximally amplified signals and real-
word scenarios spanning from tower-to-user to indoor WLAN.