* 1444721
* Collaborative Research: American National Election Studies (ANES) 2014 - 2017
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Ted Brader, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 6,982,669.00

The 2016 American National Elections Studies (ANES) focuses on two issues that
are the essence of democratic elections: candidate preference and voter turnout.
The core mission of the study is to inform explanations of election outcomes by
providing the systematic and rigorous collection of data that support rich
hypothesis testing, maximize methodological excellence, measure many variables,
and promote comparisons across people, contexts, and time. The ANES serves this
mission by providing researchers with a view of the political world through the
eyes of ordinary citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research continues the
ANES mission for the next four years, but in new and better ways than before. It
builds on an ANES history that has made the project a valuable resource to
generations of social scientists. As has been true for past presidential
elections in the ANES time series, a presidential year pre- and post-election
study will be conducted using face-to-face interviewing of a nationally
representative sample of adults. In addition, a parallel internet study will be
conducted that will use a novel fresh-recruit-to-web sampling strategy. The
results of this methodological innovation have the potential to revolutionize
the conduct of high-reliability, high-response rate surveys by significantly
reducing their costs and de-clustering their samples. The results of this
methodological innovation may have implications for all large-scale individual-
level data collection enterprises and ensure the long-term viability of this
project, the General Social Survey, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to methodological innovations, the 2016 survey continues to allow the
examination of how a rapidly changing electorate, one that has experienced
several years of divided government and extraordinarily high party unity,
engages a new set of nominees in new electoral, economic, and social conditions.
Besides continuing the times series, special emphases will be placed on the role
of gender, the rapid growth of the Latino population, and how the growing levels
of income inequality all impact the election. The results of this study will
inform views and research perspectives of social scientists from a broad range
of disciplines, as well as journalists, policy makers, and ordinary citizens.