* 1444585
* ABR-PG: The Use of Pentaploid Surrogates for Assembly and Anchoring of Octoploid Strawberry Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Thomas Davis, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 01/31/2018
* USD 411,417.00

The cultivated strawberry (Fragaria x ananassa) and its immediate ancestors, F.
chiloensis and F. virginiana, are an important and intriguing crop plant system
from evolutionary, genomic and horticultural perspectives. Having originated
from a cross between its two immediate ancestors in the mid-1700s, the
cultivated strawberry is one of the youngest crop species. It has four genomes,
each present in two copies, making a total of eight genomes. These were passed
down from as many as four ancestors, thus making the cultivated strawberry among
the most genomically complex crop plants. As yet, it has not been possible to
get a genome sequence for the cultivated strawberry, primarily because of the
great complexity of having eight genomes. This challenge is addressed in this
project by implementation of a new strategy that reduces the number of genomes
to be sequenced from eight to four. The approach is to get a hybrid with five
genomes - called a pentaploid - by first crossing a well-studied variety with
two genomes (termed a diploid) to one with eight. After sequencing the
pentaploid, the genome of the diploid is subtracted out bioinformatically,
leaving only four genomes to be assembled. The result will be the first
assembled genome sequence for one of the immediate ancestors of the cultivated
strawberry, which will be a resource of immense value to strawberry researchers
and breeders interested in further improving this economically important and
healthful fruit crop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No reference genome has yet been
established for an octoploid strawberry. Challenges facing such efforts include
those inherent to polyploidy, as well as those associated with heterozygosity.
The octoploid strawberry species, including the cultivated Fragaria x ananassa
and its immediate ancestors F. chiloensis and F. virginiana, are subject to
inbreeding depression, and doubled haploid clones as used for genome assembly in
the peach and apple genome projects have not been an available option in
strawberry. A bold approach will be implemented to solve this problem by using
pentaploid hybrids as "modified haploid" subjects for whole genome sequencing
and linkage mapping. The project goals are to construct a high resolution,
pentaploid-based linkage map and use it to anchor a pentaploid-based genome
assembly, from which the known diploid genome copy has been digitally subtracted
out. Linkage mapping will be accomplished using markers from the Axiom IStraw90
SNP array. The specific project objectives are to: 1) construct a high
resolution, octoploid linkage map based upon a novel, pentaploid mapping
population; 2) construct an octoploid genome assembly based upon newly generated
DNA sequence and optical mapping data derived from a single pentaploid plant; 3)
anchor the genome assembly to the linkage map; and, 4) compare the utility of
the newly assembled octoploid genome to that of the existing diploid genome as
references in relation to an expanded program of SNP discovery in octoploid
germplasm. The project will establish a needed knowledge foundation for
subsequent research aimed at defining the subgenome composition(s) of the
octoploid Fragaria species. Only within this knowledge framework will it be
possible to define the homoeologues and subgenomic specificities of genes of
economic and basic scientific interest. The employment of a pentaploid progeny
population for linkage map construction will provide detailed insight into
patterns of allele segregation that might otherwise be obscured by the
challenges of genotype calling in an octoploid, thereby offering the potential
to differentiate disomic and polysomic inheritance patterns and to finally
establish whether the latter do in fact occur at the octoploid level in
strawberry. The genomic resources to be developed, including the first octoploid
reference genome, will be rapidly disseminated via the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and Genome Database for
Rosaceae (http://www.rosaceae.org/) public databases. The research products will
advance both basic and applied research in strawberry, and will reinforce
efforts to implement marker-assisted breeding in strawberry.