* 1444445
* Collaborative Proposal: Using Lean LaunchPad to Promote Transfer Students' Persistence in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Luke Nogales, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 10/31/2017
* USD 348,043.00

This engineering education research project focuses on improving the success of
transfer students through an innovative transition program that utilizes a Lean
LaunchPad model. The Lean LaunchPad presents a practice-oriented paradigm for
teaching students about innovation and entrepreneurship. It focuses on the
startup experience and the skills necessary to develop successful business
ventures. By promoting the development of research, analytical thinking, and
problem solving skills in engineering students, the Lean LaunchPad approach
provides a relevant platform for academic support and experiential learning.
Students learn that failure is a necessary part of learning that allows them to
gain valuable research, innovation, and design experiences regardless of whether
the business case for an idea is viable or not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focus on the transferability of knowledge into real-world application is
expected to increase students' persistence in engineering majors. Howard
University and New Mexico State University will each implement a one week
immersive experience for 40 incoming transfer students using Lean LaunchPad as
the format. The transfer students will work in teams to explore the business
model canvas, immersing themselves in core portions of the scientific method in
an experiential, inquiry based, learner centered environment. In addition,
Howard University will adopt and adapt the proven successful NMSU transfer
student recruitment methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
importance of this project is in the innovative use of Lean LaunchPad to ease
the transition for incoming transfer students. Community colleges enroll over
half of all Hispanic students and 41% of all African American students. This
target population has enormous potential for broadening participation in the
engineering workforce. Of equal importance is the fact that this research
project will address the lack of evidenced based interventions that support the
success of transfer students. The success of this project as evidenced by
improved retention and graduation numbers can be replicated across varying
institutional types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project overlaps with NSF's
strategic goals of broadening participation in the engineering workforce. The
transfer student population is extremely diverse in multiple ways; gender, race,
age being the most obvious. The population is growing and increasingly includes
veterans returning from active duty. By targeting transfer students, introducing
them to entrepreneurship from an engineering perspective and supporting their
transition to a four year institution, this project will evaluate the impact of
a Lean LaunchPad based immersive experience on their success in earning
undergraduate engineering degrees.&lt;br/&gt;