* 1444954
* Developing more realistic animations of subduction zone processes.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,939.00

Developing more realistic animations of subduction zone
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a realistic digital
animation of the subduction process in plate tectonics that will be broadly used
by education, research, and science communities. Subduction processes involve
the sinking of 50-100 mile thick slabs of oceanic lithosphere at oceanic
trenches and the return of this material to the deep mantle. Subduction is the
single most important of all of the processes going on beneath the surface of
the solid Earth. Subduction zones affect thousands of miles of coastline and
extend hundreds of miles deep into the Earth. Subduction makes the tectonic
plates move at the same time that it impacts society. Benefits of subduction
zones include formation of economic deposits of oil, gas, and minerals. Dangers
of subduction include earthquakes, tsunamis, and explosive volcanic eruptions.
In spite of the importance of subduction, existing animations of subduction zone
processes fail to capture the advances in our understanding resulting from
recent NSF-supported geoscience research. It is in the national interest that
these advances be clearly and simply explained to students, the public, and
other scientists. Because subduction is a dynamic system, it requires animation
to show how the various components and processes interact. Existing animations
of subduction zone processes are dated and do not reflect our current
understanding of this important process. They are quite simply inaccurate. The
lack of realistic animations of how subduction and associated processes operate
creates a huge gap between NSF-funded science, science education, and public
understanding of this fundamental Earth process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves a leading scholar of subduction zone processes, a Geosciences
graduate student, and two undergraduates enrolled in the UT Dallas School of
Arts and Humanities Arts and Technology program (UTD-ATEC) to create a realistic
animation of subduction that reflects our current understanding of this complex
process resulting from geoscience research sponsored by NSF-EAR and by targeted
geoscience initiatives MARGINS and GeoPRISMS . UTD-ATEC is the only
comprehensive degree-granting program in the State of Texas designed to explore
and foster the convergence of computer science and engineering with the creative
arts and the humanities. The subduction zone animation effort is pairing
students trained in modern digital technologies with scholars who know the
science in creating a realistic animation of very large and important process.
The undergraduate students are employed to work 10 hours per week with the PI
and a graduate student to produce the animation. Feedback from geoscience
researchers and educators is being sought at national meetings. When completed,
the animation will be posted on YouTube and will also be distributed by at least
one textbook publisher as part of their supplementary on-line offerings for a
wide range of undergraduate textbooks (e.g., Physical Geology, Historical
Geology, Oceanography, Natural Hazards, Physical Geography, etc.)