* 1444489
* Rectification of El Nino-Southern Oscillation as a Mechanism for the Tropical Pacific Decadal Variability: A Diabatic and Time-Dependent View
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* De-Zheng Sun, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2019
* USD 486,044.00

On a year-to-year basis the variability of sea surface temperature (SST) in the
tropical Pacific is dominated by El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events,
which are known to influence weather patterns worldwide and have significant
impacts on the US. But tropical Pacific SSTs can also vary more slowly, and
tropical Pacific decadal variability (TPDV) has also been proposed as the cause
of worldwide impacts including the great Dust Bowl drought of the 1930s and the
recent global warming hiatus. The present work examines the possibility that
some portion of TPDV is related to ENSO activity through a mechanism referred to
as rectification, in which the ocean currents and ocean temperature anomalies
associated with ENSO events, despite their transient nature, nevertheless
produce a lasting rearrangement of heat across the tropical Pacific ocean. The
sense of the rearrangement is such that ENSO rectification leads to cooler
temperatures in the West Pacific "warm pool", the region of maximum SSTs around
the Maritime Continent, and the "cold tongue" region along the equator in the
eastern Pacific. The PI hypothesizes that if ENSO is unusually active for an
extended period the rectification effect will lead to a mean state with a weaker
east-west ocean temperature contrast across the equatorial Pacific, which is
less favorable to ENSO. The result will be a reduction in ENSO activity,
resulting in a weaker rectification effect that will lead to a stronger east-
west temperature contrast. The stronger temperature contrast is more favorable
to ENSO activity, producing a return to greater ENSO activity and repeating the
cycle. A suite of experiments using a climate model in various configurations,
including some with surface winds imposed on the ocean component model and
others with SSTs imposed on the atmospheric component model, will be used to
test the hypothesis.

In addition to its scientific interest, the question of TPDV origins has
substantial societal implications. If the proposed mechanism contributes to TPDV
and decadal modulation of ENSO activity, it may lead to improved prediction of
ENSO events and slower variations of Pacific SST. Such predictions would be of
great value given the worldwide impacts of tropical Pacific SST variations. The
work may also be helpful in understanding the global warming hiatus and
anticipating its termination. In addition, the work will support and train a
graduate student, thereby developing the future workforce in this research area.