* 1444082
* 2014 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting, San Antonio, TX, October 23-25, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Gilda Barabino, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Barabino, Gilda &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1444082&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Biomedical Engineering Society&lt;br/&gt;2014 Biomedical Engineering Society
Annual Meeting, San Antonio, TX, October 23-25, 2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks funding to support travel for students, postdoctoral fellows,
early career faculty and professionals, inclusive of underrepresented groups and
accessible to persons with disabilities, to participate in the 2014 Biomedical
Engineering Society Annual Meeting. The 2014 BMES Annual Meeting will be held in
San Antonio, Texas, from October 23-25, 2014, and it will feature 19 parallel
technical Program Tracks focused on the overall theme of "Bioengineering
Innovations to Catalyze Affordable Health Care." The BMES Annual Meeting serves
as a primary vehicle for scientific sharing and dissemination of the latest
advances in biomedical engineering, as well as a facilitator of important cross-
fertilizations between the life sciences and engineering technologies, which
foster a multi-disciplinary approach in the practice of Biomedical Engineering.
The travel awards will afford the opportunity for young investigators and
investigators from underrepresented groups to attend the Annual Meeting, be
informed on the latest scientific and technological advances in Biomedical
Engineering, and participate in programs and special sessions focused on health
disparities and promoting and sustaining innovative research in biomedical
engineering and grant writing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will
specifically be used to offset travel costs and registration fees for students,
early career professionals and session participants and to support the Students
Research and Design Awards and the Student Travel Awards, which will enable
undergraduate and graduate students to actively participate in the Annual
Meeting and be recognized for their outstanding contributions to biomedical
research. The requested funds will also support the Biomedical Innovation and
Career Development Travel Awards to provide broad participation of those
involved in minority health in the Health Disparities Session. Overall, the
requested funding will contribute towards the development of a diverse, well-
educated, technically competent, and internationally competitive biomedical
engineering workforce.