* 1444398
* EAGER: Wafer Scalable Dry Transfer of Graphene onto Silicon Substrates
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Kenneth Liechti, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 01/31/2016
* USD 132,489.00

EAGER: Wafer Scalable Dry Transfer of Graphene onto Silicon
Substrates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Integrating graphene
with silicon technology is widely considered among the greatest prospects for
translating graphene research from academic laboratories to practical commercial
applications. This heterogeneous nanotechnology can benefit from the maturity
and complexity of silicon electronics while taking advantage of the outstanding
electronic, mechanical, optical, thermal and sensor properties of graphene to
realize advanced devices on semiconductor chips. Despite the broad recognition
of the need to integrate graphene with silicon, progress has been very limited
largely due to the difficult of removing graphene from its growth surface in a
benign manner compatible with semiconductor technology. Several transfer methods
such as wet lift-off transfer, and electrochemical delamination that are
convenient for small samples, are not scalable to full wafer sizes, which are
required for practical very large scale integration with silicon. In this
effort, we propose a wafer-scalable dry transfer of graphene onto silicon
substrates that offers several advantages including a contamination-free
graphene surface. The proposed dry transfer method is a low temperature method
compatible with silicon technology. This effort has the potential to overcome
the biggest barrier for practical graphene-silicon integration. The results of
this effort is expected to lead to future academic industry partnerships for
commercial applications that can benefit the broader society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Graphene is a relatively new advanced
nanomaterial that has many unique and outstanding properties that could benefit
semiconductor technology, which is the backbone of computer chips, mobile
phones, and portable electronics. However, it has been difficult to integrate
graphene onto silicon semiconductor chips owing to the current constrain that
requires growing the film on a metallic substrate such as copper which is not
suitable for semiconductor electronics. Furthermore, single layer graphene,
which is the thinnest known material is very fragile and susceptible to tears
during film transfer based on existing chemical or solution-based methods. In
this research, we explore the idea of using small controllable mechanical forces
to directly peel graphene from its original substrate directly onto silicon
semiconductor chips. Preliminary results indicate this idea is feasible and
further research will increase the prospects for graphene integration onto
commercial computer and electronic chips to benefit society. In addition, the
graduate student and post-doctoral researchers working on this research effort
will gain advanced scientific and engineering skills needed to be technical
leaders in industry, academia or government post-graduate careers. Moreover,
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds will be recruited to participate
in the research effort to promote advanced science and engineering careers.