* 1444610
* Deciphering the role of RNA binding proteins in RNA transport, localization and post-transcriptional processes in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Thomas Okita, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2020
* USD 2,731,480.00

The world population is projected to increase to over 9 billion people by 2050,
necessitating a 70% increase in the food supply. Such a goal can only be
accomplished by increasing the yields of the major crop plants, especially the
cereals, whose grains meet substantial nutritional needs in the form of protein
and starch for a significant portion of the world's population. Results from
this research will provide new insights and innovative strategies to improve
crop yields by manipulating the enzymes (proteins that facilitate chemical
reactions) involved in the early steps of the production of the proteins and
starch that are stored in rice grains. In addition, this project will provide
state-of-the-art research training in molecular, cellular and genetic methods,
especially large-scale studies of proteins (proteomics) and genes (genomics) for
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students, including students from a
partnering minority-serving institution, California State University at Los
Angeles. Products of this research will be integrated into a new website on
molecular kinesis (how for example RNA and proteins move within plant cells to
the sites where they function) an important topic that is poorly described in
modern plant biology textbooks.

Although considerable information has been generated over the years on how plant
genes are controlled at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels,
very little is known about how RNAs are transported and localized to specific
sub-compartments of the plant cell where they are translated, stored, processed
or turned-over. This research will focus on the transport and localization of
RNAs in developing rice endosperm with the aim of providing a comprehensive
picture of the RNA binding proteins (RBPs) involved, how they are organized into
multi-RBP complexes, and how RBPs that may be common factors of distinct RNA
transport pathways may, nevertheless, provide the directions for targeting RNAs
to particular individual pathways. This project will use genome-wide approaches
to identify the role of specific RBPs in the transport and localization of RNAs
to the cortical endoplasmic reticulum and their subsequent roles in translation,
stability and/or RNA processing. Specific objectives will be to: (1) categorize
cytoplasmic-localized, cytoskeletal-associated RBPs into multi-protein
complexes; (2) determine the composition of RNAs bound by these multi-protein
complexes and identify the associated cis-sequences; and (3) determine the role
of modular domains of specific RBPs that may be responsible for specifying a
particular RNA transport pathway by the analysis of genetic mutations. This
information will provide an unprecedented view of the fate of RNAs and their
location in the plant cell and will thereby fill a major gap in our
understanding of steps in gene expression beyond transcription.