* 1444032
* Support for Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) Accelerator Network Workshop; Georgia Institute of Technology; Atlanta, Georgia; June 5-6, 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* David McDowell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,001.00

This award provides partial support for a workshop to bring together a diverse
group of community experts from academia, government, and industry to explore
the integration of major Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) activities in various
universities across the nation and to learn about important ongoing MGI research
through plenary speakers and posters on major MGI-related themes. The Materials
Genome Initiative is a multi-agency initiative designed to create a new era of
policy, resources, and infrastructure that support U.S. institutions in the
effort to discover, manufacture, and deploy advanced materials twice as fast, at
a fraction of the cost. Ideas developed during the workshop will provide the
foundation to develop a roadmap for integrating MGI activities. This will
advance the science and engineering of materials. Since advanced materials are
essential to economic security and human well-being, this workshop contributes
more broadly to the needs of society.

This workshop contributes to building a network to integrate ongoing and future
activities associated with the MGI. The workshop will be held June 5-6, 2014 at
the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia. The MGI has launched a
broad discussion among industry, government and university stakeholders on
digital data, computation, and experiments necessary to accelerate the discovery
and development of materials and their incorporation into products. The stated
MGI goal is to speed up the process from discovery to deployment, in "half the
time at half the cost." However, efforts to achieve this goal are often
localized in specific institutions leading to major challenges in integrating
efforts to achieve synergies, employ best practices, and avoid duplication.
Related to these challenges, the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy, in conjunction with the 2nd anniversary of the MGI, announced in June
2013 an initiative organized jointly by Georgia Tech, the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and the University of Michigan to begin a national dialogue
regarding prospects for establishing a national scale "Accelerator Network" for
materials discovery, development, and deployment. Such an Accelerator Network
would support MGI goals of significantly reducing the timeframe required to
discover, develop, and deploy materials through collaborative efforts among
industry, government, and university stakeholders. The merit of this activity
lies in its potential to lead to more efficient and effective incorporation of
scientific and engineering advances from institutions across the nation leading
into the community leading to more rapid progress on the effort to decrease the
time from the discovery of a material to its deployment in products.