* 1444871
* EAGER: Collaborative: Policies for Enhancing U.S. Leadership in Cyberspace
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephanie Forrest, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 102,583.00

Cybersecurity is threatened by the zero-day exploits (software vulnerabilities
that have not been previously disclosed and are therefore potential vectors for
attack). The threat is serious for exploits in the hands of major cyber powers
that are potentially hostile nations. Publication of a zero-day exploits can
enhance the resilience of domestic cyber-infrastructure (if an adversary has
discovered the same exploit), and it could give other countries the opportunity
to patch their systems proactively, increasing confidence that they will not be
penetrated. Communicating zero-day exploits, however, has the obvious drawback
that the exploit loses value as a weapon, because countries could patch their
own systems to resist it. Thus, the cost of publication is the loss of such
exploits for use in deterrence and/or future offensive cyber operations. U.S.
policy has recently begun to address the question of which zero-day exploits
known to the government should be published, both to enhance national security
and to instill confidence by others. The project analyzes various costs and
benefits of publishing exploits or patches, and studies how the costs might be
mitigated whether through policy or technical means.

In a new collaboration, computer scientist, Stephanie Forrest, and political
scientist, Robert Axelrod, are developing integrated approaches to the rapidly
expanding problem of cyber conflict, combining historical analysis, technical
research, strategic analysis, and computational modeling. This project focuses
on three areas where U.S. policy could provide additional leadership in
cyberspace: publication of zero-day exploits; labeling of neutral
infrastructure, such as networks associated with hospitals or religious sites,
and shared norms to protect neutral cyberspaces; and sustainment of Internet
interoperability, which allows Internet users on different networks to
communicate directly without interference. The findings may benefit national
security by giving policymakers a way of assessing the costs and benefits of
publishing exploits or patches. This project injects a fresh and timely voice
into debates about the cyberagenda, suggesting concrete measures for minimizing
the likelihood and impacts of conflict among state actors.