* 1445031
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Prototype mid-infrared, methane sensor for natural gas leak detection on small unmanned aerial systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Mark Zondlo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2017
* USD 199,627.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating new advances
in laser-based, trace gas detection to identify methane leaks in the natural gas
supply chain by using small unmanned aerial systems. The laser-based methane
sensor for small unmanned aerial systems is important because it will result in
increased safety by preventing explosions, improve the environment through
reduced emissions of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, and increase profits in
the gas/oil sector through more product reaching their customers. The project
will result in a prototype methane sensor for small unmanned aerial vehicles,
which are rapidly increasing in their use and applications. No existing
commercial methane sensors are sufficiently small, lightweight, and sensitive to
be deployed on small unmanned aerial systems (those with wing spans of about a
meter) for natural gas leak detection. The laser-based methane sensor has the
following unique features: low mass (1 kg), small volume (1 L volume), fast
response (10 measurements per second) and high-precision (2 parts per billion
methane). These features will allow for efficient natural gas leak detection
through decreased operating costs, increased safety of operation in populated
areas, and more accurate leak identification when compared to the current method
of visual, manned-aircraft patrols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. The project synthesizes two rapidly developing
technologies, mid-infrared laser spectroscopy and small unmanned aerial systems,
and capitalizes upon their desirable attributes of high sensitivity detection
and high-dexterity sampling, respectively. A newly-developed, interband cascade
laser (ICL) operating at a wavelength of 3.3 microns will be used to probe the
strongest (fundamental) absorption band of methane to achieve the necessary
sensitivity. The ICL will be coupled into an optical cavity and integrated onto
a small unmanned aerial system. The sensor will be exposed directly to the free
airstream and not require any sample cells, inlets, or manifolds, thereby
reducing size and mass. Sensor accuracy, particularly critical during the wide
range of atmospheric conditions and vibrations experienced in-flight, will be
maintained through the use of an in-line reference cell with multiharmonic
wavelength modulation spectroscopy. Sensor flight performance will be verified
with controlled releases of methane, and flight demonstrations over pipelines
will be conducted. In addition, key personnel involved in this project, a
graduate student, will receive entrepreneurial experiences and see how
laboratory discoveries are translated into commercial products through working
with operators in the drone and gas/oil industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages a leading small unmanned aerial systems service provider to test
and demonstrate the new sensors to its clients in the gas/oil industry at FAA-
approved locations and operations. The technology will improve pipeline
monitoring in specific and other trace gas detection in general in this
technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.