* 1445629
* Free Boundary Problems and Applications, Spring 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Dehua Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference "Free Boundary Problems and
Applications," held at the University of Pittsburgh on March 11-14, 2015. Free
boundaries in mathematical models (interfaces, moving boundaries, shocks, and so
on) arise in a wide range of applications in various sciences and real world
problems, including gas dynamics, material sciences, geometry, complex fluids,
water waves, phase transitions, mathematical finance, mathematical biology, and
medicine. The breadth of the free boundary problems presents challenges and
opportunities, and also leads to the development of research in different
directions with unifying themes regarding methods and techniques. The aim of the
conference is to bring together leading experts in various theoretical and
applied aspects of free boundary problems to promote and enhance those unifying
techniques, in particular, to exchange and explore ideas, to establish new
connections, to foster new collaborations, and to provide training for students
and junior researchers. Leading experts will speak in the conference. The
program of the conference will be structured to foster integration of research
and education, and to broaden opportunities and enable the participation of
members of groups underrepresented in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of free boundary problems has become
an important aspect of nonlinear partial differential equations. Modern
approaches to the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations have
brought various new insights and new methods to understand the free boundary
problems. New important and challenging problems have been emerging in physics,
engineering, industry, material sciences, finance, biology and medicine, and
other fields. The conference provides an opportunity for experts in analysis and
applications to present their research results, discuss mathematical theory and
techniques critical for many research fields and applications, explore new
important and challenging problems emerging in various applications, establish
new connections, and potentially foster new collaborations among the
participants. The conference also provides an opportunity for students and
junior researchers, including those from the groups underrepresented in
mathematical sciences (women, minorities) to be educated in the research field
and to present their recent research results. The conference will disseminate
research results and promote the research area through talks, a web page,
flyers, and posters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
www.math.pitt.edu/~dwang/conference2015.html