* 1445246
* SAVI:   Crossing the Boundaries of Critical Zone Science with a Virtual Institute
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,382,827.00

An anticipated increase in population to more than 8 billion, a 50% increase in
demand for food and fuel, and a 30% increase in demand for clean water will
occur in the next 2 decades. To enable this, humanity must increase our
understanding of the physical, biological and chemical processes occurring in
the Critical Zone (CZ) that nurture human society globally. The CZ is Earth's
surface layer between the top of the vegetation canopy and the base of
groundwater. Such understanding will help society to better adapt to and manage
the effects associated with ongoing land-use and climate change. This proposal
proposes to create an international Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) SAVI as an
integrating activity for Earth surface geosciences research
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this proposal is to address important
and outstanding charges that challenge the U.S. CZO program: How can individual
sites articulate and answer network-wide questions? How can the diverse CZOs
make some measurements in a coordinated fashion at all CZOs? Proponents
hypothesize that development of such measurements and questions requires focused
leadership and a concerted effort that entails 5 years of workshops, graduate
and postgraduate student mentoring, and targeted research projects that demand
common measurements. They have proposed an approach to the development of
international cross-CZO science, and to establish a new cadre of truly
interdisciplinary and international scientists through graduate student and
postdoctoral training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CZO SAVI will establish a
framework to address major challenges that face humanity with respect to
habitability of the CZ. This project will engage U.S. and international partners
from diverse networks by: 1) learning to explore and measure the essential
variables underpinning models of the CZ; and, 2) supporting a U.S. group of
junior scientists to become the next-generation of international scholars of the
CZ. In short, the project seeks to implement a cross cutting and coupled network
of junior researchers working closely with the senior CZO leaders to promote
understanding of the cross-disciplinary and coupled nature of CZ processes. This
is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and is co-
funded by NSF's Geosciences Directorate, Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Office of International and Integrative Activities.