* 1445065
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Innovative High-Performance Cold-Formed Steel Wall System for Light Framed Construction
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Cheng Yu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2017
* USD 257,521.00

This PFI: Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) Technology Translation (TT)
project focuses on translating a research discovery on the use of perforated
corrugated steel decks as sheathing to fill the need for non-combustible high-
performance shear walls for mid-rise light-framed buildings. Mid- and low-rise
buildings comprise the majority of buildings in the United States. The mid-rise
multi-family homes (4-9 stories) are becoming the housing trend to meet the
increasing demands of population growth and urbanization. The use of cold-formed
steel (CFS) would be highly cost-effective for mid-rise light-framed buildings.
However the existing shear wall technologies impede the use of CFS in mid-rises
due to the requirements of non-combustibility and high structural performance
(shear strength, stiffness, ductility). The project will result in a prototype
of the proposed non-combustible high-performance steel shear wall technology.
This new technology has the following unique features: a) it uses the
perforation in the sheathing as energy dissipating fuses to achieve high
ductility; b) it uses the corrugation in the sheathing to achieve high strength
and stiffness; c) it uses only CFS members; d) the sheathing to framing
connection method is optimized for high efficiency; e) it has the same thickness
as the non-shear walls; and f) it enables the engineers to control the damage
locations to be away from critical building components. These features provide
the following advantages over the current state-of-the-art technologies: higher
structural performance, lower overall cost, non-combustibility, and controllable
failure mechanism when compared to the leading competing technologies, namely
the wood based panel shear wall, the steel sheet shear wall, the steel-gypsum
composite panel shear wall, and the diagonal steel strap bracing shear wall in
the mid-rise construction market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. It will investigate the feasibility of positioning the
corrugated deck within the CFS frame in order to form standard wall thicknesses
while maintaining high structural performances. A major research effort will be
made to maximize the shear wall performance by developing optimal parameters in
perforation, corrugation, and CFS framing details via numerical simulations and
full-scale experiments. In addition, personnel involved in this project,
undergraduate and graduate students, will receive innovation and technology
translation experiences through modeling, building, and testing CFS shear walls.
The potential economic impact is expected to be significant for the mid-rise
construction industry, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in
building industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves research
collaboration between the University of North Texas and two industrial partners,
Verco Decking Inc. and Nucor Building Systems. The industrial partners will
provide deck manufacturing capacities, assist in developing an efficient
connection method, and guide commercialization aspects in this technology
translation effort.