* 1445636
* GRC Biocatalysis 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Stefan Lutz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT TITLE&lt;br/&gt;2014 Gordon Research Conference on
Biocatalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially
cover the registration costs for some of the participants of the 2014 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on Biocatalysis and associated Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS), with preference given to post-doctoral associates, graduate students, and
early career scientists. The GRC will be held on July 6-11, 2014, at Bryant
University in Smithfield, Rhode Island. The meeting will be preceded by the
second associated GRS on July 5-6, 2014, which follows up on the success of the
first GRS in 2012. The PI for the award is Prof. Stefan Lutz of Emory
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of this joint GRS/GRC meeting is
to provide a forum, in a highly interactive environment, to educate experienced
researchers about the latest developments in fundamental and applied
biocatalysis and to introduce students, postdoctoral fellows, and young
investigators to current questions and challenges in the field. The agenda for
the conference allows for extended discussions amongst the participants from
academia, industry, and the national laboratories. Approximately a third of the
participants are postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and early career
scientists. The conference has a unique learning environment for early career
participants because the format combines informal presentations and discussions,
group meals, and external activities to encourage collaborative discussions
between early career and advanced-career scientists in the field of
biocatalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 2014 GRC on Biocatalysis will continue
the tradition of bringing together leading researchers from around the world to
discuss their latest, most exciting work in biocatalysis and future directions
for the field. The conferences sessions will cover core research areas in
biocatalysis which have recently yielded exciting new discoveries. In addition,
emerging areas in biocatalysis will be presented such as applications to new
materials and the impact of disruptive technologies in advancing the field of
biocatalysis.