* 1445675
* Developing Consensus Guidelines for Tools and Processes that Assess Science Instructional Materials
* EHR,DGE
* 11/01/2014,01/31/2017
* April Gardner, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 01/31/2017
* USD 298,696.00

The recent National Research Council (2013) publication, Monitoring Progress to
Successful K-12 STEM Education (Monitoring Progress) identified fourteen
indicators to assess the health of STEM education in US schools. This project is
addressing the indicator that specifies the creation of a set of criteria to
determine how well widely-used STEM instructional materials support the intent
of national standards. The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
creation of this criteria set. No other document exists that represents the
collective knowledge and perspectives of science education leaders and clearly
articulates the criteria to be used at a national level to determine how well
science instructional materials embody the NGSS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes three phases: 1) a literature review of tools and processes
that have been used to analyze the quality of science instructional materials;
2) a national Summit conference of science education leaders who are
identifying, specifying, and building consensus around the criteria to be
included in any tools or processes for analyzing the quality of these materials;
and 3) the production and dissemination of a set of Guidelines that developers
of such evaluation tools and processes can use to ensure that they include
criteria for assessing alignment of materials with the NGSS, criteria that
represent a consensus among leading science educators. The Guidelines produced
are being disseminated throughout the science education community by the key
leaders participating in this project. The Guidelines will inform development of
tools and processes to consistently evaluate alignment of materials with the
intent of the NGSS.