* 1445042
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Low Cost Integrated Plasma Wave THz Detector for Ultra-Fast Pulses of THz Radiation.
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2018
* USD 241,981.00

This PFI: Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) Technology Translation (TT)
project focuses on translating advances in terahertz (THz) electronics
technology to fill the need for simple, low cost, and reliable room temperature
detectors of pulsed terahertz radiation, equivalent to photodiodes. Due to the
ability of THz waves to penetrate through barrier materials (clothes, packaging,
etc.), and to perform non-contact and non-ionizing testing, THz systems are
positioned to compete with more hazardous and less sensitive technologies like
X-rays and will allow resolving images that other technologies cannot resolve.
The proposed system based on THz detection would enable the development of new
nanostructured THz devices with applications in homeland security,
biotechnology, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a
low-cost commercial prototype of the terahertz plasma-wave SOC (system on chip)
detector. The device will feature a wide spectral range (0.3-3 THz), an improved
time resolution by optimizing device packaging and building integrated signal
processing elements, which would allow logic operations with multiple terahertz
pulses, such as measuring delays between pulses and extracting pulse position
modulation information. This will extend the feasibility of such devices to the
emerging fields of THz communication and THz logic systems. Traditional
detectors of terahertz radiation include pyroelectric detectors and bolometers,
which are very slow (typically within Hz or kHz bandwidth). Such systems are
acceptable for measuring the average THz power, but unable to resolve short
individual pulses. Existing fast Schottky diode based detectors didn't receive
wide acceptance in short pulse terahertz applications due to their static
sensitivity and low electrical breakdown thresholds. The proposed device
addresses these issues in a silicon integrated platform. While the terahertz
spectrum has a great potential for applications in imaging, sensing,
spectroscopy, and ultra-broadband wireless communications, realizing this
potential requires lowering the equipment cost and size and developing highly
efficient, fast, and compact sources and detectors. The proposed integrated SOC
plasma wave detector system will be uniquely suited for the THz market. The
development of such prototype will include: (1) Design and fabrication of
integrated amplifier for RF coupling of the detector output with transient
digitizer module with an RF bandwidth up to 50 GHz. (2) Design and fabrication
of integrated terahertz antenna for the active element and collimating lens for
optimization of THz radiation coupling efficiency, and increase of effective
terahertz cross section of the detector. (3) Design of integrated data
acquisition module. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages industry,
foundries, and university venture development organization to augment research
capability, provide test environment, and guide the commercialization aspects in
this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality. Furthermore, the students involved in the project, will take an
entrepreneurship course, which, in addition to the courses offered by the Lally
School of Business at RPI, will have a directed study course offered by the PIs.
The students supported by the project will also receive a 3 hours mini course
followed by a pass-fail test on IP, and they will be strongly encouraged to
participate in business plan competitions at RPI.