* 1445025
* MaizeCode - An Initial Analysis of Functional Elements in the Maize Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* William McCombie, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 6,076,363.00

PI: Thomas Gingeras (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
David Jackson, Robert Martienssen, W. Richard McCombie, Michael Schatz, and
David Micklos (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory), Doreen Ware (USDA-ARS/Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory); and Ken Birnbaum (New York
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize (corn) is one of the most economically
and agriculturally important crops grown in the world. It has assumed this
position after centuries of careful genetic breeding to enhance many of its
growth and nutritional properties. The generation of high quality genome
sequences paired with diverse molecular data allows scientists to better
understand the effects of this selective breeding at both the genetic and
epigenetic levels. The MaizeCODE project aims to create a comprehensive
reference encyclopedia of highly useful genomic reference sequence resources for
breeders and plant scientists to use to improve economically important crop
traits like disease resistance and yield. In addition, this project will provide
broad and comprehensive training opportunities for students, breeders and
practicing scientists through specific courses and workshops that will address
various approaches to obtain and analyze MaizeCODE data. The Education,
Outreach, and Training (EOT) effort will prepare faculty from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to analyze MaizeCODE with undergraduate
students and will provide travel awards for graduate students to attend
MaizeCODE training at professional meetings. The EOT program will be unique in
promoting Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) disciplines by
anticipating and encouraging broad participation in primary data analysis by
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved assemblies
of the maize genome will provide a foundation for the identification of
biochemically active and biologically functional elements encoded in this
working-draft sequence. A comprehensive catalog of these elements will be a
critical component in strategies to link genotype with important traits in
maize, a classical genetic system. This is the overarching goal of the MaizeCODE
project. The human ENCODE project is a model for such a comprehensive catalog.
Building on the project team's leadership experience with ENCODE, this similarly
integrated and multi-disciplinary project has three main objectives: 1) to
develop high-quality working drafts for two inbred maze lines and one teosinte
inbred line, 2) to identify regions of the maize genome that are transcribed,
methylated, bound by specific modified histones in six cell types that are the
major progenitors of the root and shoot systems (focusing on histone
modification in three root cell types) and transcription factors in five
unrelated tissues and 3) to store, collate, display and disseminate the data to
the broader community of plant biologists worldwide. Given the wealth of "genome
to phenome" studies in maize, and the emerging realization that much of the
variation under selection acts at the level of gene regulation, it is expected
that this project will have broad and significant impact on maize genetics
research and breeding, with the potential to inform similar research in other
grass crops. The project expects to extend significantly the functional
annotations and the current understanding of the regulation of gene activity in
maize, adding critical content to established databases and graphical genome
display centers. Information generated in this project will be rapidly and
broadly disseminated using publically available databases and the CyVerse
(www.cyverse.org) online resource.