* 1445713
* NSF/FDA SIR: Numerical Model Observer for Multiple Abnormalities
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Mia Markey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 9,712.00

PI: Markey, Mia K.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1445713&lt;br/&gt;Title: Numerical Model
Observer for Multiple
Abnormalities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The proposed model
observer would enable more rapid optimization of medical imaging systems,
especially during the early stages of the technology development. The underlying
paradigm is to quantify the quality of a medical image by its effectiveness with
respect to its intended clinical task. This aspect of is aligned with the
mission of the FDA to facilitate new, safe, and effective medical devices. Of
further importance is the development of a new research collaboration between
Prof. Mia K. Markey and her graduate students at The University of Texas at
Austin and researchers in the Division of Imaging and Applied Mathematics at the
FDA, especially Dr. Subok Park. In addition to integrating research and
education through the experiences of the graduate student supported by this
project, the PI (Markey) anticipates that this work will inform her teaching
such that she can improve biomedical engineering course offerings at The
University of Texas at Austin with respect to topics that are particularly
relevant to the Division of Imaging and Applied Mathematics at the FDA.that this
work will inform her teaching such that she can improve biomedical engineering
course offerings at The University of Texas at Austin with respect to topics
that are particularly relevant to the Division of Imaging and Applied
Mathematics at the FDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed collaborative research is designed to provide a structured opportunity
for a graduate student to conduct engineering and scientific research at the FDA
focused on improving the design of numerical model observers for medical imaging
research. As a surrogate of human observers, numerical model observers provide
an objective method for assessing medical image quality, and, thus, play an
important role in the optimization and assessment of imaging devices. The FDA
needs model observers in order to develop regulatory criteria and identify
scientific issues that imaging device manufacturers must address. In clinical
practice, there may be zero, one, or more than one abnormality that a
radiologist needs to find on a medical image. The objective of the proposed
study is to develop a model observer to characterize the detection of multiple
abnormalities in a medical image and to estimate the properties of the
abnormalities. This is critical for enhancing the generality of model observers
and their practical application in medical imaging since current state-of-art
model observers are unable to handle multiple abnormalities in a single image.
The main idea of the proposed model is to compute the likelihood of an ensemble
of suspicious locations, estimate the parameters of each detected signal, and
then assemble all the information into a final score that reveals the most
suspicious scenario.