* 1445605
* A New Look At Sahel Rainfall Variability Over Two Centuries
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Sharon Nicholson, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2019
* USD 723,836.00

This project is a re-examination of the dynamics of Sahel rainfall variability
using datasets which provide long-term coverage of the region, in one case going
back more than two centuries. The re-examination is motivated by the strong
dependence of current understanding on observations over the latter half of the
20th century, when the region experienced prolonged wet (1950-1967) and dry
(1968-1997) periods with strong year-to-year persistence. The behavior of Sahel
rainfall in the 21st century is in some ways atypical compared to this
climatology, thus the context provided by a longer-term record may prove
valuable. One significance difference between the recent years and the second
half of the last century is that in the recent record the late rains (in August
and September) appear to be less stable from year to year than the June-July
rains, thus the importance of the two parts of the rainy season may be shifting
over time. A further assumption which is challenged in the recent record is that
Sahel rainfall variability is spatially coherent over the considerable
longitudinal extent of the region. In particular, the recovery from the late
20th century drought was stronger in the western portion of the Sahel. The
research focuses on the relationship between rainfal and atmospheric circulation
features, including a low-level African Westerly Jet (AWJ) near the equator and
the upper-tropospheric Tropical Easterly Jet (TEJ). The monsoon rain belt lies
between the axes of the two jets and is thus sensitive to their fluctuations.
Variations of the TEJ and AWJ lead to two distinct modes of Sahel rainfall
variability: a north-south shift in the monsoon rain belt which is primarily
driven by meridional displacements of the AWJ; and an overall change in the
intensity of the rains which is governed by the speed of the
TEJ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal broader impacts given the
susceptibility of the Sahel to prolonged drought and consequent food shortages
and related societal disruption. The PI has a long record of service as an
advisor to US agencies and African governments and meteorological services, and
the work performed here may be of value for developing empirical drought
forecasting techniques. In addition, the work will support and train two
graduate students, thereby contributing to the future workforce in this research
area.