* 1445505
* California Renewable Energy and Storage Technology Conference 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Abhijit Mukherjee, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 05/31/2015
* USD 9,644.00

Principal Investigator: Abhijit Mukherjee Proposal No: 1445505 Title: California
Renewable Energy and Storage Technology Conference 2014

Nontechnical Description

The California Renewable Energy and Storage Technology (CREST) Conference 2014,
to be held at the campus of California State University, Northridge on August
15, 2014, is envisioned to bring together researchers, engineers, consultants
and policy-makers in the field of Renewable Energy and Advanced Energy Storage
Technology. The attendees participating in this conference will share ideas and
visions of the future for a greener California and the nation. This annual
conference, started in 2012, has enabled exchange of information and ideas among
universities, industries, research and development laboratories and government
agencies to propel renewable energy technology into the future. The one day
conference typically consists of invited talks, paper and poster presentations,
exhibits, workshops and tour of CSUN renewable energy facilities, thus providing
a unique opportunity for communication and collaboration between academia,
government and industry.

Technical Description

The California Renewable Energy and Storage Technology (CREST) Conference 2014,
to be held at the campus of California State University, Northridge on August
15, 2014, is envisioned to bring together researchers, engineers, consultants
and policy-makers in the field of Renewable Energy and Advanced Energy Storage
Technology. California, the third largest and the most populous state in the US,
has significant energy needs that must be addressed adequately in order to
minimize impact on air quality the potential for climate change. To meet
California?s clean energy goals, renewable energy generation, distribution and
storage systems need to be designed based on existing infrastructure that will
be able to provide sustainable and reliable power to the consumers. These
systems include solar photovoltaic, distributed wind, fuel cells, electric
vehicles, etc. as well as design of green buildings, efficient home appliances,
smart measurement devices, and sensors. Smart control of energy demand in an
electric network is needed to enhance system reliability, security and
efficiency of the overall electric network. The CREST Conference 2014 will
include presentation and dissemination of advanced research activities in these
critical areas of sustainable energy from leading experts in the industry,
academia and national labs. Although this is a regional conference, the state of
California is a leader in renewable energy adoption, and so outcomes of this
conference may have national impact. The proposed conference will involve active
participation of undergraduate and graduate students from CSUN, which is
certified as a Hispanic-Serving Institution, as well as an Asian American Native
American-Pacific Islander Serving Institution (AANAPISI). Invitations will be
extended to science teachers and students from local community college as well,
to maximize participation and outreach.