* 1445690
* EAGER: A Transient System for Cassava Genome Editing
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Linda Hanley-Bowdoin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is the second most important crop in Africa
after maize. East Africa is the world's largest producer of cassava, accounting
for ~60% of world production, where it is often grown on marginal lands.
Millions of people depend on cassava as their major source of calories, and it
plays a key role in food security for the developing world. It is also an
important source of income for small farmers, who are often women in Africa.
Many different cassava cultivars that are adapted to local environmental
conditions and have unique tuber properties are grown across Africa. Farmers
often prefer local varieties instead of "improved" cultivars that are less
susceptible to disease and pests, which greatly limit cassava production in
Africa. Thus, it is important to develop genetic approaches to improve local
varieties as well as elite cultivars that are part of national breeding
programs. This EAGER project will develop an innovative, rapid strategy for
modifying the cassava genome that leaves no "footprint" except for the desired
mutation. This strategy has many potential applications and would complement
conventional breeding and transgenic approaches used today for cassava
improvement. In addition, since cassava geminiviruses are members of the
begomovirus genus that includes nearly 300 viral species, the information and
resources generated could also provide new insight into how other begomoviruses
can be adapted as viral vectors for transient gene editing systems, potentially
extending the technology to many important crop species in addition to cassava.

This project will develop a new approach using viral vectors to express targeted
nucleases to introduce site-specific modifications into the cassava genome. The
system will use a viral vector based on a cassava geminivirus to express a
meganuclease designed to introduce mutations into the cassava gene encoding
phytoene desaturase (PDS), the first enzyme in the carotenoid biosynthetic
pathway. The bleached phenotype of a PDS mutant will be used to screen for gene
knockouts caused by the transient gene editing system and establish its
efficacy. The impact of several parameters, e.g. the inoculation method,
inoculation site, virus movement and cassava sequences that enhance infection,
on the efficiency of the system will be tested. Experiments will also
characterize progeny plants for the presence of mutant PDS sequences as well as
for viral and meganuclease sequences. These studies will indicate if vegetative
propagation of the inoculated cassava increases the efficiency of detecting a
site-specific mutation and if progeny plants do not retain viral or meganuclease
DNA.