* 1445946
* EAGER: Experimental Determination of Non-Evaporating Film Thickness in Pool Boiling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Shalabh Maroo, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2016
* USD 97,969.00

CBET-1445946&lt;br/&gt;Maroo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boiling is used in
domestic and industrial applications, ranging from residential refrigeration
systems to power generation systems such as boiling water reactors. For example,
about 90% of all electricity generation in the United States is by the use of
steam turbines, where a large percentage of systems generate the steam using
boilers. Due to its wide applicability, boiling has been researched for over
five decades to understand bubble dynamics and attain enhancements in heat
transfer; however, a complete knowledge of the bubble growth phenomenon is still
lacking. One of the key missing pieces is the nanoscale non-evaporating liquid
film (also known as the "adsorbed" film) widely theorized to exist at the base
of a bubble. This film is of critical importance in bubble dynamics as it can
sustain reduced/negative liquid pressure causing liquid to flow to the surface
for evaporation and bubble growth. The non-evaporating film has not yet been
directly measured in pool boiling experiments due to complexities associated
with its nanoscale thickness and fluidic nature in the turbulent boiling
process; the proposed research aims to overcome this
shortcoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to
perform in-situ measurements of the nanoscale non-evaporating film thickness in
pool boiling through the use of a novel interdisciplinary approach: application
of two independent free-space optical techniques, spectral reflectometry and
Michelson-interferometry, in pool boiling experiments of water. These high
resolution techniques will enable measurement of the non-evaporating film
thickness and its variation during a bubble's life-cycle in the isolated bubble
regime at low heat fluxes. The effect of increasing heat flux and surface
temperature on the film thickness will also be investigated. The experimental
determination of the non-evaporating film thickness will facilitate accurate
representation of the evaporation characteristics of the microlayer (region
where the film is present) and its contribution to bubble growth, compared to
current numerical simulations where the film is treated as a boundary condition
with an assumed constant thickness. This work can also act as a basis for
enhancing pool boiling heat transfer via novel surface modifications and other
techniques aimed at altering the non-evaporating film and contact line region.
The proposed research will enable new course materials and lab demonstrations to
give students first-hand experience in interdisciplinary visualization
techniques. Undergraduate students will also be actively engaged in the proposed
research.