* 1445104
* Learning and Sharing the World Best Practices in Math Education:  The U.S. National Commission on Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 455,115.00

To prepare the country's youth more broadly for a globalized world, the U.S.
National Commission on Mathematics Instruction (USNCMI) will engage with the
international community and assist in improving the state of mathematics
education in the country by implementing international education programs,
participating in international benchmarking activities, and working closely with
other countries and multilateral organizations. As a commission of the Board of
International Scientific Organizations, the USNCMI serves as the liaison to the
International Commission on Mathematical Instruction (ICMI), representing the
U.S. mathematics education community abroad while learning about the world's
best mathematics educational practices. Through a series of local and
international activities over the course of three years, the USNCMI will achieve
the following goals: (1) advance the U.S. position in the international
mathematics education community through continued engagement, leveraging the
U.S. strength in research; (2) create opportunities for educators in the U.S. to
learn from promising practices in other countries and engage with mathematics
educators internationally; and, (3) communicate findings from Goals 1 and 2 to
the mathematics education community and policymakers in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USNCMI provides the vehicle through which the
U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) reaches out to, and coordinates
international activities with, the U.S. mathematics education community.
Further, it takes advantage of the NAS network to disseminate its national and
international interests, activities, and products. The USNCMI will continue to
provide effective international representation and participation in meetings
that involve learning and sharing the world's best practices in mathematics
education. The primary activities of the USNCMI over the next three years are as
follows: (1) Participate in ICMI leadership meetings, which provide vision and
mission for fostering efforts to improve the quality of mathematics teaching and
learning worldwide; (2) Participate in the influential ICMI Studies, which is a
document that addresses how to better understand and resolve the challenges that
face multidisciplinary and culturally diverse research and development in
mathematics education; (3) Provide support for a strong U.S. representation at
the next ICMI Congress (ICME-13) and the General Assembly in 2016, which foster
collaboration, exchange, and dissemination of ideas and information involving
the theory and practice of contemporary mathematical education; (4) Support the
U.S. bid to host ICME-14 in Hawaii in 2020, an international meeting that
develops a scientific program addressing various aspects of mathematics
education; (5) Host and facilitate the U.S.-Finland Workshop, which will discuss
current mathematics education policies and best practices in the U.S. and
Finland; (6) Hold the Park City Mathematics Institute International Seminar,
which invites scholars from different countries to discuss viewpoints and other
relevant issues related to mathematics education; and, (7) Disseminate
opportunities and products of the USNCMI and ICMI to the U.S. mathematics
education community.