* 1445442
* Conference Support for the Second International Workshop on Nano-Micro Thermal Radiation (NanoRad2014), June 6-9, 2014 in Shanghai, China
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2015
* USD 6,000.00

CBET-1445442 Zhang

This proposal requests support for several junior faculty members, a graduate
student, and a plenary speaker attending the conference. The conference is
scheduled to be held June 6-9, 2014 in Shanghai, China. The main objective of
this proposal is to support participation at the Conference Support for the
Second International Workshop on Nano-Micro Thermal Radiation. The workshop will
bring together experts in thermal radiative transfer worldwide along with young
researchers and students for close interactions and discussions. A short course
will be offered in conjunction with the workshop. Young scholars and graduate
students attending this course will gain a better understanding of the
fundamentals as well as deep appreciation of the current research trends in this
field.

Nano-microscale thermal radiation has important applications in energy
harvesting such as solar cells and thermophotovoltaics, nanomanufacturing,
biomedical sensing, and thermal imaging and locating heating below the
diffraction limit. Radiative heat transfer can be greatly enhanced at nanometer
distances due to photon tunneling and the excitation of surface plasmon (or
phonon) polaritons. Furthermore, the performance of various devices can be
greatly enhanced by the modification of the reflection, transmission, absorption
and emission spectra using one-, two-, or three-dimensional
micro/nanostructures.

This workshop will bring together experts, researchers, and students from around
the world for an open exchange of research ideas, recent findings and
discoveries, and future outlooks in Nano and Micro Thermal Radiation. This event
will provide a forum to facilitate international collaboration and promote joint
efforts in this multidisciplinary area. Abstracts and PowerPoint slides from the
workshop will available to the participants. The most recent progress and
development results will be published in a special issue of JQSRT following the
workshop.