* 1445363
* I-Corps:  Innovation Corps Team: Commercial feasibility of a novel strategy for protein purification development
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Purification is an essential early step in any studies of protein structure and
function. Devising a protein purification strategy is typically the most
significant bottleneck in all such studies, because the number of possible ways
to purify a protein is essentially infinite. The routes to a suitable solution
are entirely empirical and require time-consuming trial-and-error approaches by
expert operators with specialized equipment. The most common go-around approach
today is to fuse the protein of interest to a tag that facilitates purification,
but tags can be difficult to remove and can compromise protein properties.
Direct purification of the protein in its native condition is considered the
gold standard for structure/function studies. This team has developed a method
to circumvent current limitations in devising protein purification strategies
that can be developed as a marketable product for non-expert
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of tagged or fusion proteins to facilitate
purification is a recognized cause of artifacts due to perturbation of protein
properties. Devising a purification strategy for untagged proteins presently
requires empirical optimization by expert users with specialized equipment. End-
users of pure proteins today are not always trained in chromatographic
principles that would enable devising optimized purification strategies. Even
for proteins with established purification schemes, minor mutational changes
commonly used to probe protein function may so drastically alter properties as
to make previous purification strategies useless. The proposed approach for
devising optimized protein strategies for purification of non-tagged proteins
represents the transfer of knowledge from basic research on protein purification
and characterization to practical applications in science and technology.