* 1445357
* Galaxies at Redshifts z~2: The Apex of Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 12/31/2013,02/28/2017
* Desika Narayanan, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2017
* USD 541,076.00

The Principal Investigator and collaborators in this project will combine three
sophisticated computer codes in order to simulate the properties of galaxies at
redshifts around 2 (approximately 10 billion years ago). These codes are (1)
Arepo, an unstructured-adaptive-mesh hydrodynamics code based on Voronoi
tessellations; (2) Sunrise, a Monte Carlo radiative transfer code that
calculates spectral energy distributions from ultraviolet to millimeter
wavelengths for galaxies with stellar and nonthermal sources modulated by
scattering and absorption; and (3) Turtlebeach, a similar radiative transfer
code that calculates molecular spectral line emission. The team will use these
coupled codes to create a library of hydrodynamic simulations of isolated,
evolving, and merging galaxies. They will then fold the resulting models through
estimates of cosmological merger rates and merging histories obtained through
semi-analytic and numerical methods. This strategy will make it possible to
connect physical mechanisms operating on scales of tens of parsecs to
observations from large-scale galaxy surveys. The goals of the project are (1)
to construct a physically motivated unified model for the diverse "zoo" of high
redshift galaxies, including galaxy populations expected to be discovered in
deep surveys by the Atacama Large Millimeter Array, the James Webb Space
Telescope, and the Herschel Space Telescope; (2) to assess the cosmological
significance of the various high redshift galaxy populations, and determine the
dominant contributors to cosmic stellar mass assembly and the far infrared
background; and (3) to develop tools for observers based on a physical
understanding of high-redshift galaxies and a critical assessment of the
applicability of locally-calibrated diagnostics. The project will support a
postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student, who will be mentored and trained
by the Principal Investigator. The proposers will make public for the community
expected luminosity functions for ALMA, JWST and Herschel deep fields in advance
of these surveys. They will also conduct a series of 1-hour lectures as part of
a continuing education program for senior citizens.