* 1445719
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID:  Testing High Temperature Subseafloor Tracers and Optical Communication Networks at Axial Seamount Using Deep Submergence Vehicle Alvin
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Cody Youngbull, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2015
* USD 106,650.00

This RAPID project involves two different components. The first component
relates to a novel, high-temperature glass material which is being developed for
future use as a subsurface fluid flow tracer. The second component further
develops a new approach to high-speed underwater sensing and wireless
communications networks. Both project components are ambitious experiments that
progress the NSF mission by providing foundational engineering research with the
long-term potential to transform our approach to ocean science, education and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the first component is to test the
stability of a new type of non-toxic, chemically-inert fluorescent glass in
hydrothermal vent fluid. If the material can withstand the complex chemical
environment of high-temperature vent fluid for an extended duration, it could
potentially be used as a tracer for mapping subsurface fluid flow in the future.
Such tracer studies will help to address some of the most difficult but
fundamental questions we have about the Earth, including: How deep within the
Earth does life live? What limits the growth of life in these extreme
environments? How large is the subseafloor biosphere, and what role does it play
in the carbon cycle? We will test this inert non-toxic material by attaching it
to temperature probes and placing the probes in direct contact with high-
temperature hydrothermal fluid for 2-3 weeks. We will examine the material
before and after vent fluid exposure using fluorescence microscopy, and evaluate
any changes in its physical and optical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the second component is to characterize the range and stability of an
optical multi hop sensor network. Sensor networks employ a spatially distributed
array of communicating nodes, in which each node collects and transmits data to
its neighbors in a web-like fashion. Sensor networks allow scientists to monitor
dynamic phenomena over an extended area simultaneously. Optical multi-hop
networks will form an important part of the communication backbone for
distributed, underwater sensor data collection to help monitor ocean fine-scale
phenomena. Such networks can be joined by passing ROVs, AUVs, or other sensors
(like those used to monitor the tracers described above) to relay data to each
other or onto a cabled observatory or surface buoy for real-time reporting. On
this cruise, we will test two optical modem modules deployed multiple times at
varying distances apart along a cable. The data will be statistically combined
in order to model and plan for future sensor network missions.