* 1445755
* CIRCLE: Catalyzing and Integrating Research, Collaboration, and Learning in Computing, Mathematics, and their Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2022
* Rebecca Wright, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,199,934.00

The DIMACS Project on Catalyzing and Integrating Research, Collaboration, and
Learning in Computing, Mathematics, and their Applications provides a resource
for a large community of researchers and educators in computer science and
related mathematical and statistical areas as well as their collaborators in
fields such as biology, chemistry, physics, engineering, public health,
business, and the social sciences. The project enhances and encourages programs
that emphasize fundamental methods and theory to advance computer science and
related mathematics while also encouraging their application in areas with the
potential to impact the infrastructure and resources society depends on,
including healthcare, environmental sustainability, homeland security,
information security, energy, and business. The project also reflects the
importance of education at DIMACS and works to build and support communities
that facilitate entry into and promote retention and success in computing
disciplines. This award partially supports the DIMACS Center infrastructure
required to achieve project goals. The programs enabled by the infrastructure
this project supports will directly reach an estimate of roughly 2000 people
each year, and through them, many others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research programs
enabled by the project are organized around special focus programs consisting of
workshops, research workshop groups, tutorials, and a visitor program, on topics
including Cybersecurity; Information Sharing and Dynamic Data Analysis;
Algorithms and Energy; Sustainability; Theoretical Foundations and Scalability
of Machine Learning; Health and Medical Informatics; Cryptography; and Analytics
of Preference, Opinion, Recommendation, and Comparison. Educational programs
integrate research and education across levels from precollege through
postdoctoral via activities including an extensive Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program; a Reconnect program run at satellite locations around
the country for 2-year and 4-year college faculty highlighting recent research
topics relevant to the classroom; a year-round program of workshops for middle
and high school teachers; and development of classroom materials in areas
including bio-mathematics, computational thinking, and planning for
sustainability. Connections with researchers in education enhance understanding
of the cognitive mechanisms at play when students master computational thinking
skills, allowing creation of research-informed materials that facilitate
teaching and enhance learning. Several DIMACS programs use multi-layer mentoring
models for providing mentoring to students while instilling in them the capacity
to mentor, both enhancing their own skills and serving to build excitement for
computing and computing-related careers in the next generation.