* 1445496
* Collaborative Research: CubeSat: Observing Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flash (TGF) Beams With A Pair Of CubeSats
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2023
* Peter Jenke, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2023
* USD 457,629.00

This project is to design, develop, construct, operate and analyze the results
of a dual spacecraft CubeSat mission named "Terrestrial RaYs Analysis and
Detection" (TRYAD). The purpose of TRYAD is to help solve the mystery of a
phenomenon that's linked with lightning: terrestrial gamma rays, or TGFs. Bursts
of gamma rays usually occur far out in space, near black holes and other high-
energy cosmic phenomena. Scientists were surprised when, in the mid-1990s, they
found strong gamma-ray flashes happening in the skies over Earth. Powerful
natural particle accelerators in the atmosphere are involved in creating
lightning but the exact process is not yet known. TGFs result from this particle
acceleration. The specific objective of TRYAD is to observe TGFs from two
separate points within their beams. All other existing and planned TGF
observations are single-point. With a pair of CubeSats, therefore, TRYAD will
make unique, first-of-its-kind TGF observations that are crucial for being able
to distinguish between several existing models for the acceleration process that
is a key part of lightning. In this way, the project will help advance the
fundamental understanding of this intriguing and important phenomenon in the
Earth atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its impact on lightening physics,
TRYAD will pursue extensive hands-on learning and training objectives for
undergraduate students at both Auburn University and University of Alabama in
Huntsville. Building on the experiences from the successful, established CubeSat
program at AU, the Auburn University Student Space Program (AUSSP), most of the
tasks throughout the project will be carried out by student teams under the
expert supervision of teams of professors at both institutions. Further, the
project will be supported through for-credit classes at both universities.
Students from outside AU and UAH will be offered an opportunity to participate
via UAH?s existing Heliophysics Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program. Likewise, CubeSat and TGF-related activities will be included in
the annual Summer Student Institute for High School Students at AU, which is an
effective way to attract high-achieving students into the program. The new,
largely unproven technology involved in cubesat missions, inherently makes the
project associated with significant risks. On the other hand, the project has
tremendous potential to be transformational not only within its own research
area of lightening physics but also for the larger field of space science and
atmospheric research as well as within aerospace engineering and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the TYRAD Mission is to measure the beam
profiles and tilts of TGFs in order to distinguish between various classes of
TGF initiation models. The results will advance our understanding of the
physical process involved in TGF particle acceleration as well as of the
thunderstorm electric fields. A pair of 3U CubeSats separated by several hundred
km in low Earth orbit will provide the measurements. TRYAD is a focused mission
that maximizes the gamma-ray sensitivity by carrying only gamma-ray detectors.
Control of the satellite separation is essential to the success of the mission
and this is achieved by using ionospheric differential drag on the two
satellites, actively changed through modifying the orientation of the deployed
solar panels.