* 1445576
* CAREER:   Investigating the evolution of gene regulation at Drosophila Hox genes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Robert Drewell, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2017
* USD 212,088.00

A key issue in modern biology is to understand how the complex development of an
organism is regulated at the molecular level. The model fruit fly system
(Drosophila melanogaster) studied in Dr. Drewell's laboratory is particularly
well suited to this type of research. In the last decade a number of Drosophila
genomes have been completely sequenced, allowing us to begin analyzing the
function and evolution of genetic regulatory regions. The experiments in this
project will use a combination of molecular, genetic and computational
approaches to examine the interacting network of DNA regulatory sequences at
critical developmental genes, the Hox genes. As the correct pattern of
expression of the Hox genes is essential for the control of cell identities in
the developing embryo in all animals, the results will have very broad
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Drewell is an investigator at Harvey Mudd
College (HMC). This project will build on the strong tradition of excellence in
undergraduate research and education at HMC. Active engagement of undergraduates
in research will be an integral part of the success of this project. Special
attention will continue to be given to recruiting female, minority and first-
generation college student researchers, who are currently highly represented in
Dr. Drewell's laboratory. An additional major goal is to develop courses and
tools for biology education by synthesizing a strong interdisciplinary
curriculum in molecular and developmental biology, genetics and evolution in the
Biology department at HMC.