* 1445926
* CAREER: Time-Resolved Structure-Property Relationships in Piezoelectric Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/26/2014,07/31/2016
* Jacob Jones, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 120,405.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Piezoelectric ceramics can couple electrical and
mechanical energy, enabling us to sense and interact with our environment in
multiple ways. Examples of devices utilizing piezoelectric ceramics include
diagnostic and therapeutic ultrasound, sonar, vibration and position sensing,
large-displacement actuation, micro-technologies including micro-positioning,
and renewable power generation or energy harvesting. Many of these applications
often function under dynamic conditions and although material properties can
currently be measured under these conditions, time-resolved structural
characterization techniques do not yet exist that can characterize the
structural state of materials as a function of time during dynamic loading. This
program will develop time-resolved X-ray diffraction techniques using both local
instrumentation and through access to international synchrotron diffraction
facilities and apply these tools to develop a more fundamental understanding of
the time-dependent structural behavior of piezoelectric ceramics. This program
will lead to an entirely new way of reconciling macroscopic properties in terms
of structural dynamics in the time and frequency domains and has application in
numerous other material systems. In piezoelectric ceramics, this framework will
promote the development of lead-free, high-temperature, and multiferroic sensors
and actuators. A primary educational component of this program is the
development of international partnerships and the provision of international
research experiences for students. This program will enable students to perform
hands-on research at top-tier research institutions in Europe. These experiences
will foster an awareness and appreciation for diversity of cultural and
educational background, experience, and intellectual approach. Another
significant educational component of this proposal is the development of in-
house instrumentation for time-resolved structural studies at the University of
Florida. The development of in-house instrumentation in a multi-user facility
will enhance regional infrastructure for research and education and promote the
development and dissemination of next-generation instrumentation. Hands-on
modules will be developed for the in-house instrumentation to help teach
undergraduate ceramics laboratories, core and specialty undergraduate courses,
and graduate courses. Versatile software tools for the systematic and consistent
analysis of diffraction datasets will also be developed and disseminated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Materials scientists often describe the
macroscopic behavior of materials in terms of microscopic origins through
structure-property relationships. For macroscopic properties measured under
dynamic perturbation, the development of such linkages is particularly difficult
due to the lack of time-resolved structural characterization techniques. The
primary goal of this program is to establish a new framework in which to
investigate the relationship between structure and macroscopic properties of
piezoelectric ceramics in the time domain. This will be accomplished by
developing time-resolved stroboscopic data collection techniques during X-ray
diffraction of bulk piezoelectric ceramics. The established framework will then
be used to enhance the fundamental understanding of hysteresis, nonlinearity,
and frequency dispersion in a variety of piezoelectric ceramic systems. For
example, time-resolved techniques will enable a quantitative determination of
the role of extrinsic mechanisms such as domain wall and interphase boundary
motion on macroscopic properties. Ultimately, this will lead to an enhanced
understanding of the origin of the macroscopic electromechanical behavior and
its frequency and time dependence in polycrystalline piezoelectric ceramics.
Throughout the course of the program, students will travel to the European
Synchrotron Radiation Facility and the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
to work with leading scientists while conducting high-energy X-ray diffraction
experiments and complementary property measurements.