* 1445960
* NUE: Sustainable Nanotechnology Education for Undergraduate Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Hillary Hart, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 199,997.00

The goal of this NUE program, Sustainable Nanotechnology Education for
Undergraduate Engineering Students, under the direction of Dr. Navid Saleh, is
to develop two technical electives, a theory-based course and a laboratory
course, with integrated social and ethical aspects utilizing metacognitive
pedagogical strategies. In addition, a workshop involving experts experienced
with real-life decision-making in nanotechnology development will support the
courses three goals: introduce nanoscale concepts and sustainability principles
to engineering students; integrate social and ethical aspects in the context of
nanomaterial sustainability; and enhance core knowledge by infusing critical
thinking with the hands-on PBL-based modules in laboratory sessions. The
proposed courses and workshop will be novel in four aspects: their metacognitive
teaching style; the integration of ethical and societal aspects with the
technical content; the integration of sustainability with nanotechnology; and
emphasis on safe and sustainable nanomaterial design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) calls for nano-education in the context
of real-life implications. There is a critical need to introduce nanoscale
principles to undergraduate students so that these future engineers will
consider sustainability and safety of this emerging technology at the outset.
Often, nanomaterial design is disconnected from its safety and sustainability
concerns. Students suffer from this and extend it to real-world practice.
However, educating students in nanotechnology with integrated societal
components challenges traditional pedagogical structure. Problem-based learning
(PBL) is one approach that can confront such challenges, where the fundamental
nanoscale concepts can be taught in an inquiry-based setting. This program
addresses these challenges by integrating societal and ethical aspects with
technical nanoscale phenomena, utilizing an interactive PBL approach under a
theme of sustainable nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will be a
true collaboration among researchers and educators of engineering,
sustainability, ethics, and communication, and the merging of these disciplines
into the proposed courses will provide a novel experience for undergraduates. It
is projected that 60-100 students will be impacted by the courses during the two
year project.