* 1445834
* CAREER: Small Grazers, Multiple Stressors and the Proliferation of Fungal Disease in Marine Plant Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Brian Silliman, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2017
* USD 342,201.00

In terrestrial communities, grazer-facilitation of fungal disease in plants has
been studied for over a century. Despite the prevalence of this interaction in
terrestrial systems, it was not considered relevant to the structure of marine
plant communities until the investigator's recent work in salt marshes. By
manipulating both grazer and fungal presence, he demonstrated that snail grazing
and subsequent fungal infection in live grass led to drastic reductions in plant
growth and, at high grazer densities, destruction of canopy. If grazer promotion
of fungal disease in marine plants is not limited to marshes (as suggested by
preliminary data from a world-wide survey of 4 marine plant ecosystems) then
small grazers that take small bites out of plants could be exerting similarly
strong, but undetected control over marine plants globally. In addition, since
physical stress commonly reduces plant immune responses, intensifying multiple
stressors associated with marine global change could intensify and destabilize
these unstudied grazer-disease-plant interactions. To test the global generality
of this potentially keystone ecological interaction, this project will answer
the following questions with a combination of multi-site surveys and
manipulations across 4 ecosystems spanning 2 continents: 1) Is grazer
facilitation of fungal disease in marine plants a common but overlooked
interaction? 2) What is the resultant impact of grazer-facilitated fungal
infection on marine plant growth? 3) How do multiple stressors impact the
strength of grazer facilitation of fungal disease in marine plants? The work
represents a transformative step forward in our understanding of plant-grazer
interactions in marine ecosystems as it fills a &gt; 100-year intellectual gap
in our understanding of top-down control in marine plant ecosystems: Do small
grazers commonly facilitate fungal disease in marine plants and does this
interaction suppress plant growth?&lt;br/&gt;Evidence for this cryptic, yet
powerful mechanism of grazer regulation of marine plants will compel marine
ecologists to reevaluate our understanding of top-down control and lead to
widespread integration of disease dynamics in marine food web
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consequences of marine plant ecosystem health
are far-reaching for humans, since these communities provide many essential
services. Results from this study will allow managers to better predict effects
of disease and global change on marine plant systems and formulate effective
strategies for conservation. To help integrate plant disease dynamics into
marine ecology and conservation, the investigator will: (1) produce an edited
volume on Food Webs and Disease in Marine Ecosystems and (2) work closely with
The Nature Conservancy to incorporate findings into their global marine learning
exchanges. In addition, an integrated educational plan will increase student:
(1) understanding of disease and food web dynamics in marine ecosystems and (2)
consideration of marine science careers. This goal will be accomplished through
class development and early student exposure to field-based learning and
independent research. Over the past 3 years, the investigator has organized a
successful undergraduate marine field course at UF. He will enhance its
curriculum by incorporating new lectures and laboratories based on food web
disease-plant interactions. He will expand this integrated educational effort to
high school students by engaging students that are excelling (boy scouts) and
at-risk (low grades, attendance) in hands-on, field science and potential career
opportunities through: 1) a two-week field class with integrated web support, 2)
mentored summer research on marine plant disease and 3) presentation of results
at the Marine Symposium initiated at UF in 2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
for this project was provided by the Biological Oceanography Program, Ocean
Science Education Program, and Office of International Science and Engineering
Americas Program.