* 1445522
* An Exploration of the Alignment of SLDS Infrastructure and Data Highway To Relevant Success Indicators in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ellen Mandinach, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,694.00

This project will examine the potential of data collected by the State
Longitudinal Data Systems (SLDS) as a way to reflect national trends-and yet
still address state information needs for which each system was designed. This
project will examine the feasibility of how the SLDS infrastructure might be
used to collect some of the data elements related to the STEM indicators
proposed by the National Research Council in the report on Monitoring Progress
Toward Successful K-12 Education: A Nation Advancing? The project explores the
leverage points for action like the NCES Forum that can stimulate policy change
in the data collections. Revisions designed to improve the data for national use
will be weighed in terms of data quality as well as usefulness, timeliness, and
burden forcing trade-offs and definition of needed supports. In addition, should
an outcome be that the SLDS infrastructure cannot support some of the
indicators, policymakers and other stakeholders will have clearer information
about the need to establish other means. The outcome of the project will be a
report, both across and within states, on the extent to which the SLDS
infrastructure and data highway have the capacity to address the STEM indictors,
focusing on a subset of 6 indicators that we think have the most potential. A
second outcome will be a small convening that will generate action steps of what
needs to be done and what might be done to plan for and implement future data
collections that will address the STEM indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on the intersection of STEM indicators and the data
infrastructure at the state level to address those indicators. Specifically, the
focus is the extent to which the infrastructure surrounding the SLDSs data
highway can support the data needed to address the STEM indicators. State data
systems are considerably more robust than 10 or even five years ago. Each state
has now developed a SLDS containing hundreds, if not thousands of data elements
disaggregated to the school level. Some of these data are required by the
federal government and appear in the federal EDFacts system. Other data elements
are unique to the specific states. The project will obtain data dictionaries
from states and EDFacts and use them as a foundation with National Center for
Education Statistics, STEM experts, and SLDS officials to determine how existing
state data collections could address any of indicators, beginning with a subset
that experts say a best aligned to SLDS current and future data collections and
what revisions to the state systems would be necessary. The project has
identified Indicators 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 8 as having the most potential. An
outcome will be a set of recommendations and action steps as well as a
statement, from states and others, of what role the NCES Forum and other
supports might play in leveraging for the needed modifications to state data
collections.