* 1445076
* Transforming Engineering Culture to Advance Inclusion and Diversity
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Klod Kokini, Wepan Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,181,416.00

This engineering education research project focuses on implementing an
intensive, two year department level leadership development initiative for five
selected mechanical engineering department leadership teams. TECAID -
Transforming Engineering Culture to Advance Inclusion and Diversity has an
overall goal to build the capacity of the department leadership to create,
develop and sustain an inclusive department culture. Three specific professional
development areas are targeted; change leadership, engineering culture and
inclusive pedagogies. Change leadership will provide the ME leadership teams
with the skill set necessary to effect change at either the individual or
department level. Engineering culture refers to the intellectual, social,
emotional and physical environments where our students learn. Inclusive
pedagogies means utilizing instructional practices that improve student learning
such as inquiry based learning, cooperative learning and use of student
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise is that the cultural environment within
engineering departments is inhibiting the success of many students, particularly
underrepresented students. The literature supporting this research indicates
that this project will result in improved engagement, learning and social
experiences for all engineering students, both majority students and those that
are traditionally underrepresented in engineering. The project will utilize
surveys to evaluate the existing department climate. The PIs will select five
mechanical engineering departments to participate in this study, ensuring a wide
variety of department types and sizes. Leadership teams from each department
will participate in intensive professional development workshops and a
facilitated virtual learning community enabling them to create and sustain
inclusive, learner-centered environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance and importance of this project is in its ability to positively
impact department culture resulting in an educational environment that welcomes
all students, particularly those from underrepresented groups. The project will
utilize evidenced based interventions to effect a positive organizational
change, increasing the awareness of factors that negatively impact students and
changing the classroom environment to facilitate improved student learning. This
project also represents a unique partnership with ASME, the mechanical
engineering disciplinary society, which has great potential to substantially
increase the reach and impact of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of reaching across society to ensure that
the rich diversity of the nation's cultures is well represented in the STEM
workforce and that individuals engaged in STEM fields are trained to participate
fully in the global research enterprise. The creation of an environment that
implements inclusive educational pedagogies will enhance learning for all
students, facilitating equal participation of underrepresented students and
contributing to broadening participation within the engineering workforce.