* 1445404
* Collaborative Research: Improved Cenozoic Paleoelevation Estimates for the Sierra Nevada, California: Linking Geodynamics and the Atmospheric Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Matthew Huber, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2016
* USD 125,911.00

How long have California's Sierra Nevada Mountains been high? This question is
one of the most persistent challenges in unraveling the geological history of
North America. Many studies argue that the Sierra Nevada reached high elevation
by the Late Cretaceous (about 65 to 100 million years ago) and experienced
subsequent limited surface elevation increases. An opposing array of studies
argue that the Eocene (about 35 to 55 million years ago) Sierra Nevada had low
elevation and weak relief and that a post-Eocene pulse of surface uplift linked
to the Pliocene delamination of a crustal root led to the modern elevation of
the range. These divergent views embody fundamentally different theories of
North American tectonic evolution. The primary sources of evidence for the
interpretation that the Sierra Nevada have been a region of persistent high
topography since the Eocene are stable isotope and leaf-shape paleoaltimetry
techniques. However, a series of recent atmospheric dynamics studies challenge
these interpretations. These studies show that current frameworks for
interpreting proxy records of precipitation isotopic ratios are based on
assumptions about the atmosphere that are not generally valid for the Sierra
Nevada or that do not take proper account of paleoclimate variation. The goal of
this project is to merge the latest methods from geodynamical studies,
atmospheric dynamics, and paleoclimate modeling, to substantially improve
interpretations of paleoaltimetric data from the Sierra Nevada and thereby
advance understanding of the surface elevation history of the range. The project
will rigorously evaluate air parcel trajectories around the Sierra Nevada and
associated precipitation isotopic and enthalpy distributions for a range of
atmospheric conditions. These will be derived from suites of water-isotope
enabled atmospheric General Circulation Model simulations of paleoclimate
scenarios from the Eocene through the present, and for a range of proposed
topographic settings for western North America over that interval. The result
will be improved quantitative constraints on the topography of the Sierra Nevada
throughout the Cenozoic and in particular on the potential for Late Cenozoic
surface uplift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is a new,
interdisciplinary approach to tectonics that leverages modern atmospheric
modeling techniques and applies them to one of the most persistent problems in
geology, the surface uplift history of the Sierra Nevada. While the approach
draws on dynamical meteorology and isotope geochemistry techniques, the results
will directly impact our understanding of the geological evolution of North
America. A suite of new techniques for interpreting paleoaltimetry proxy records
that will be of use in a wide range of settings around the world will be
developed. Once proven in the limited context of the Sierra Nevada, these
techniques can be applied to other regions and time intervals to better
interpret uplift histories and disentangle the mixed elevation/climate signals
in paleoclimate records. The results of this study will be of interest to the
atmospheric sciences community because it will advance our knowledge of static
stability in several paleoclimate scenarios and will elucidate the nonlinear
interactions between topography and climate. This study will thus have important
implications for both the solid earth and climate change communities.