* 1445618
* Assessing the Use of Licensure Tests as an Indicator of Teachers? Science and Mathematics Content Knowledge for Teaching
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Dan Goldhaber, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca A. Kruse
* 10/31/2015
* USD 283,715.00

The National Research Council in 2013 released the report Monitoring Progress
toward Successful K-12 STEM Education: A Nation Advancing?, which outlined 14
Indicators as well as the needed research and development to create a system to
monitor the quality of STEM education in the nation. This project is funded in
response to a Dear Colleague Letter request for research in the Promoting
Innovation in Measurement and Evaluation program focused on developing research
and tools to advance the nation's capability to measure these indicators. The
researchers in this project will address Indicator 6: Teachers' science and
mathematics content knowledge for teaching. The project is investigating the
extent to which teachers' scores on the Washington State Educator Skills Basic
and Endorsement tests are predictive of students' scores on mathematics and
science achievement tests. The findings from this study will inform the validity
of the use of licensure tests as one indicator of teacher quality as part of a
system of measures for Indicator 6.

The researchers in this study will be using data from the Washington Educator
Skills Tests, collected over the past ten years for the Basic test and the past
four years for the Endorsement tests. Data from secondary school teachers will
be compared to student scores in middle school mathematics, high school Algebra,
high school Geometry and high school Biology. Standard value-added methodology
will be used to generate a within-subject estimate of the predictive validity of
the licensure tests. Findings from this study, either positive or negative, will
provide evidence of the validity of use of teacher licensing exams as part of an
indicator system to determine teacher science and mathematics content knowledge
for teaching.