* 1445869
* Fifth International Conference on Porous Media and its Applications in Science, Engineering and Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Kambiz Vafai, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

CBET-1445869&lt;br/&gt;Vafai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The workshop requests travel
costs to host a workshop titled "Recent Advances in Porous Media Research and
its Future Implications" in the Fifth International Conference on Porous Media
and its Applications in Science, Engineering and Industry to be held in Kona,
Hawaii from June 22-27, 2014. Fluid transport and heat transport in porous media
have led to hugely significant advances in thermal insulation, geothermal
energy, electronics cooling, biotechnology, environmental protection, energy
resources, and food supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
convene world experts in various aspects of the field of Porous Media.The
experts in the field will convene in an ideal setting and discuss the state of
the art and various controversial and emerging issues in the field. The results
of these in depth discussions should be very helpful to both the experts as well
as the researchers in the field. This workshop provides an opportunity for
researchers from a number of fields and from around the world to share the
latest developments related to porous media and to identify future research
directions. A review article based on this workshop will be published in one of
the leading journals related to Recent Advances in Porous Media Research and its
Future Implications.