* 1445823
* High-Performance &amp; Distributed Computing for Polar Sciences: Workshop on Applications, Cyberinfrastructure Requirements and Opportunities
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,990.00

High-Performance and Distributed Computing (HPDC) has made significant impact in
simulation and modeling of many domains, ranging from
understanding&lt;br/&gt;fundamental physical processes to designing new and
functional materials. With the growing richness of capabilities, increased ease
of access and availability of high-performance and distributed computing
resources, the opportunity to employ such resources to novel problems types and
domains arises. The aim of the proposed workshop is to bring the HPDC and the
Polar Science communities together to collectively explore, examine and identify
the opportunities and barriers in the use of high performing computing
techniques and resources for polar science studies. The workshop has the
potential to bring advantages to both fields, where NSF has been investing
considerable resources over the past years. Outcomes from the workshop will
benefit science and society through the laying of the foundation for
collaborative efforts aiming at improving the understanding of the variability
of the polar regions at different timescales, and their connection to climate
and other Earth systems. Moreover, it will contribute to the building of a polar
cyberinfrastructure, one of the goals of the Polar Cyberinfrastructure Program
at the National Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held at the
Rutgers Climate Institute and will host approximately 40 participants, lasting
two and a half days, at the end of October or early November. A broad group of
scientists from the polar science and HPDC communities, both broadly defined,
will be engaged as members of the organizing committee to identify major
challenges, opportunities and questions such as: What HPDC/CI support is already
available to the Polar Science community? What HPDC/CI capabilities are missing?
Unsatisfactory? Insufficient or Incomplete? What are the cyberinfrastructure
barriers beyond availability that limits further advancing Polar Science? The
workshop participants will be also asked to create a ranked list of scientific
challenges that the community aims to tackle on a 1-year, 5-year and a decadal
time frame. The final outcome of the workshop will be a report that defines and
conveys a community-based vision for the Polar Cyberinfrastructure Program at
the National Science Foundation.