* 1445176
* The Centrality of Advanced Digitally ENabled Science: CADENS
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Donna Cox, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,799,376.00

Computational data science is at a turning point in its history. Never before
has there been such a challenge to meet the growing demands of digital
computing, to fund infrastructure and attract diverse, trained personnel to the
field. The methods and technologies that define this evolving field are central
to modern science. In fact, advanced methods of computational and data-enabled
discovery have become so pervasive that they are referred to as paradigm shifts
in the conduct of science. A goal of this Project is to increase digital science
literacy and raise awareness about the Centrality of Advanced Digitally ENabled
Science (CADENS) in the discovery process. Digitally enabled scientific
investigations often result in a treasure trove of data used for analysis. This
project leverages these valuable resources to generate insightful visualizations
that provide the core of a series of science education outreach programs
targeted to the broad public, educational and professional communities. From the
deep well of discoveries generated at the frontiers of advanced digitally
enabled scientific investigation, this project will produce and disseminate a
body of data visualizations and scalable media products that demonstrate
advanced scientific methods. In the process, these outreach programs will give
audiences a whole new look at the world around them. The project calls for the
production and evaluation of two principal initiatives. The first initiative, HR
(high-resolution) Science, centers on the production and distribution of three
ultra-high-resolution digital films to be premiered at giant screen full-dome
theaters; these programs will be scaled for wide distribution to smaller
theaters and include supplemental educator guides. The second initiative,
Virtual Universe, includes a series of nine high-definition (HD) documentary
programs. Both initiatives will produce and feature data visualizations and the
CADENS narratives to support an integrated set of digital media products. The
packaged outreach programs will be promoted and made available to millions
through established global distribution channels. Expanding access to data
visualization is an essential component of the Project. Through a call for
participation (CFP), the Project provides new opportunities for researchers to
work with the project team and technical staff for the purpose of creating and
broadly distributing large-scale data visualizations in various formats and
resolutions. The project will feature these compelling, informative
visualizations in the outreach programs described above. A Science Advisory
Committee will participate in the CFP science selections and advise the Project
team. The project calls for an independent Program Evaluation and Assessment
Plan (PEAP) to iteratively review visualizations and the outreach programs that
will target broad, diverse audiences.

The project launches an expansive outreach effort to increase digital science
literacy and to convey forefront scientific research while expanding researchers
access to data visualization. The project leverages and integrates disparate
visualization efforts to create a new optimized large-scale workflow for high-
resolution museum displays and broad public venues. The PEAP evaluations will
measure progress toward project goals and will reveal new information about
visualization's effectiveness to move a field forward and to develop effective
outreach models. The project specifically targets broad audiences in places
where they seek high-quality encounters with science: at museums, universities,
K-16 schools, and the web. This distribution effort includes creating and widely
disseminating the project outreach programs and supplemental educator guides.
The project visualizations, program components, HD documentaries, educational
and evaluation materials will be promoted, distributed and made freely available
for academic, educational and promotional use. Dissemination strategies include
proactively distributing to rural portable theaters, 4K television, professional
associations, educators, decision-makers, and conferences. To help address the
critical challenge of attracting women and underrepresented minorities to STEM
fields, the Project will support a Broadening Participation in Visualization
workshop and will leverage successful XSEDE/Blue Waters mechanisms to recruit
under-represented faculty and students at minority-serving and majority-serving
institutions and to disseminate the Project programs and materials among diverse
institutions and communities.