* 1445381
* RAPID: Confirmation of Structural Dynamics Concepts for Urban Structures Subjected to Adjacent Construction Blasting
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Charles Dowding, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2016
* USD 23,997.00

This project provides supplementary instrumentation to advance the state-of-the-
art of construction blast vibration control, with the objective of reducing the
cost of constructing urban buildings and facilities. It leverages ongoing
measurements of building response to high frequency, blast induced excitation at
a construction site in New York City. The additional instruments will be used to
time correlate excitation and response motions, and to measure additional
responses not required by construction regulations. Measurements enabled by this
deployment of supplemental instruments will be used to test the hypothesis that
urban structures are not perturbed as greatly as typically assumed, and thus
vibration controls may be safely reduced. In dense urban areas old and modern
high-rise buildings can coexist on the same street block. Project owners and
contractors performing rock excavation are faced with restrictive vibration
limits targeted for older buildings designated as historic, "Landmark", or
fragile and in need of repair. For blasting projects, the presence of a single
building perceived as "vulnerable" to cosmetic cracking from vibrations can
severely restrict allowable vibration limits and constrain rock removal
efficiency, thereby lowering overall productivity and extending the duration of
the project. All of these negative construction consequences may unnecessarily
increase construction costs. The potential economic benefit is large. In New
York City alone over $17 billion in current transit projects involve
construction blasting for excavations and tunneling in
rock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time correlated rock excitation and structure
response measurements are needed to advance the understanding of the response of
urban structures to high frequency excitation. Time correlation of these
measurements along a structure will allow increased accuracy in the calculation
of building strains that are responsible for cosmetic cracking, the object of
control by regulation. Current regulations and understanding are based upon
measurements of the response of residential, 1 to 2 story single family
structures when subjected lower frequency excitation. Extension of these
observations by response spectrum analysis to taller structures when excited by
higher frequency ground motions needs to be validated. Excitation frequency and
strain based analytical techniques developed in Earthquake Engineering, Blast
Protective Design, and Structural Dynamics should be applicable to these urban
situations; however, validation by measurement has not occurred because of the
difficulty of finding full-scale test sites. This site and these instruments
provide that opportunity.