* 1445889
* Collaborative Research: Interannual and seasonal variability of snowpack in the Sierra Nevada from tree rings.
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Eylon Shamir, Hydrologic Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 351,379.00

Changing snowmelt patterns associated with climate variability pose challenges
to water resources management in river basins around the world. Hydrologic
models are useful to assess impacts of expected climate variability on snowmelt-
driven watersheds, but are hampered by limited data. Even in well-instrumented
basins data records on snow variables are too short to describe the long-term
variability of snow cover, snow depth, and snowmelt. Tree rings, with a long
history of application in hydrology, offer a solution to the data limitations.
Tree-ring properties, such as ring-width, wood density, and the anatomical
structure of cells, are sensitive to changes in hydrologic variables. Moreover
trees that can provide such data are often widely distributed over forested
watersheds, and the records they provide can extend from centuries to millennia.
This project is the first effort at assembling and interpreting a network of
tree-ring chronologies specifically for the purpose of studying snowmelt
properties and snowpack. The research is being conducted along the American
River, a vital source of water supply to the State of California. A goal of the
research is to develop transferrable, generally useful, research tools for
better understanding of snowmelt processes and their variability in space and
time. The scientific understanding of the spatiotemporal variability of the
hydrologic variables will benefit society through improvements in sustainable
water resources planning and watershed management practices. The research will
include field sampling and development of tree-ring chronologies and
reconstructions of snowpack-related variables. Resulting data will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education on hydroclimatic variability by
expanding the available palaeoclimatic data networks. The project includes
training of undergraduate and graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher.
In addition, it incorporates meetings with stakeholders to further the public
understanding of science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing snow-
accumulation and snowmelt regimes in recent decades pose an increasing challenge
to water resources management in the United States. Earlier melt and decreases
in accumulation have been linked to both increasing winter and spring
temperatures and an increasing fraction of precipitation falling as rain instead
of snow. The existing observational networks in many basins do not have the
spatiotemporal resolution to adequately characterize the variability of
parameters relevant to these changes. Specifically, for the western USA, the
intra-annual and spatial distribution of hydrological variables is poorly
understood, as existing in-situ observations in the mountains are scarce and of
short duration. The hypothesis of this interdisciplinary research is that key
hydrological characteristics of the Sierra Nevada such as snow pack properties,
precipitation, soil moisture and temperature can be constrained using the intra-
annual features of tree rings. In addition, basin scale characteristics such as
seasonal snow-line evolution and features of extreme events such as droughts can
be identified. The novelty of this research is identification of key
hydrological characteristics within a few days to weeks of occurrence. The
research will explore the use of intra-ring properties of tree rings from
multiple tree species and sites along an elevation transect in a snowmelt-driven
watershed with goals of (a) improving the representation and scaling of land
surface processes important to snowmelt processes in complex terrain, and (b)
developing a method to detect the spatial variability and seasonality of
evolving snowpack and soil moisture. The study basin is the North Fork of the
American River, which drains the western side of the Sierra Nevada Mountains,
California. Hydrometeorological variables will be derived for the sampling
locations by merging a dense observational network and state-of-the-art land-
surface model simulations. The cross association among hydrological variables
and tree ring indicators will enable a description of the seasonal evolution of
hydrological processes and provide for the development of proxy records that
describe the spatial variability of various snow pack features.