* 1445670
* Measuring Classroom Coverage of Content and Practices in the New Generation of Mathematics and Science Standards
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Brian Stecher, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 03/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The National Research Council in 2013 released the report Monitoring Progress
toward Successful K-12 STEM Education: A Nation Advancing? which outlined 14
Indicators as well as the needed research and development to create a system to
monitor the quality of STEM education in the nation. This project is funded in
response to a request for research in the Promoting Innovation in Measurement
and Evaluation program focused on developing research and tools to advance the
nation's capability to measure these indicators. The project will explore
existing measures from the social, behavioral, and educational sciences as well
as opportunities for developing new measures of Indicator 5, one of the highest
priority indicators listed in the report: student experience in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) classes that can be adopted on a
large scale to collect evidence about classroom coverage of mathematics and
science content and practices in standards for college and career readiness.
This project will contribute to advancing knowledge about STEM research and
education through building consensus among researchers and practitioners about
how to improve the measurement of students' exposure to mathematics and science
content and practices and providing concrete action steps to inform the
development of high-quality, usable indicators.&lt;br/&gt;Research activities
will be carried out in two stages. During Stage I, the project team will conduct
a review of existing measures of student experience in classrooms and innovative
data collection methods. Research methods used include literature review and
interviews with developers and subject-matter experts. Key deliverables from
Stage I are a draft research report and associated briefings about findings from
the reviews of literatures and proposed future plan and action steps to measure
instruction aligned with the college and career ready standards in mathematics
and science on a large scale. During Stage II, the research team will hold a one
and one-half day conference with experts and policymakers to collect feedback on
deliverables from Stage I activities and to address ways to adapt existing
measures or develop new measures to assess students' exposure to STEM content
and practices for use in a large-scale indicator system. A project website will
summarize project activities and serve as a repository for all project
documents, which will be made available for downloading free of charge.