* 1445821
* Workshop Support for Focused Technical Workshop on Improving Data Mobility &amp; Management for International Climate Science
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Jennifer Schopf, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2016
* USD 44,316.00

The Focused Technical Workshop on Improving Data Mobility &amp; Management for
International Climate Science (FTW for Climate Science) will enable an active
dialogue between climate scientists, climate data managers, and
cyberinfrastructure engineers with the goal of setting longer-term relationship
building in motion. The workshop also hopes to provide climate researchers with
information about a set of broad, concrete, and immediately useful tools and
resources for improved data transport and management. The FTW on Climate Science
is sponsored by ESnet, Internet2, Indiana University (IU), National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) and will be hosted at the NOAA Boulder Labs, in Boulder, Colorado, in
July 2014.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together experts to
discuss recent research technology advances and research techniques in data
management for climate science. The format is being designed to encourage
lively, interactive discussions with the goal of developing a set of tangible
next steps for supporting this data-intensive science community. Participation
key stakeholders from multiple agencies and programs provides the climate
science community with the knowledge, tools, and partners necessary to improve
data transfer performance as data scale continues to increase. This has the
potential to have broad reaching effects in a science area that is critical to
society. By increasing performance to match increased data scale, scientific
productivity for this community is expected to increase. This workshop will
leverage existing NSF supported projects, including work with EarthCube.