* 1445649
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: A Seismic Reflection Survey to Assess the Deep Drilling Potential of Laguna de Tota, Colombia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Broxton Bird, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2016
* USD 53,151.00

The proposed work would conduct a detailed geophysical survey of the Laguna de
Tota, a large tectonic lake in the Eastern Cordillera of the Colombian Andes.
The survey would determine the thickness and layout of the bottom sediment
layers, and allow the researchers to better understand the type of materials
available for a possible later expedition to extract samples by drilling for
cores. The proposed geophysical work involves an international team of U.S. and
Colombian geoscientists, which will strengthen international collaboration and
provide training for U.S. and Colombian graduate students. Drs. Bird and Escobar
will engage local communities that rely on Tota's water resources by giving
lectures about the geophysical and drilling project at community centers. They
will also speak at Colombian universities to increase awareness about Andean
water resources and climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The location of the
lake is important, because as South America's third largest lake, it is well
removed to the North from the other two (Lakes Titicaca and Junin, in Bolivia
and Peru). A sediment core from the Laguna de Tota could potentially contain
climate data recording temperatures and lake process history over the last
several hundred thousand years, and include several glacial/inter-glacial
climate signals, including that of the South American Summer Monsoon, whose
details are poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a small, high-
resolution single-channel airgun seismic reflection system and a CHIRP sub-
bottom profiler the team would map Tota's bathymetry, determine the thickness of
lacustrine sedimentary sequences, locate depositional centers and identify lake-
level transgression-regression sequences. Littoral sediment cores collected from
Tota in 2013 suggest that the lake's sediment archive contains detailed climatic
information, including evidence of past lake level changes. The team would
characterize Tota's sediment archive and assess its potential for developing a
long-term paleoclimate record. Despite near certainty that Tota's sediment
archive spans at least several hundred thousand years, no known geophysical or
paleoclimate work has been conducted on the lake previously. The proposed work
therefore represents a unique opportunity to investigate a site that has
tremendous potential for containing a long, continuous record of Northern
Hemisphere South American Pleistocene climate. This work is in its initial
phases, but has potential to transform our understanding of tropical climate
change. As such, this work is appropriate for the EAGER funding mechanism that
is designed to support "high risk-high pay off" exploratory work in its early
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding is requested for Â¾ of a summer month
for the lead PI, 1 month for his graduate student, as well as travel for 3 PIs
and 2 U.S. graduate students. Airfreight for the coring equipment from LacCore
and its return, per diem in the Tota vicinity, and boat and truck rental are
also requested.