* 1445017
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Micro-Laser Assisted Drilling
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* John Patten, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 229,888.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on investigating the utility
of the micro-laser assisted machining (Micro-LAM) system to perform precision
drilling (micro-laser assisted drilling or Micro-LAD). Previous research has
found Micro-LAM to be essential in machining materials that are very hard and
extremely brittle (e.g. semiconductors and ceramics). The Micro-LAM process
modifies the material, in-situ during machining, so as to render these materials
easier to cut and makes it more cost effective to generate useful end products.
The Micro-LAD system aims to achieve enhanced ductility through reduced hardness
and decreased brittleness from laser heating and thermal softening, which
promotes a more efficient, productive and less costly manufacturing process.
This research project aims to evaluate the Micro-LAD system that capitalizes on
this fundamental material behavior and determines the degree and significance of
the preferential heating and resultant thermal softening of the high-pressure
phases of semiconductors and ceramics during the machining
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology
gaps as the technology translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: improve the productivity and decrease the cost of drilling
semiconductors and ceramics by extending the Micro-LAM technology to drilling
with a proof of concept and performing a market analysis. By advancing the
capability associated with drilling semiconductors and ceramics by locally
rendering them more ductile and less brittle, it will become easier to machine,
resulting in greater productivity and reduced cost of manufacture when compared
to the current drilling process in the marketplace. This new knowledge and
expertise can be assimilated into teaching and educational efforts, as well as
distributed into industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the project will
produce achievement in four core areas. First, fundamental materials science and
engineering research will be advanced and showcased in a real proof of concept.
Second, the principal investigators will work with the university?s technology
transfer office and industrial partners to further integrate the research
results into realizable structures, initially the proposed proof of concept and
eventually a prototype and commercialization or production unit. Third, a
business model or plan will be developed to engage industries? interests and for
market research activities associated with the proposed research. Finally,
students will achieve unique education and research experiences directly related
to product innovation and the process of moving fundamental research into real
world commercial use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project include both academic and industry organizations: Western Michigan
University (Kalamazoo, Michigan) and Micro-LAM Technologies LLC (Battle Creek,
Michigan). This project provides hands-on training opportunities to
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doc students from manufacturing and mechanical
engineering programs at the university, as well as entrepreneurship and business
students from across the university, related to advanced scientific, engineering
and materials concepts.