* 1445356
* An experimental study on grain-size evolution during phase transformations in the mantle transition zone and its influence on rheological properties
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2017
* USD 331,192.00

It is now well appreciated that Earth's interior are vigorously convecting at
the geological time scale. This "mantle convection" is the most important
process that controls the way in which Earth evolves and continents move. As
materials move in the deep interior of Earth, crystal structure of minerals
changes to new ones caused by a large pressure inside of the deep Earth. These
phase transitions likely change the deformability (viscosity) of materials and
the main goal of this project is to evaluate the degree to which these phase
transitions might change the deformability. Our focus is the changes in the size
of minerals caused by phase transitions, that could modify the viscosity of
materials by several orders of magnitude. The results of this study will provide
a new insight into the role of phase transitions in the deep interior of Earth
in modifying the nature of mantle convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase
transitions that occur in Earth's transition zone likely have a large influence
on mantle convection. A phase transition could affect convection through its
effect on density and viscosity. Among the various mechanisms by which viscosity
of materials change, we focus on the change in grain-size that could change the
viscosity up to ~10 orders of magnitude. We will conduct systematic experiments
on the olivine to wadsleyite transitions following various P-T-t paths (P:
pressure, T: temperature, t: time) and determine the size and spatial
distribution of new grains. We will interpret these results in terms of a model
of microstructural evolution during a phase transition, and apply these results
to evaluate the change in viscosity of a subducting slab in the transition zone.