* 1445974
* Workshop on CPS Education with Emphasis on the Power Grid, to be held in  Arlington, VA, July 26-27, 2014
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2014
* Anil Pahwa, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2014
* USD 31,927.00

Workshop on Cyber Physical Systems Education with Emphasis on the Electric Power
Grid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past decade has seen many new advances in electric
power and energy field. Specifically, newer smart grid technologies are being
implemented, the share of renewable energy has increased multi-fold, and
electric vehicles are gradually gaining popularity. Due to integration of these
new technologies, operation of power systems has become more complex. Every
aspect of power from generators to consumers now requires computers for
operation and management. As a result of these developments, power systems have
become large cyber-physical systems (CPS). As the power system becomes more
complex, there will be continuing need to integrate advances in the cyber-
physical systems area into operation, control, and design of power systems. This
also poses the task of preparing the workforce of the future prepared to face
the challenges of operating and managing the complex grid of the future. The
goal of the proposed workshop is to tackle this task by examining the current
state of affairs and proposing new educational concepts and ideas for the
future. Although majority of the participants will be from the power and energy
area, selected experts from the computations, communications, and control areas
will be invited to participate in the workshop. This will allow the participants
to learn about best practices in other areas to implement in power and energy
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on the latest advances in
power and energy systems and CPS with a goal of integrating them for education
of the future generation of engineers. The workshop will result in new
strategies and ideas to fulfill these needs. Strategies identified through the
workshop will result in educational content, which will promote better
preparation of the future generation of power and energy engineers. These
engineers will be prepared to operate the power and energy systems more
efficiently. This will further lead to economic wellbeing of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be conducted over a two-day
period (July 26 and 27, 2014) in Washington DC prior to the IEEE Power and
Energy Society General Meeting (GM 2014). The outcome of the workshop has
potential to impact the educational needs of the future in the power and energy
area with integration of CPS concepts. A report of the workshop will be placed
on the IEEE Power, Energy Education Committee web site for wider distribution.