* 1445121
* EAGER: Research on the Broader Impacts of Basic Science:  Gauging the State of the Art
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Juan Rogers, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 07/31/2017
* USD 224,890.00

Congress and science funding agencies such as the National Science Foundation
are searching for ways to better assess the real world effects of public
investments in basic scientific research. These concerns are now known as the
"broader impacts" of science. This project will critically evaluate approaches
to characterizing the broader impacts of science and develop an agenda for
advancing understanding of how and how much impact scientific progress has on
societal well-being. By generating a unified conceptual grounding for broader
impacts evaluation and sponsoring the creation of an ongoing community of
broader impacts researchers and user groups this project has the potential to
transform our thinking about how to best assess the value of scientific
research.

This project will begin by engaging a team of researchers, representing a broad
range of relevant disciplines, who will work together to survey and organize the
existing scholarly literature on the topic of broader impacts. This
interdisciplinary team will critically assess the different approaches to
evaluating the broader impacts of science, with the goal of developing a general
account of the various strengths and weaknesses of the different approaches
existing today. The team will then prepare a report synthesizing these
approaches in order to identify the current best practices within the field. To
engage even broader input, the research team will convene a two-day workshop
with leading academics working in the area of broader impact assessment to offer
criticisms and advancements on the analysis of the research report, toward the
goals of further extending and improving this analysis as well as sharing their
differing assumptions and perspectives with one another. Second, the workshop
will have these perspectives vetted by representatives of US agencies such as
the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and the
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, along with
representatives from European, South American, and Asian science agencies. This
will help foster the creation of a community of broader impacts researchers and
interested groups.