* 1445812
* 2014 International Symposium on Biomathematics and Ecology: Education and Research
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Ami Radunskaya, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal is for partial funding for the Seventh International Symposium on
Biomathematics and Ecology: Education and Research to be held at Harvey Mudd and
Pomona colleges on October 10-12, 2014. The symposium will highlight significant
recent developments in both research and education of mathematics, biology,
ecology, and biostatistics. This conference provides a forum for the
participants to meet and communicate their recent work, as well as share their
experiences and work on the educational aspects of these disciplines. An
important component of the meeting is to broaden the education and stimulate the
interdisciplinary research of young researchers, particularly those from groups
under-represented in the field. To this effect, the funds principally support
young under-supported researchers, such as graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty. These participants will greatly benefit from this
conference.

The International Symposium on Biomathematics and Ecology: Education and
Research, to be held in Claremont, California at Harvey Mudd and Pomona colleges
on October 10-12, 2014 is the seventh annual meeting in the series. The
conference started with a goal of bringing together researchers and educators
from both biological and mathematical sciences. Participants came from a wide
variety of fields, including applied mathematics, statistics, biology, computer
science, ecology, epidemiology and medicine. Through formal and informal
presentations and discussions, the attendees are able to disseminate their
current work while networking with active researchers and educators. The
conference will provide a unique opportunity for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows to interact with leading researchers in these areas. The
NSF support for this event will be used solely to support and encourage the
participation of graduate students, minorities, women, and recent doctoral
students in an effort to provide young researchers and under-represented groups
an exposure to current research topics and techniques in the interdisciplinary
area of biomathematics. Moreover, the work that will be presented at the
conference will help us engage with challenging environmental and health
problems, such as epidemics, pollution, pest management and the emergence or
resurgence of diseases, in addition to establishing the relevant curriculum to
prepare future researchers in these subject areas. Conference participants will
be encouraged to submit work presented at the symposium for consideration in a
special peer-reviewed issue of Letters in Biomathematics.