* 1445753
* Monitoring the Western Arctic Boundary Current in a Warming Climate: Mooring activities and Hydrographic Sampling in 2014
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Robert Pickart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Monitoring the western Arctic boundary current with a mooring provides
information over a complete seasonal cycle at a location that is critical for
understanding the fate of the Pacific water in the Arctic and its impact on the
ecosystem. Accurate measures of along-stream and cross-stream fluxes of mass,
heat, and freshwater are obtained from the mooring. This allows for causal
relationships between the physical environment and the ecosystem, ranging from
nutrient dynamics up to higher tropics. This project will recover an AON mooring
in the western Arctic boundary current at 152°W during mission HLY1402 on the
USCGC Healy. During the cruise the team will also carry out a hydrographic
survey of the boundary current and do additional mooring work for other
ancillary projects. Finally, a mooring will be re-deployed at 152°W using
instrumentation that allows for a two-year deployment. This will extend the
timeseries until 2016, resulting in 11 years of data from the boundary current.
The science party on the Healy cruise this year will include three graduate
students, one undergraduate student, and a participant from the MATE internship
program. This will provide valuable at-sea experience for these young
researchers in a variety of areas.