* 1445113
* I-Corps:  Positioning System in GPS-denied Environments using Euclidean TOA Ranging and Linear Matrix Inequalities
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Alvin Lim, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Because of the critical needs for scalable data dissemination and efficient
spatial query processing for supporting large-scale information systems with
mobile users, there is a great demand for accurate positioning of mobile
devices. Only with these capabilities, one will be able to develop scalable data
dissemination and query evaluation infrastructure for querying, indexing, and
routing datasets to support novel mobile applications. These needs will drive
customers' willingness to pay for these capabilities. For example, important
customers are firemen who will use this technology in a burning building to
locate victims trapped in the building using this positioning method that is
based on opportunistic communication among the group of firemen and the victim's
mobile devices. In this proposal, the I-Corps team introduces new software for
accurately determining the positions of mobile devices, even in GPS-denied
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovative method for
positioning does not use special hardware as UWB or ultrasounds transceivers.
Instead, the proposed positioning software will run on typical smartphones and
laptops. A GPS-denied target node with no position information communicates
opportunistically with a number of in-range mobile peer nodes with some
positioning capabilities. Data exchanges between the target node and peer nodes
are used by the target node to refine its position estimation using three
algorithms: Euclidean TOA (Time of Arrival), LMI (Linear Matrix Inequalities)
and barycentric algorithms. Using the approximate ranges from the Euclidean TOA
method, the LMI and barycentric algorithms are then applied to improve position
accuracy.