* 1445727
* NSF/FDA Scholar in Residence Program on In Vitro Biological Characterization of 3D Printed Small-Scale Medical Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 130,000.00

PI: Narayan, Roger J. Proposal: 1445727 Title: NSF/FDA Scholar in Residence
Program on In Vitro Biological Characterization of 3D Printed Small-Scale
Medical Devices

Significance The data obtained in this project will serve as the basis for a
material property-biological performance database, in which the relationship
between in vitro cell-material interactions, protein adsorption, and material
processing parameters will be considered. The regulatory science approach will
provide a repertoire of methods and tools to understand the fundamental tissue-
material interactions for complex and innovative device technologies.

Technical Description In the proposed Scholar-in-Residence (SIR) program, a 3D
printing technique known as multi-focus two photon polymerization will be used
to create solid tissue barb adhesives with microscale features for tissue
penetration and sub-microscale features for cell ingrowth out of a zirconium
oxide hybrid material. Tissue barbs are innovative small-scale devices with
potential use in wound closure and healing. They will examine use of
biocompatible photoinitiators (e.g., riboflavin-triethanolamine mixtures and
riboflavin-arginine mixtures) for two photon polymerization-based 3D printing.
They will also evaluate incorporation of an electrochemical sensor for
monitoring of creatinine within the tissue barb adhesive. In the proposed
program, they will collaborate with FDA colleagues to evaluate the in vitro
biocompatibility of tissue barb materials that contain sub-micrometer scale
pores and creatinine sensor materials using appropriate cells (e.g., dermal
fibroblasts and epidermal keratinocytes).