* 1445386
* EAGER: Ferroelectric Memristive Devices Emulating Synapses in Subcortical Information Processors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Santosh Kurinec, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 165,108.00

Neuromorphic computing is an interdisciplinary field that aspires to create
physical architecture and design principles based on biological nervous systems
for applications in vision systems, auditory systems and autonomous robots.
There is an increasing interest in developing electronic analog circuits to
mimic neuro-biological architectures present in the nervous system. In the
nervous system of the brain, a synapse is a structure that permits a neuron to
pass an electrical or chemical signal to another cell. This exploratory research
proposes to create a two-terminal memristive device that can emulate the
function of a synapse. The resistance of the device will change depending on the
amount, direction, and duration of voltage applied. The device has advantage of
maintaining its state until another voltage pulse is applied over conventional
computer memory, which requires regular charge to maintain its state. The
principle behind the proposed approach is to make dipoles in a film switch up or
down depending on voltage polarity in ferroelectric materials. If the thickness
of the ferroelectric layer is made small enough, it can allow tunneling of
electrons that is a function of the relative density of dipoles in up or down
position thus preserving a memory similar to that of the synapse, thereby making
electronic analog circuits to mimic brain. The proposed novel synapse circuits
will enable integration of complex systems with power-constrained devices. The
research on hafnium oxide (HfO2) based FTJ will also open the door for further
scaling of FE capacitor based random access memory and enable the fabrication of
FE field effect transistor (FE-FET) based memory. The graduate students would
have a significant opportunity in advancing their interdisciplinary skills in
semiconductors device design and fabrication, integrated circuit design, machine
learning, and neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal explores a two-
terminal memristive device based on newly discovered ferroelectricity in CMOS
compatible high permittivity dielectric, HfO2 doped with silicon or aluminum.
The switching mechanism in FTJ is driven by polarization that is relatively
immune from stochastic variations observed in other resistive memory devices.
Fabrication of a high permittivity HfO2 based ferroelectric device will allow
thinner films which can be scaled. The goal of the proposed research is to
explore the design and fabrication of HfO2 based ferroelectric tunnel junction
(FTJ) memristive device and its characterization to generate models. In
addition, neuron circuits with multiple signaling types for behavioral emulation
of biological neurons will be designed, synaptic circuits based on the proposed
memristor device models will be trained, and the feasibility of incorporating
the neuron and synapse circuits into subcortex-inspired information processing
(SIIP) system will be evaluated. The outcome of the proposed exploratory
research will result in a novel device that can mimic synaptic behavior and can
be integrated with conventional CMOS electronics thereby forming the basis for
the next generation of intelligent computing.