* 1445398
* Symposium on Undergraduate Research to be held October 19-24, 2014 in Tucson Arizona.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Harold Metcalf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 8,000.00

This award provides travel support for student participation in the 30th
Conference on Laser Science to be held October 19-24, 2014 in Tucson, Arizona.
Support is provided only for US students (students enrolled in US universities).
This conference series is important to the vitality of atomic, molecular, and
optical physics in the United States. The support of students through this award
makes a substantial contribution to the education and training of future
scientists. Students who graduate with a background in atomic, molecular, and
optical physics acquire a broad range of knowledge and skills that enable them
to contribute to progress in many areas of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Conference is part of the Division of
Laser Science (DLS) of the American Physical Society (APS) and offers an
opportunity for students to present their research results and to interact with
senior scientists primarily from the United States, but also the broader
international community. A special undergraduate student symposium has been
organized to allow students to present the results of their research and
introduce them to cutting-edge topics in atomic, molecular, and optical physics.
This Conference will be held jointly with the 98th Annual Meeting of the Optical
Society of America.