* 1445853
* Design and Execution of a Design Laboratory (Learning Lab) for STEM Projects
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Paul LeMahieu, Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca A. Kruse
* 01/31/2016
* USD 299,215.00

Networked Improvement Communities (NICs) are a structure for redefining the
relationship between education research and development and practice so as to
more effectively address real problems in order to produce knowledge that can
meaningfully contribute to improvement. NICs are scientific learning communities
distinguished by essential characteristics: they are focused on a well-specified
common aim, guided by a deep understanding of the problem and a shared working
theory of how to improve it. NICs are committed to the rigor of improvement
science and are coordinated to accelerate the development, testing and
refinement of interventions. NICs also diffuse their knowledge to the field more
rapidly and work to integrate their findings into varied educational contexts.
This project provides an opportunity to learn how best to implement NIC
principles so as to realize their potential to support STEM initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A NIC Design Learning Laboratory is a series of learning
sessions in which participants are convened together and are interspersed
between action periods in their local contexts leading to the formation
networks. At each learning session, significant knowledge about the
developmental stage of NIC design and initiation is introduced. During the
action periods, teams follow through on ideas introduced and plans established.
Subsequent learning sessions offer design teams the opportunity for coaching on
particular problems that may arise and to encounter the ideas and work to be
addressed in the next developmental stage. Participants learn the ideas of NIC
conceptualization and initiation by working on launching their own networks,
with the training and guidance relevant to each step in NIC development provided
by Carnegie and colleagues in the Learning Lab. The focus for the learning
sessions includes technical skill and leadership development and forming
learning community networks related to STEM goals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the
end of the Learning Laboratory the following will be produced: 1) a NIC Design
Learning Laboratory for STEM Projects that would support up to five project
teams as they plan, initiate and launch NICs; 2) an Assessors Guide to document
the essential elements of NICs and their expression in programmatic thinking; 3)
A Design and Operational Plan and timeline for each of the participating teams
guiding the establishment of their NIC as would constitute the centerpiece for
their plans and possible proposal for seeking support; 4) A final report drawing
upon the Developmental Evaluation and External Review.