* 1445783
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: High-Resolution Imaging of Instability Dynamics and Breakdown
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

This is a 3-year collaborative investigation between The Aerospace Corporation
and GATS Inc. to place a new airglow camera at the Andes Lidar Observatory (ALO)
in Chile and use those data to study turbulent processes near the mesopause.
Turbulent viscosity is a critical unknown parameter in numerical models of the
80 to 100 km altitude region. It is notoriously very difficult to measure. This
project will provide a method of measuring this parameter in this important
atmospheric region where turbulent viscosity may vary by 3 orders of magnitude.
The results of this study will also contribute to a more general understanding
of fluid dynamics accompanying flow instabilities. &lt;br/&gt; Specifically,
this project will utilize the Aerospace Corporation?s new high-resolution
infrared camera (AIC2) that uses fast optics and a 2048 x 2048 IR detector to
image the OH airglow at 30 m pixel size with a 2 s image cadence. The ALO site
also includes a Na wind-temperature lidar and a meteor radar. Data from the AIC2
and the other ALO instruments will be used to investigate the breakdown into
turbulence of Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities (KHIs) and to measure the turbulent
viscosity. This new technique will allow characterization of the turbulent
viscosity for a variety of background conditions and over daily and seasonal
timescales. The measurements will be combined with high-resolution direct
numerical simulations to produce the most complete picture to date of KHI
breakdown and its evolution into turbulence.