* 1445650
* EAGER: Development-specific changes in ECM topography influence cardiac specification
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Brenda Ogle, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2016
* USD 106,480.00

PI: Ogle, Brenda &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1445650&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Development-specific
changes in ECM topography influence cardiac
specification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stem cells have great potential to treat
acute and chronic conditions, including cardiac disorders; however, the optimal
methods of delivering these cells to patients have yet to be learned. Much of
the difficulty lies in the disconnect between the tissue culture environments in
which cells are typically grown, versus the complicated architecture of in vivo
tissues. In the latter, tissues are encased in a network of nano and micoscale
3D fibers comprised of proteins such as collagen, laminin, and elastin that
promote cell growth and synthesis of new tissue. This project aims to replicate
the in vivo tissue structure, where the blueprint will be derived from
microscopy data of cardiac tissues at various stages of development. Determining
the stem cell response to the replicated tissue structure would have a
significant and fundamental impact on how stem cells could be manipulated and
delivered for both research and therapy. In addition, success of this proposal
would have broad reaching utility for the study of cell-matrix interactions in
other tissue types with health or disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better
understanding of stem cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions could refine
stem cell culture regimes and improve protocols to induce functional
differentiation of cardiac cell types. Resultant differentiated cell types could
be used for in vitro toxicity testing and to inform therapeutic delivery of stem
cells or their progeny to the heart. It is hypothesized that 3D topographical
features of the developing heart can guide differentiation of pluripotent stem
cells or cardiac precursors into functional cardiac cell types. To test this
hypothesis, methods to advance the differentiation and delivery of stem cells or
their progeny will be developed by rigorous recapitulation of in vivo ECM
architecture. Specifically multiphoton-excited (MPE) photochemistry will be used
to create 3D matrices, one plane at a time, with sub-micron feature sizes, from
templates derived from high resolution microscopy image data of the developing
heart at well-defined timepoints. For this objective, matrices will be
fabricated using BSA or methyl methacrylate to purposefully eliminate
biochemical signals associated with ECM proteins (though it should be noted that
the technology is capable of fabricating with ECM proteins). Ventricular
progenitor cells (VPCs), capable of differentiating exclusively to mature
cardiac cell types, will be seeded in the matrices. At weekly time points
thereafter, cells in matrices will be tested for phenotypic and functional
attributes of cardiac cell types. The primary comparator between matrices
associated with developmental time points will be the percentage of cells with
cardiomyocyte phenotype and function. The secondary comparator will be the
relative percentage of each cardiac cell type. It is anticipated that a
statistically significant increase in the percentage of functional
cardiomyocytes will be detected in BSA or methacrylate-based structures derived
from templates corresponding to late embryonic cardiac development relative to
matrices corresponding to earlier and later time points. A successful stem cell
response to ECM structure would have a significant and fundamental impact on how
one can manipulate and deliver stem cells for both research and therapy, and
would substantially impact research strategies for more generally understanding
cell-ECM interactions in health and disease.