* 1445226
* Collaborative Research: Meeting: Vascular Transport in Plants - Research Frontiers and Priorities (Washington, DC March 2015)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2015
* USD 41,846.00

This proposal seeks funding for a workshop focused on the current and future
state of research in plant water transport. The plant water transport system is
a central determinant of plant photosynthetic rate and growth, and thus of the
productivity of terrestrial systems. The plant water system is also a key locus
for the impact of drought and pathogens. This proposal is for a workshop on the
current and future directions in the study of plant vascular transport. The
goals of the workshop are to integrate current research, identify the most
exciting new areas of research, highlight research at the interface with other
scientific disciplines, and to promote new collaborations and approaches among
practitioners. Previous plant hydraulics workshops in 2003 and 2008 have been
enormously productive. However, large conceptual and methodological advances in
this research area have marked the period between 2008 and 2014. A new meeting
is needed to focus on issues of current excitement, controversies regarding
measurements and analyses, and future directions in plant vascular biology. By
integrating expertise across fields, including newly developed approaches in bio
imaging, plant anatomy, computational models and lab measurements, the workshop
will enable detailed discussion and improved resolution of research frontiers
that will result in increased collaboration and inter- and trans-disciplinary
projects. Opportunities to connect with other fields, including genomics, plant
pathology, and nano-engineering, are critical, and at the workshop, a wide range
of scientists in plant hydraulics will identify how to do this in the most
productive way and disseminate their findings to the field. Time will be devoted
to discussion and development of integrative projects, needed instrumentation
development, and moves toward developing consensus methods. The organizers, in
consultation or collaboration with participants, will produce a comprehensive
meeting report, and collaborative papers for publication in high impact journals
and projects as a direct outcome of discussions during the workshop. The
research has significant broader impacts in organismal response to global
change, agricultural yield, and forest conservation. The workshop involves a
diverse community of participants, including women and under-represented
minorities, and will contribute to networking between diverse senior and junior
scientists, thereby helping career development. Mentorship of students and
postdocs, and in particular, members of under-represented groups will be the
focus of some discussions.

Plant water transport relies on physical and biochemical processes, and thus
breakthroughs in physics and molecular biology both inform and extend the core
understanding and measurements. Several of the foundational methods used in
plant hydraulics have been recently challenged in their ability to provide
unbiased estimates. The debate over methods has grown to include controversies
concerning estimation of the conditions under which xylem embolism occurs, the
methods to quantify the impact of water stress on xylem conductivity, and the
mechanisms by which plants respond to and recover from drought. Thus, a workshop
would be a timely and valuable tool to promote discussion and analysis of
research among diverse, widespread research groups. The workshop will take place
over 2.5 days, in Arlington, VA, with over 30 participants. The first day of the
meeting will concentrate on plant hydraulics and water relations, while the
second day will focus on interfaces with other field, including phloem function,
ecological genomics, xylem pathology, broad-scale ecology, and nanodesign. The
third day will be devoted to discussion and development of integrative projects
and/or instrumentation development.