* 1445012
* PFI:AIR - TT:  SIG-Blocks: Tangible Game Technology for Cognitive Assessment and Rehabilitation of People with Traumatic Brain Injuries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Kiju Lee, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 294,574.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating integrated
sensors and wireless communication technology to fill the need for cognitive
assessment and rehabilitation of veterans with mild traumatic brain injuries
(TBI). The novel Sensor Integrated Geometric (SIG)-Blocks technology enables
fully autonomous and remote administration of the cognitive assessment and
training programs that will reduce the cost and broaden accessibility to
rehabilitation opportunities. Improved quality and quantity of measurable data
and the dynamic nature of this technology-based approach will also lead to
improved rehabilitation outcomes. This project will result in a prototype of a
fully functioning hardware platform (SIG-Blocks) and user-friendly game software
for personalized cognitive assessment and training. The SIG-Blocks technology
has the following unique features: fully automated and remote (online)
administration of the assessment and training games, dynamic and personalized
game items, and improved quality and quantity of measureable data. These
features will potentially improve the accuracy of assessment and clinical
effectiveness of rehabilitation. Further, reduced cost and possible in-home
training will broaden rehabilitation opportunities for TBI patients when
compared to the existing cognitive assessment and training instruments in this
market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: 1) lack of the platform technology that can be used for both
cognitive assessment and rehabilitation of TBI patients by developing the new
SIG-Blocks and assessment/training games building on a current prototype; 2)
lack of fun and engaging features in the current technology by embedding visual,
sound, and tactile feedback mechanism into the technology; 3) need for improved
user interface (UI) to enable end-users to customize the test items or training
games by designing a graphically augmented tangible UI; 4) need for in-home
training to broaden the accessibility to the service and reduce the cost by
developing online programs; 5) need for personalized assessment/rehabilitation
to maximize health outcomes by developing a software tool kit that enables
personalization of test/training programs; and 6) lack of clinical evidence of
the efficacy of such technology-based approach by testing the games using SIG-
Blocks on TBI patients in collaboration with the Cleveland VA Medical Center. In
addition, undergraduate and graduate students involved in this project will
receive unique learning and training experiences by working with a highly
interdisciplinary team for investigating effective strategies of technology
translation that is often overlooked in engineering education. The educational
activities will also include integration of this project with unique project-
based courses that focus on advancing the impact of invention via multi-
disciplinary perspectives.