* 1445651
* Workshop: Refining Research Challenges Underlying a National-Scale Learning Health System Anchored in a New Science of Cyber-Social Ecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Charles Friedman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,973.00

This workshop is to assess the research needs and opportunities in the
development and implementation of a national-scale Learning Health System (LHS).
Realizing such a transformative vision represents a profound socio-technical
challenge requiring not only collaboration among multiple and diverse
stakeholders, but also a new cross-disciplinary science of cyber-social
ecosystems to address the myriad novel scientific research challenges the LHS
presents. The proposed workshop will be convened at a cross-disciplinary,
integrative symposium on January 5-6, 2015 at the 48th International Conference
on Systems Sciences (HICSS-48). Bringing together the workshop with this
conference will leverage a unique opportunity to develop an understanding of the
fundamental knowledge needed for the development of a LHS and the new cross-
disciplinary science of cyber-social ecosystems within a broad scientific
community, including those for information technology, systems science,
healthcare and other non-related fields. The workshop is expected to have a
significant impact on the development of a research agenda for a Learning Health
System. Leveraging the multidisciplinary expertise at the HICSS-48 conference
will be an important next step in moving this work forward and advancing a new
science.