* 1445376
* The Sondrestrom Facility - Enabling Fundamental Research of the Coupled Atmosphere-Ionosphere-Magnetosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2015,05/31/2018
* John Kelly, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2018
* USD 7,496,800.00

This is an award to continue supporting management, operations, and scientific
activities at the Sondrestrom Geospace research facility located near
Kangerlussuaq, Greenland. The activities include technical support of the
incoherent scatter radar (ISR), Rayleigh lidar system, and two all-sky imagers,
as well provide observational service and data to the national and international
geospace science communities, including education and outreach efforts relevant
to facility operations and science. To foster new ideas in geospace research,
facility staff advances instrumentation to promote scientific discovery, ensure
data are of high research quality, and maintain expertise in the related
sciences conducted at the facility. Over the years, the number of complementary
instruments at the site has risen dramatically and the capabilities of the radar
itself have been considerably enhanced. As a result, the research supported by
the facility has diversified and evolved to meet the changing needs of the
community of scientific users. Non-geospace activities, such as solid earth
research, stratospheric research, and environmental research are supported as
part of broader community outreach. The IS radar will be operated for 1800 per
year at least in response to the evolving needs of the research community,
providing flexibility in radar operations to capture space weather events, and
make data available for retrospective analysis. To take advantage of these
extensive observations, facility staff will focus on collaborative studies with
other existing and planned high-latitude radars. The facility's data handling
and processing tools are readily available in a timely manner. The facility
staff will also maintain relationships with the Greenland Home Rule Government
and Danish Commission for Scientific Research in Greenland to ensure effective
management and operation of the Sondrestrom Geospace facility.