* 1445371
* The Midwest Mathematics and Climate Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Erik Van Vleck, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2016
* USD 24,000.00

The Midwest Mathematics and Climate Conference will take place on the campus of
the University of Kansas from April 30 to May 2, 2015. The conference shall
bring together atmospheric scientists and applied mathematicians to address
different aspects of our changing climate, one of the most urgent topics of our
time. Bringing together these different groups will facilitate a transfer of
knowledge between climate science and mathematics. The conference will provide
an excellent opportunity for researchers, especially early-career graduate
students, postdocs, and faculty members, to disseminate their results to a
broad, interdisciplinary mathematical and scientific community, gaining
experience and improving their skills in communication and presentation. The
conference will play an active role in motivating and strengthening the
relationship between research groups in applied mathematics and atmospheric
sciences across universities in the region. Although the scientific basis for
the anthropogenic influence on Earth's climate system is well established,
substantial uncertainty surrounds important details of climate behavior. Many
components of the climate system are substantially nonlinear, suggesting the
possibility of "tipping points" or threshold behavior, which may lead to abrupt,
irreversible climate change. Although the concepts of nonlinearity, tipping
points, and threshold behavior are appreciated by the atmospheric science
community, they are typically approached somewhat anecdotally. On the other
hand, the applied mathematics community has been exploring these topics in
nonlinear systems for many years, though often in highly idealized mathematical
frameworks. The goal of this conference is to bring together atmospheric
scientists and applied mathematicians with the goal being to foster
collaboration between the two groups, to expose atmospheric scientists to
cutting-edge techniques in nonlinear mathematics, and to engage mathematicians
with a hierarchy of models that exhibit greater degree of physical realism than
the idealized models they typically employ. With this goal in mind, the PIs will
host a conference on atmospheric science and mathematics with the title "Midwest
Mathematics and Climate Conference" from April 30 to May 2, 2015 on the campus
of the University of Kansas. Conference topics of emphasis will include
nonlinear climate dynamics, high performance computing, numerical analysis,
cloud systems behavior, data assimilation, dimension reduction, uncertainty
quantification, model hierarchies, and advanced statistical methods. Bringing
together researchers with expertise in these different areas will facilitate a
transfer of knowledge between mathematics and areas of atmospheric science.
Furthermore, the conference will provide strong motivation for interdisciplinary
collaboration between mathematicians in dynamical systems, PDEs, numerical
analysis, probability theory, and statistics, with researchers in climate and
the broader atmospheric sciences.