* 1445720
* EAGER: Novel high electron mobility transistor designs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Fan Ren, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2016
* USD 161,253.00

Title: EAGER: Novel high electron mobility transistor designs

A novel approach is proposed to enhance heat dissipation and reliability in high
electron mobility transistors based on wide bandgap semiconductor materials. The
approach consists in by incorporating a backside gate, through the Si substrate,
directly under the top side gate finger. Heat generated within the active area
of the device would be effectively dissipated through the back-side contact. The
successful fabrication of the backside gated device would produce more reliable
power transistors with higher drain breakdown voltages which could be used as
small package and uncooled dc to ac convertors for automotive and solar cell
applications. From an educational prospective, this project will provide
training for both graduate and undergraduate students. Special efforts will be
made to recruit female and underrepresented minority students for participation.
Research discoveries from this project will be incorporated into the
semiconductor materials and processing course developed by the principle
investigator. Outreach activities supported by the University of Florida,
including school visits, the training of high school senior students, and
participation in the NSF GK-12 Program, will be conducted along with the
proposed research work.

Gallium nitride (GaN) material based high electron mobility transistor (HEMT)
based structures have shown great potential for high voltage (>1000V) and high
power density applications (>15 W/mm). This includes high efficiency uncooled dc
to ac convertors for electrical cars and solar cells due to its superior
electron mobility and saturation, as well as, its energy bandgap of 3.3 eV as
compared to 1.12 eV for silicon (Si). However, the current device performance is
limited by the high junction temperature due to inefficient heat dissipation of
the device design. Higher junction temperatures not only degrade HEMT dc and rf
performance, but also diminish the device reliability. Thus, it is very critical
to effectively dissipate heat generated during device operation for high power
electronics. By taking advantage of GaN HEMT structures grown on SiC or Si
substrate, the PI intends to place a through substrate via hole directly
underneath the active area of the HEMT and fill up the via hole with plated
copper. Not only can the heat generated within the active area of the device be
effectively dissipated from this via hole, the back-side via contact itself also
can be used as a field plate or a back gate to further increase the device
operation voltage.