* 1445679
* Support for the Siegman International School on Lasers: 2014: To Be Held at   Staford University, August 3-8, 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Elizabeth Rogan, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The proposed project is to provide travel support for students to attend the
2014 Siegman International School which is to be held at Stanford University
from August 3-8 2014. The requested amount is $15,000 for travel and
accommodation support for 10 US students. The educational program will consist
of a series of presentations on recent advances in the field of lasers given by
world experts. Student attendees will have the opportunity to interact with
leading scientists and engineers from academic and industry. The meeting will
facilitate an open technical exchange between students and lecturers and will
promote networking and professional development. The exchange of ideas and
future collaboration possibilities are expected to enhance training of a US
workforce in this important area of photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2014
Siegman International School on Lasers will take place at Stanford University
from August 3-8 2014. The Program will consist of a variety of invited speakers
who will give presentations over the course of five days on the Stanford
University campus. Student attendees will participate in a program of lectures,
networking and professional development opportunities, poster presentations and
research sharing discussions. The following program topics are to be covered:
Optical Fibers, Solid State Lasers, Nano-Lasers/Exotic Laser Systems, Silicon
Photonics, and Quantum Theory of Lasers. The instructors have agreed to have
daily interaction with the students. The daily interactions with the world
renowned instructors are a proven vehicle for sharing of technical insights.