* 1445704
* Collaborative Research:   Characterizing Small-scale Lightning Discharges Associated with Explosive Volcanic Activity at Sakurajima Volcano
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Sonja Behnke, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 317,492.00

Volcanic lightning discharges have length scales ranging from tens of meters to
tens of kilometers. Most small discharges occur proximally to a volcanic vent
concurrent or within a few minutes of an explosive volcanic eruption. Large
scale discharges typically occur throughout a mature plume formed 5 or more
minutes subsequent to an explosive eruption. This research work focuses on
studying the small, proximal discharges that occur concurrent with explosive
volcanic eruptions. The main goal is to better characterize the proximal
electrical activity within the context of the eruptive activity to gain a better
understanding of the eruptive conditions that are required to produce different
types of small-scale discharges. This characterization will be accomplished by
making high-resolution 3-D lightning mapping observations of lighting discharges
during small explosive eruptions of Sakurajima Volcano located in the Kyushu
region of southwestern Japan. Other instrumentation (infrasound, video cameras,
and electric field change sensors) will be used to monitor the explosive
activity, plume development, and changes in electric field caused by lightning.
The data will be used to determine when different types of electrical discharges
occur relative to the onset of an explosive eruption and in relation to the
ascent of volcanic ejecta. Electrical discharges will be characterized by
determining the length scales, speeds, and polarities of the discharges, as well
as by locating where the discharges initiate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The research would be the most detailed study of volcanic
lightning to date, combining measurements of volcano infrasound, electric field
changes, and plume development with high-resolution Lightning Mapping Array
(LMA) data and high-speed video observations of volcanic lighting. The inclusion
of electric field change measurements, high-speed video, and visual plume
observations distinguishes this project from previous research. The research
will increase knowledge of electrical activity that occurs as a direct result of
an explosive volcanic eruption. This will contribute to our understanding of the
eruption processes that are responsible for producing electrical activity
proximally to a volcanic vent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Because small-scale discharges frequently accompany volcanic
eruptions of a large range of sizes, the results of the research will be
applicable to developing an eruption monitoring system that utilizes VHF
observations of lightning and electrical activity. In addition, the results of
the research will be used to determine if one can predict eruption magnitudes or
ash plume heights based on observations of electrical activity. The research
will also provide training for an early career researcher from an
underrepresented group and three graduate students. They will participate in
gathering, organizing, archiving, and analyzing the data.