* 1445659
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Imaging the Geometry of the Kharga Basin (New Valley Oasis) and its Groundwater Capacity
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Estella Atekwana, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr. Estella Atekwana of
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma and Magdy Atya of the the
National Research Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics (NRIAG), Helwan, Egypt.
They plan to study "Imaging the Geometry of the Kharga Basin (New Valley Oasis)
and its Groundwater Capacity." The PIs will investigate the subsurface geometry
of the Kharga Basin which hosts the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer (NSA). The NSA is
likely to become and increasingly important source of fresh water for Egypt and
a more thorough analysis is crucial to ensuring that this water resource is used
effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many numerical groundwater models used to
evaluate the groundwater potential of the NSA have relied on regional-scale
geological investigations and did not consider the structural complexity of the
NSA. This structural complexity is highlighted by borehole data that suggest
that the thickness of the Mesozoic sedimentary section of the NSA in southern
Egypt can vary between 600m and 0 m along a distance of &lt;40 km. Accurate
imaging of the basin's geometry is critical to any effort to utilize the NSA
groundwater; a freshwater resource believed to be of fundamental importance to
Egypt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently ~99% of Egypt's 85 million population
lives along the Nile Valley and Delta using the 55 billion cubic meters of fresh
water discharged annually by the Nile River. However, this supply is likely to
become less reliably due to the increasing demand by other countries upstream
for a larger share of the Nile's water and also the unpredictable consequences
of global climate change on the river's &lt;br/&gt;discharge. The Paleozoic-
Mesozoic NSA, The majority of which appears to lie under Egypt but also
stretches into Libya, Sudan and Chad, &lt;br/&gt;is thought to be the likely
candidate for providing badly needed groundwater resource. The specific
objectives of this project are to: (1) determine the subsurface geometry of the
basin hosting the NSA underlying the Kharga Depression, (2) map and characterize
the surface and subsurface geometry of the fault systems of this basin as
potential conduits of groundwater flow, (3) develop a geoscientific GIS database
that would aid in resource planning and management. These objectives will be
accomplished by utilizing remote sensing data and geological investigations in
association with geophysical surveys (seismic, gravity, magnetic and
electromagnetic data) along E-W and N-S profiles for detailed subsurface imaging
of the basin and associated aquifers, hence identifying potential groundwater
accumulations. These data will also provide important constraints for the
development of groundwater models that will quantify the availability of
groundwater. Similar studies can be conducted at other oases to provide a more
accurate inventory of available and sustainable water resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds upon existing research collaborations
between the US and Egyptian scientists at NRIAG and at OSU. The project will
affirm an equal partnership, enhance intellectual collaboration and serve as a
platform for the training of the next generation of globally-engaged scientists.
The scientific input of the Egyptian institution and collaboration with the US
institution will help establish an approach for long term strategic planning for
sustainable resources management for the oases in the Western Desert. The study
will integrate geological, geophysical and remote sensing information for water
resources exploration with GIS-based mapping data The geophysics research,
mapping and modeling efforts will also train students in skills that are
relevant around the world as surface freshwater resources become more scarce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of early career faculty and graduate students
in international research from both Egypt and the US, and mentoring them to lead
international, culturally diverse, and multidisciplinary research teams will be
a significant benefit of this project. There will be specific opportunities for
women and minority students to participate in international research by
partnering with the NSF-funded Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) Program at OSU. The overall training and collaboration
with LSAMP will help students realize the relevance of international research
and will provide important opportunities to develop the knowledge, skills and
abilities necessary to effectively live and work in an increasingly globalized
world. Technology transfer will occur through peer reviewed publications,
workshops, short courses and dissemination of project results at international
science venues such as the Geological Society of Africa, American Geophysical
Union and Geological Society of America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science and Technology Fund Program. Support
for the U.S. side of these cooperative projects is provided to the National
Science Foundation by the U.S. Department of State. The Egyptian Government
provides support for the Egyptian side of the collaboration.