* 1445261
* EAGER: Dispersion and Selective Positioning of Reinforcement in Polymer Matrix Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Marilyn Minus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 134,754.00

Composite materials made with ceramic reinforcements in a polymer matrix offer
features of high strength-to-weight ratio, flexibility, and flaw tolerance. One
advantage for discontinuous (short) fiber-reinforced composites is the ease of
manufacturing complex shaped parts. One disadvantage, however, is reduced
strength as compared to continuous (long) fiber-reinforced composites, due to
stress concentrations at the fiber ends in the composite during use. This stress
localization at the ends of fibers can lead to bond failure between the matrix
and fiber reinforcement causing cracks that lead to material failure. The
novelty of this project's process is the ability to selectively position a range
of particle sizes near the fiber ends to help reinforce and distribute the
stress in that zone. This will result in higher strength for composite parts
made with discontinuous fiber reinforcement, helping to enable low cost
manufacturing of parts with intricate geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate the
homogeneity, stability and reproducibility for fabricating and dispersing
suspensions of colloidally-assembled hierarchical ceramic fillers for
discontinuous fiber composites. These new materials are predicted to push
discontinuous fiber composites toward the holy grail of increased strength and
ductility, a combination that is not attainable in most material systems. When
these hierarchical assemblies are incorporated into a polymer matrix, the
polymer will infiltrate the near-interface of the assemblies to form an
interphase region of enhanced mechanical stiffness that encompasses the even
stiffer ceramic particles. This new perspective offers a material independent
methodology for increasing the properties and performance of discontinuous fiber
composites, while maintaining compatibility with bulk, economic, and facile
manufacturing techniques such as injection molding, tape-casting or hot-
pressing. This research project will answer several fundamental questions
associated with stress transfer and failure mechanisms for materials consisting
of dissimilar components, and also take advantage of emerging technologies that
enable processing of composites with hierarchical morphology (i.e., stepping
between macro- micro- and nano- regimes). The work will also provide insight
toward the challenges associated with fabrication (i.e., dispersion and
preparation) as well as reproducibility and reliability of the composite
manufacturing process.