* 1445654
* An Online System for the Collection of Textbook Adoption Data
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Morgan Polikoff, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,942.00

Textbooks are an important influence on teachers' instruction and students'
learning. While textbooks are nearly ubiquitous in U.S. classrooms, little data
is kept on which schools and districts adopt which textbooks, and to what
effect. The lack of systematic textbook adoption data is especially troubling
given that districts and schools are making important decisions about curriculum
materials in light of new college and career readiness standards. This project,
funded as part of an effort to improve the measurement of indicators of
successful K-12 education, will gather and make publicly available the largest-
ever database of mathematics and science textbook adoption data and analyze the
impact of textbooks on student achievement in the five largest U.S. states. The
goal of the work is to create an online system that could be sustained
inexpensively and used to maintain and make publicly available longitudinal data
on textbook adoptions moving forward. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work plan
involves four phases. Phase 1 will build a web-based data collection tool and
assemble a list of school district contacts for the target states. Phase 2 will
gather textbook adoption data in mathematics and science from the districts
through phone and email contacts. Phase 3 will analyze textbook adoption
patterns and effects. Phase 4 will update the adoption data in the second year
and build plans to sustain and expand the tool. The proposed adoption data could
have several transformative uses. Researchers could use the data to study
patterns in adoption and conduct 'epidemiological studies' of curriculum
effectiveness. District personnel could use the data to, to identify other
districts adopting their same curricular materials for purposes of collaboration
and instructional improvement.