* 1445237
* Workshop on Future Directions in Control, Dynamics and Systems, August 5-7, 2014, Pasadena, CA
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 24,114.00

Workshop on Future Directions in Control, Dynamics and
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is to bring together leading US and
international researchers to discuss latest advances in control and feedback,
dynamics, and geometry, systems, networks and applications. The workshop
sessions will focus on established connections between topics in Control and
Dynamical Systems (CDS) program at Caltech and emerging opportunities. This
workshop is unique as it will bring in distinguished US and international
researchers to participate and discuss future directions for the control and
dynamical systems community. The goal is recognize some of the successes of the
field in the past 20 years and to talk about new opportunities in the next 20
years. A particular focus of the workshop will be on how the future directions
of CDS can better serve the nation, and how to educate a new breed of scientists
and engineers in this important area. Sample application areas include aerospace
and transportation, biology and medicine, communications and networking,
economics and finance, energy and infrastructure, materials and processing, and
robotics and intelligent machines. The workshop will be held on August 5-7, 2014
in Pasadena, CA.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will include three major
themes (1) control and feedback (2) dynamics and geometry (3) systems, networks
and applications. The workshop will have a strong educational component for
graduate and undergraduate students, especially those seeking to define an
exciting thesis topic for a 21st century control theory that continues to impact
society and technology in numerous ways. The outcome of the workshop will be
published in the IEEE Control Systems Magazine for wider dissemination. It is
expected that this workshop will have a significant impact in setting the
direction of research and innovations in control system engineering.