* 1445634
* Sinabung Volcano, Sumatra: Testing the link to the Toba Supervolcano
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Shanaka de Silva, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,961.00

Sinabung Volcano, located less than 25 miles from the northern edge of the Toba
caldera, Sumatra, has been erupting dangerously since November, 2013 with
significant potential hazard to the more the 100,000 people living in the
surrounding Brestagi-Kabanjahe districts. 25 miles to the NE lies Medan, the
capital of the North Sumatra province with over 2million people. Most concerning
is that there is evidence that the erupted magma compositions of Sinabung and
Sibayak (its neighbour) share more in common with the Toba magma system, than
with other arc volcanoes in Suantra. Without trying to be alarmist, this
affinity to Toba has obvious consequences for the way we should think about
hazards from Sinabung and Sibayak as Toba-like compositions tend to result in
more explosive eruptions that normal arc volcanoes. Moreover, if these two
volcanoes are somehow linked to the Toba magma system, then we must factor that
into predicting the potential hazard.

To test the hypothesis of a link between Sinabung-Sabayak and Toba magma
systems, these researchers propose to look for a Toba ?signal? in Sinabung and
Sibayak. The signal will be in two parts. First, they will focus on microscopic
zircon crystals and obtain age dates that will help them identify any Toba-aged
components. They will do this by obtaining in-situ U-Th age determinations in
zircons and then combining these data with He-in-zircon. This will allow them to
track the Toba signature back through the history of activity at Sinabung and
Sibayak through time. In addition, detailed analysis of zonation of zircons
would allow them to differentiate between two alternative explanations for the
Toba signal; a) re-melting solidified remnants of Toba and b) rejuvenating an
old Toba magma. Both these scenarios will influence the eruptive style of
Sinabung and Sibayak, but the latter would connote that the Toba signal is
recent and beneath Sinabung and Sibayak. Second, the chemical fingerprint of
Toba will be searched for using whole rock major and trace elements, and
isotopic ratios The work needs to be done in a timely fashion under the auspices
of RAPID, while the iron is hot so to speak, because the opportunity to sample
the most recent eruption must be taken before the explosive deposits, which are
small, are removed by monsoon rains and their context lost. This work will be
done in collaboration with Indonesian colleagues and other international groups
addressing volcanic hazards from Sinabung.