* 1445542
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Untying the Gordian Knot: Practical and Distributed Optimal Scheduling to Support Multimedia Traffic over Wireless Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Eylem Ekici, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 100,851.00

This project supports a cooperative research effort by Dr. Eylem Ekici of Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, and Dr. Moustafa Youssef of the Egypt-Japan
University of Science and Technology, Alexandria, Egypt. They plan to study
"practical and distributed optimal scheduling to support multimedia traffic over
wireless networks." Communications and networking have become inseparable
components of modern life. With the ever-increasing penetration of mobile and
networked devices, the majority of available services rely heavily on
information obtained or delivered through a networked information
infrastructure. This project will design distributed scheduling algorithms for
wireless networks that will increase efficiency and "quality of experience",
especially for streaming multimedia applications that demand significant
bandwidth. The project is based on using available wireless resources but with
more efficient information transfer algorithms to ensure existing wireless
networks are used to their fullest extent. This research has clear benefits
around the world as the use of mobile devices continues to expand, with specific
benefits likely for real-time multimedia delivery activities such as video
streaming, video conferencing and distributed surveillance. The project includes
an explicit plan to incorporate the research work into educational programs for
students at the participating universities, with signicant benefits likely. The
education plan includes technology transfer, student training, outreach to high
school students, and international collaboration. The US PI will leverage
various established programs at his university to recruit qualified women and
students from underrepresented groups for the research.

Recently, two important properties have emerged as prominent features of
current, and likely future, networking environments: First, multimedia traffic
(e.g. multimedia podcasts, broadcasts, interactive real time communication
applications) constitute an increasing fraction of the communication network
load; second, there is a significant shift to connections that contain at least
one hop delivered over wireless links that are shared by multiple users. The
widespread use of multimedia services over wireless networks is causing stress
on the available bandwidth and is affecting the quality of experience (QoE) for
users, especially with streaming multimedia applications. Recent studies of the
delay performance of throughput-optimal distributed schemes have generally
revealed that their delay characteristics are unacceptable for serving
multimedia traffic. This indicates a need for alternative distributed solutions
geared towards the QoE metrics associated with multimedia traffic. This project
will design distributed scheduling algorithms for wireless networks, and will
implement the algorithms on real platforms and evaluate the effect of different
practical issues on the performance of the algorithms. The research will be: (1)
to add the ability to establish multiple optimization criteria on a per-flow (as
opposed to an aggregate) basis, (2) to extend the algorithm to multiple hops in
a topology, (3) to rectify tradeoffs in jitter and long-term fairness, (4) to
account for finiteness and variability in flow lifetimes, and (5) to ensure
practical implementation of the resulting decentralized algorithm. The
objectives encompass a challenging research agenda, and the research is both
incremental and high risk. The US PI will focus on design and theoretical
analysis, and the Egyptian PI to focus on implementation and prototyping.

This project is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science and Technology Fund
Program. Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative projects is provided to
the National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department of State. The Egyptian
Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the collaboration.