* 1445493
* Support for NSF Workshop for CAREER Awardees in Photonics. To Be Held in San Jose, CA., June 8-13, 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Elizabeth Rogan, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2015
* USD 28,000.00

The project will provide financial support for NSF CAREER Awardees in Photonics
to participate in a workshop to be held in San Jose, CA on June 13, 2014. The
goal of the workshop is to bring together many recent CAREER Award winners
supported by the ECCS division to discuss their progress in photonics and to
promote development of their research careers. The workshop will be co-located
with the Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO) 2014 meeting being held
in San Jose, CA during June 8-13, 2014. CLEO serves as the premier international
forum for scientific and technical optics, uniting the fields of lasers and
opto-electronics by bringing together all aspects of laser technology, from
basic research to industry applications. The main objective goal of the Workshop
is to assist NSF CAREER Awardees in photonics to improve their experience as
junior faculty members who are establishing their academic careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Workshop, recent NSF CAREER Awardees will present
their research activities in photonics. Technical discussions will span a broad
range of areas of photonics research, from materials to devices, including
integrated photonics, non-linear optics, microstructure and specialty fibers,
optical sensors, optical manipulators, metamaterials, and Mid IR photonics. The
meeting will facilitate an open technical exchange to establish new
collaborations, determine future research strategies and infrastructure needs as
well as opportunities to pursue larger award opportunities, including NSF
Engineering Research Centers. In addition, the workshop is expected to provide a
special venue for NSF CAREER Awardees to interact with leaders from both
academia and industry.