* 1445862
* Workshop on Virtual Reality, Gaming and Individuals with Disabilities in San Diego, CA on September 10-13, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Richard Simpson, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 23,302.00

PI: Simpson, Richard C. Proposal Number: 1445862 Workshop on Virtual Reality,
Gaming and Individuals with Disabilities in San Diego, CA on September 10-13,
2014

Broader Significance & Importance The PI proposes to conduct a four hour seminar
at the Annual Meeting of the American Academy for Cerebral Palsy and
Developmental Medicine (AACPDM) in San Diego, CA. The seminar's title will be
"Virtual Reality, Gaming, and Individuals with Physical Disabilities -
Developers Showcase." Participants in the workshop will include: - scientists
and engineers who are using inexpensive virtual reality and gaming technologies
(e.g., the Microsoft Kinect, the Nintendo Wii) to develop therapeutic activities
for individuals with disabilities; - clinicians who have used virtual reality
and gaming technologies with their clients; - individuals with disabilities who
have an interest in virtual reality and gaming technologies The goals of the
proposed seminar include: - increasing communication between software/hardware
developers, between clinicians to developers, and between consumers to
developers; - allowing developers to share "lessons learned" about
hardware/software development in this area; - providing developers with insight
into future gaming and virtual reality technologies; - giving developers the
opportunity to receive feedback beyond the group of clinicians and consumers
they regularly work with

Intellectual Merit: With recent technological advances in computers and the
gaming industry, a growing field of study has emerged at the intersection of
computer science and individuals with disabilities. Computer scientists and
electrical engineers are developing software and hardware solutions for use by
people with physical disabilities; health professionals are designing and
testing systems for clinical therapeutic use; and tech start-ups and non-profits
have already created adaptive and assistive technologies that are available for
consumer use. However, there is a need for increased cross-collaboration between
researchers, developers and clinicians in different labs and across different
disciplines. This workshop will be part of a collaborative effort to create a
forum where efforts can be celebrated and ideas can be shared.

Broader Impacts: Virtual reality and gaming technologies have the potential to
dramatically increase the effectiveness of rehabilitation and therapy in a
variety of fields and across a number of clinical populations. Fully
capitalizing on this potential, however, will require active participation from
scientists, engineers, clinicians and individuals with disabilities. The
proposed workshop will provide a forum for inter-disciplinary collaboration and
communication, which will advance this field towards its ultimate goal of
deploying effective therapeutic systems based on virtual reality and gaming
technologies.