* 1445431
* Adapting the Classroom Video Analysis Approach as a Feasible and Scalable Measure of Common-Core-Aligned Mathematics Knowledge for Teaching
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Nicole Kersting, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,445.00

The Classroom Video Analysis (CVA) instrument is a new and innovative approach
to measuring teachers' Mathematics Knowledge for Teaching (MKT). The MKT of
teachers is a key indicator to monitor according to the National Academy of
Science report Monitoring Progress toward Successful K-12 STEM Education. The
most common approach to assessing MKT are the multiple-choice measures developed
by Ball and Hill, which in some studies have been shown to correlate
significantly with instructional quality or student learning. While the measures
clearly represent significant improvements over traditional tests, they are not
without limitations. Correlations between MKT scores, instructional quality and
student learning have been inconsistent across studies. The CVA provides an
innovative alternative. In the CVA teachers view short video clips of authentic
mathematics instruction online and analyze them in writing. Based on early work,
teachers' CVA scores were not only reliable and predicted the MKT, but were also
better predictors of instructional quality and student learning. One advantage
of the CVA is that analyzing teaching events is closer to the work of teaching
itself and hence less onerous for teachers and easy to embed. Most recently,
research has shown that the CVA can be computer scored, making it potentially
highly scalable. This project will develop an extension of the measure that is
aligned with the Common Core State Standards (CCSS), and then assess its
feasibility as a scalable indicator of MKT. Findings from this study will help
evaluate the feasibility of developing video-based MKT measures that are
classroom-focused and seek to approximate as much as possible the knowledge that
is used in the process of teaching. Findings will inform which item prompts and
formats appear to be most promising as indicators of standards-based MKT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team hypothesizes that the knowledge teachers
draw on when analyzing the teaching events in the video clips is their usable
MKT not just knowledge they can access on a test but knowledge they can activate
and apply in the classroom. Previous work was based on general prompts and
rubrics. This project will map existing CVA fraction clips onto the CCSS,
including the mathematical practices. The project will revise the tasks posed
and the scoring rubrics applied to create classroom-focused, standards-based
measures of MKT that can be used to monitor this indicator. Next to more general
prompts they will develop content-specific ones, using different item formats
and ways of scoring. The project will complete preliminary testing of new
measures in two stages. First, the project will collect and analyze responses
from 100 mathematics teachers (grades 3-5) using different versions of the new
standards-aligned items and evaluate item and scale functioning and score
reliability. The project will also explore how teachers' scores on our new
measures relate their scores on a traditional MKT fraction scale. In a second
study of 40 mathematics teachers and their grade 3-5 students, the project will
combine the well-working items from the first study into new scales and explore
how they relate to the traditional MKT and student learning of fractions. The
project will analyze the items and scales using classical test theory, item
response theory models, and explore the applicability of diagnostic
classification models.