* 1445084
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Microbial Capacitive Desalination for Produced Water Reuse and Energy Production
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Michael Carr, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2017
* USD 255,703.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating microbial
capacitive desalination (MCD) technology to fill the need for energy efficient,
modular, and mobile water management solutions for the emerging oil and natural
gas industry using hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling. Current
technologies for on site treatment and reuse are very energy and cost intensive.
Consequently, large quantities of contaminated water are transported and re-
injected without treatment, an approach that is attracting public and regulatory
attention. The MCD is important because it solves the environmental problems of
produced water (wastewater) transportation, re-injection, and groundwater
contamination, and it can recycle billions of gallons of water for beneficial
use while harvesting energy from the chemical reactions. The project will result
in a prototype MCD system with improved performance under real environmental
conditions. This product has the following unique features: it is a smaller,
mobile system that generates rather than consumes energy while removing
hydrocarbons, salts, and metals. These features provide much higher efficiency
and lower cost when compared to the leading competing water management practices
in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application. It enables the integration of advanced manufacturing, automation
control, and process engineering for modular system development and scale up. It
also provides a testing platform for hydraulic, mechanical, and environmental
characterizations under different conditions, which provides crucial information
for system optimization and application. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, including postdoctoral researchers and students will gain both
technological and entrepreneurship experience through technology development and
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages manufacturing companies and
oil and gas companies to identify commercialization pathways and test
environment in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.