* 1445858
* EAGER: A novel approach to produce graphene for fabricating electronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Prakash Sharma, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 80,000.00

Title: A novel approach to produce graphene for fabricating electronic
devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Decreasing the
switching times is one of the most important requirements for enabling high
performance electronic devices. In this regard, selecting advanced materials for
such devices is vitally important. Graphene is a type of material with only one
layer of carbon atoms packed in a honeycomb configuration. Since its discovery
in 2004, graphene has shown many excellent properties, including a super high
electron mobility, which means that the response time of electronic devices
fabricated using graphene can be much shorter than on other materials. It is
challenging, however, to produce large area and high quality graphene films
prior to building such electronic devices. This project will try to develop a
new method, low cost and easily set up, of growing graphene films. The idea is
loading silicon carbide (SiC) into a high-temperature furnace with oxygen gas
flowing through. SiC will be oxidized and a layer of silicon dioxide (SiO2) can
be formed. Graphene films are expected to be grown between the SiC and SiO2. It
has been shown that carbon atoms do exist between them. However, it is not yet
reported that large area carbon atoms packed like honeycomb, i.e. graphene, are
available. The goal of this project is to produce large area graphene films by
trying different parameters during the growth. It is also proposed that graphene
films with defined shapes can be grown. After graphene is produced, electronic
devices will be fabricated on the grown graphene and their performance, such as
response time, will be tested. If successful, the cost of electronic devices on
graphene will be much lower. Since the project will be carried out at an HBCU
school, underrepresented students will be encouraged to participate and they
will be exposed to the frontier of graphene-based electronics. This project will
also serve as a platform for many interdisciplinary students to learn
semiconductor-related courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a new method for producing a 2-D
carbon material: graphene. Current methods require either high temperatures
(&gt;1300oC) or high vacuum (&lt;10-8 Torr). It is difficult for small research
institutions to afford such type of facilities. The new method which is less
costly, originates from the fact that carbon atom can accumulate between silicon
carbide (SiC) and silicon dioxide (SiO2), reported by some groups, during the
thermal oxidation process. Previous experiments conducted by the PI have also
demonstrated that the channel mobility of lateral MOSFET on SiC sometimes is
higher than its widely recognized values (160 cm2/V.s vs. 35 cm2/V.s),
suggesting another mechanism may be involved. Smaller graphene flakes are
suggested to be produced between SiC and SiO2 during the thermal oxidation
process, a key step during the fabrication of MOSFETs. This project proposes to
investigate whether the unusually high channel mobility is attributed to
graphene. The idea is testing whether graphene flakes exist under the SiO2 layer
of MOSFETs that show higher channel mobility. A correlation is expected to be
built. More importantly, an attempt will be made to grow more uniform graphene
films between SiC and SiO2 by adjusting the oxidation conditions such as
temperature (900 ~ 1200oC), pressure (1 atm ~ 0.01 atm), flow rate, and
oxidation time. Graphene films with defined shapes are also proposed to be
produced with the help of ion-implantation. The goal is to develop a new
graphene production approach which can be accomplished by most institutions and
easily employed for fabricating electronic devices, particularly MOS devices and
radio-frequency (RF) devices. Prototype of those devices will be demonstrated
and measured. This project will have a great impact on graphene-based
electronics, as well as other related fields.