* 1445467
* Collaborative Research: CubeSat: Ionosphere Thermosphere Scanning Photometer for Ion-Neutral Studies (IT-SPINS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Richard Doe, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 07/31/2018
* USD 279,350.00

This project is to design, develop, construct, operate and analyze the results
of a spacecraft CubeSat mission named "Ionospheric-Thermospheric Scanning
Photometer for Ion-Neutral Studies" (IT-SPINS). The ionosphere affects modern
technologies such as civilian and military communications and navigation and
surveillance systems. Reliable communication and navigation, therefore, often
requires correction of the signals for effects imposed by the ionosphere. To do
that the properties of the ionosphere, such as its variability with respect to
magnetospheric disturbance, time of day, season of the year, and solar cycle
variability must be well understood and modeled. The fundamental measurements of
IT-SPINS are high-sensitivity line-of-sight observations of Ultra Violet
nightglow radiance produced by the recombination of Oxygen ions with electrons
in the upper ionosphere. IT-SPINS will rotate at two rotations per minute about
the orbit normal and will acquire 60 radiance measurements per revolution.
Observations from several rotations will then be combined in a tomographic
inversion algorithm to produce two-dimensional altitude/in-track images of the
emissions. In this way, IT-SPINS will provide the first-ever set of unambiguous,
geographically-extended measurements of the Oxygen ion distributions within the
nightside ionosphere. Specifically, IT-SPINS will provide crucial information on
the ion gradient structures in the, so-called, Topside Transition Region, from
approximately 500km to 1000km altitude, where a transition takes place in the
plasma conditions from being dominated by Oxygen ions to being dominated by
Hydrogen ions. Prior studies of the TTR have primarily used large incoherent
scatter radars at only a few locations around the World. Consequently, a
thorough climatological study of the TTR's dependence on latitude, local time,
and solar and geomagnetic activity does not exist at present. Lacking
fundamental understanding of the variability of the TTR and the detailed
morphology of Oxygen ion distributions throughout the TTR is a critical
limitation currently in our ability to accurately model and predict ionospheric
variability.

Beyond fundamental space weather objectives, the IT-SPINS project places a
significant priority on experimental learning in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education at the university undergraduate
level. Undergraduate students will participate in responsible roles on all
aspects of the project. This provides the students with rare and valuable
opportunities to learn and practice project management; systems engineering;
engineering design, development and testing; and flight operations and data
analysis skills through first-hand, project-based learning while being mentored
by faculty and professional staff. In addition, through affiliation with the
statewide Montana Space Grant Consortium (MSGC), the project will engage
traditionally disadvantaged students at MSGC affiliated Tribal Colleges with IT-
SPINS operational activities during the orbital phase.

IT-SPINS can achieve compelling science results over a wide range of available
orbit inclinations (>40 degrees) and altitudes (500-700 km). This altitude range
puts us at optimal viewing of the TTR above, and plasma structures below the
satellite while ensuring a 25-year de-orbit criteria. The following primary and
secondary science objectives and derived science questions are designed so that
a subset of them can be addressed by IT-SPINS regardless of the satellite orbit
it will be given. The primary science objective for the mission is to study the
variability of the TTR and O+ altitude profiles. The following three questions
will be addressed: 1) How does the altitude and thickness of the boundary
between O+ dominated ionospheric physics and H+, He+ dominated plasmasphere
physics vary as a function of magnetic L-shell, magnetic longitude, local time
and geomagnetic activity? 2) How well do Geospace numerical models predict the
observed variability of the TTR and O+ altitude profiles? 3) What is the
importance of the charge exchange between O+ and neutral hydrogen to the TTR?
Imaging the mesoscale structuring of equatorial plasma bubbles and polar cap
patches constitutes a secondary science objective for the mission. The
equatorial part of the secondary science objective can be addressed by both mid-
and high inclination orbits, whereas the polar patch part can only be addressed
for high inclination orbits (~70 degrees or higher).