* 1445430
* International Travel Support for The Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics 13th Quadrennial Solar-Terrestrial Physics Symposium; October 12-17, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* David Webb, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,960.00

The Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics (SCOSTEP) 13th Quadrennial
Solar-Terrestrial Physics Symposium (STP 13), to be held October 12 through 17,
2014, in XiAn, Shanxi, China is an important international meeting that will
attract key scientists and students from around the world working in solar-
terrestrial studies. SCOSTEP has sponsored many multi-year solar-terrestrial
programs, the most recent being the Climate and Weather of the Sun Earth System
(CAWSES) I and II programs extending from 2005 thru 2013. The new SCOSTEP
program is the Variability of the Sun and Its Terrestrial Impact (VarSITI)
program, extending over the next 5 years. The STP13 Symposium will highlight the
scientific results obtained during the previous CAWSES II program and the first
new results from VarSITI. VarSITI has four scientific elements that address key
solar terrestrial problems of current interest including the current low solar
activity. These involve solar evolution and extreme events, Earth affecting
solar transients, the coupled inner-magnetospheric environment, and the middle
atmosphere/thermosphere/ionosphere role in climate.&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the travel and meeting expenses for up to seven distinguished U.S.
scientists to attend the meeting. A major focus of the discussions will be data
analysis, modeling, and theory to improve to improve understanding of how solar
variability affects Earth. The U.S. scientists that will be sponsored are
essential for organizing key aspects of the meeting and the results that will be
discussed there. Students from many countries will attend the meeting and
benefit from the participation of the sponsored U.S. scientists. These
scientists will also be available to participate in media and public outreach
activities. The presentations will be published in the STP 13 symposium
proceedings, and many journal publications will result from the interactions of
the attendees. The sponsored U.S. scientists will help promote such publications
and may be coauthors of papers and even editors of the proceedings.