* 1445380
* EAGER: Guide Drones for Blind Athletes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Eelke Folmer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 72,080.00

There are approximately 25 million people with visual impairments in the United
States, including 1.3 million who are legally blind. Lack of physical activity
is a serious health concern for these individuals, who have fewer opportunities
to engage in physical activities that provide the amounts and kinds of
stimulation necessary to maintain adequate fitness and to support a healthy
lifestyle, for a number of reasons: a lack of exercise partners or sighted
guides with whom to exercise; safety concerns; and a general lack of accessible
activities to choose from. Running is a popular form of exercise that offers
various cardiovascular health benefits, but to run outdoors blind athletes must
currently rely on a sighted person to safely guide them using a tether; in
addition to the challenge of meeting someone who has a compatible schedule and
is willing to exercise together, this dependency on others puts significant
constraints on the frequency and duration with which blind individuals can
exercise.

It has been suggested that robots may allow individuals with disabilities to
lead more independent lives, but the approaches that have previously been
explored primarily involve grounded robots moving at slow speeds. Because
running is performed at a much faster pace than walking, this exploratory
project will investigate the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle (commonly
referred to as a drone) to safely guide a blind runner. The blind athlete
follows the drone, which is flying ahead of him/her at a fixed distance, on the
basis of sound alone, with no human exercise companion and no tether to impede
his/her ability to run. The PI will employ a commercially available low-cost
quadcopter platform that is controlled using an app on a smartphone, to explore
audio feedback mechanisms that allow a blind runner to effectively follow the
drone while avoiding obstacles and also correcting for unintentional veering off
course.

The PI has secured the collaboration of a blind triathlon athlete as a
consultant on this project, to provide feedback on design issues, to participate
in early trials, and to help with subject recruitment. This research will make
significant contributions in nonvisual Human-Robot Interaction while
establishing design principles and laying the foundations for a new kind of
assistive technology. Potential future extensions to the work could involve the
use of guide drones for other physical activities such as swimming or cycling,
where the use of a grounded robot and leash is impractical.