* 1445944
* SKC Indigenous Research Center Planning Grant
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sievert Regina, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2016
* USD 115,469.00

American Indian people are underrepresented in the STEM fields. Tribal colleges
are working to develop their research capacity so as to broaden participation in
research by American Indian people. Salish Kootenai College (SKC), the tribal
college of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, has in recent years
likewise been expanding its research work, with both students and faculty. SKC
faculty and administration recognize the importance of research in the
recruitment and retention of students and faculty, in preparing students for
STEM professions and graduate study, and in generating knowledge that benefits
tribal communities and the rest of society. An indigenous research center (IRC),
the first of its kind at a tribal college, has been envisioned as a means to
further develop research capacity and broaden participation in research at SKC
and other tribal colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step toward the
development of such a center, SKC will conduct a self study and needs assessment
to gather information that will assist in conceptualizing the center. The one-
year study will be led by SKC and will include other tribal and non-tribal
colleges, as well as related tribal entities, in gathering data to inform the
feasibility, design, role, and operation of an IRC at SKC. A wide array of data
types, both quantitative and qualitative, will be collected using a variety of
strategies including focus groups, surveys, interviews, site visits,
teleconferencing and video conferencing, and archived institutional data. The
study will seek answers to questions such as "What kinds of research efforts and
resources currently exist at TCUs? What strengths and hindrances related to
research work are found within TCUs? What are the research priorities for TCUs?
What types of assistance could an IRC provide to support the development of
research capacity and broaden participation in research at TCUs? What would be
the logistics of establishing and operating an IRC at SKC? Does the IRC align
with SKC's vision and mission? What kinds of resources already exist at SKC to
support the maintenance of an IRC and what kinds of things would have to be
acquired or established?" The needs assessment and self study will occur in
stages, adding participants and collecting finer-grained information at each
stage. Data will be analyzed in several ways as appropriate for each data type,
using descriptive statistics for quantitative data and thematic analysis for
qualitative data, for example. A formative report generated after the first few
months of the study will inform later stages of the work. A preliminary
framework for he IRC will be iteratively revised by a broad range of TCU
partners in the later stages of the study. A comprehensive report of the study
process and its final findings will be shared with the NSF and project
stakeholders and will be made available to a wider audience on the SKC web site.