* 1445131
* EAGER: Detection Of In Vivo Corticosterone In Mice Using Cophmore Engineering And Fluorescent Carbon Nanotube Sensors
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Michael Strano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 09/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Steroid hormones produced by the adrenal gland are important biomarkers for
psychological stress. They are involved in fat and sugar metabolism, modulation
of the immune system and cognitive processes in the brain. Despite the obvious
need to characterize the dynamic changes in these steroids throughout daily
life, there has been little progress towards a method of in vivo detection of
these important hormones. Dr. Michael Strano's research team at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) will build upon their recently
developed platform technique called Corona Phase Molecular Recognition
(CoPhMoRe) to create novel sensors for long-term in vivo monitoring of a
specific steroid hormone, corticosterone, a steroid hormone in rodents. If
successful, continuous and fast detection of corticosterone from the blood, the
brain, and other tissues will become a reality. Initially, nanoscale fluorescent
sensors for corticosterone will be placed in mice near the region of interest
either by injecting them into the blood stream, incorporating and implanting
them in biocompatible hydrogel particles or immobilizing them on waveguide
probes. Once internalized the sensors will determine local corticosterone
concentrations through activation by a non-invasive light. Measuring sensor
responses with light enables fast (< 1 second) and continuous (>1 year)
monitoring of corticosterone concentrations. This new sensor will provide
completely new insights into the dynamics of this hormone and related
physiological processes and form the foundation for further developing the
sensor for cortisol, a related stress hormone in humans. This technology will
enable a detailed understanding of the role of steroid hormones in the healthy,
as well as diseased, organism.

Understanding the dynamic function of the stress response system is critical for
developing solutions for many social and health problems that involve stress
regulation. The development of an in vivo corticosterone sensor for
investigation using rodent model system will be transformative for both the
basic research in the role of stress in cognitive function and clinical research
on treatment of illness associated with stress. The economic and societal
benefits of developing noninvasive nanoscale sensors for the ultimate
development of cortisol detection in humans are enormous. In addition, this
project will provide an opportunity to understand molecular recognition at the
nanometer scale as a teaching aid to students. Using conventional microscopy
with modified optics and near infrared detectors, students are able to study
CoPhMoRe at the single molecule level as well as to learn the techniques needed
for in vivo research. The Strano laboratory at MIT has a strong track record of
working and publishing with undergraduate students and minorities; this grant
will continue these efforts by supporting a female postdoc.