* 1445804
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Experimental Investigation and Control of an Integrated JB/AMB rotor bearing
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Eric Maslen, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 86,780.00

This project supports a cooperative research effort by Dr. Eric Maslen of James
Madison University with Dr. Aly El-Shafei of Cairo University in Cairo, Egypt.
They plan to study "The Design and Control Development of an Integrated JB/AMB".
Most large turbomachinery use fluid film journal bearings (JBs) to support the
rotor, limit vibrations, and to control potential instabilities. More recently,
an alternate bearing technology has come into commercial use: active magnetic
bearings (AMBs). These bearings offer a number of advantages, particularly
because they can provide very favorable dynamic properties, useful in managing
rotor stability. The goal of the project is to integrate the superior load
capacity of journal bearings with the controllability characteristics of active
magnetic bearings which can counteract the instability associated with fluid
film journal bearings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To capitalize on the advantages of
both bearing designs, the PIs will explore the combination of both bearings into
a single integrated bearing design. The core hypothesis of the research is that
it is possible to physically co-locate a fluid film and a magnetic bearing and
construct a controller to a) ensure stability of the rotor/bearing system at all
speeds of interest, b) satisfy a loadsharing objective that minimizes
competition between the two bearing mechanisms, c) minimize a weighted
combination of bearing-transmitted forces and rotor vibration to significantly
reduce rotor vibration or pedestal force transmission for a given level of rotor
unbalance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop the concept of a
hybrid bearing,integrating a fluid film and magnetic bearing into a single
component. One merit of this approach is that the two devices can operate in a
complementary fashion with the fluid film component providing the bulk of load
capacity and fault tolerance, while the magnetic component enhances the
stability. It is expected that the combination can offer substantially higher
stability margins than are currently afforded by tilt-pad fluid film bearings.
The second merit of this approach is that a hybrid bearing can allow for
performance optimization to a particular application as it is less dependent on
hardware to control its operation. By incorporating bearing control through a
choice of algorithms, the hybrid bearing design can adapt with system changes or
upgrades to prolong the useful life of the bearing. A set of conventional
controllers for addressing common system dynamics and an option for allowing in-
situ tunability could also be provided. The results could have an immediate
benefit for large stationary rotor systems (e.g., gas turbines, turbo expanders,
megawatt scale motors). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By building a strong collaboration
between researchers in the United States and in Egypt, the project will promote
exchange of scientific and engineering ideas as well as cultural exchange. Both
the US and the Egyptian teams include junior scientists who will make multiple
trips in both directions. The US activity will be conducted at James Madison
University, a primarily undergraduate institution and will integrate
undergraduate students from both the School of Engineering and from the
Department of Integrated Science and Technology. Further, the results of this
research will provide educational benefit for two engineering courses as a case
study providing an example of design and analysis. Third, the research will
potentially have direct impact on the welfare of the public at large, as high-
speed rotating machinery pervades the technical base of modern societies. This
resarch has significant potential to improve the efficiency of such machinery,
especially in the energy sector. Advances in bearing technology will improve the
overall performance and viability of the dependent technology sectors, which in
turn provides benefits to the societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science and Technology Fund program. Support
for the U.S. side of these cooperative projects is provided to the National
Science Foundation by the U.S. Department of State. The Egyptian Government
provides support for the Egyptian side of the collaboration.