* 1445701
* NSF/FDA SIR: Quantitative Characterization of Innovative Near-infrared Fluorescence Imaging Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Yu Chen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 87,972.00

PI: Chen, Yu&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1445701&lt;br/&gt;Title: Quantitative
Characterization of Innovative Near-infrared Fluorescence Imaging
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;Insights gained regarding
optimal methods for NIR fluorescence image quality assessment will be relevant
well beyond the primary focus of intraoperative imaging, to applications such as
retinal angiography and lymphatic imaging using fluorescent dyes. Development of
standardized test methods will also have a significant impact on the emerging
field of optical molecular imaging, by facilitate device development and
intercomparison, clinical translation and regulatory clearance. Furthermore, the
proposed research will be seamlessly integrated with educational, mentoring, and
outreach activities to advance the cross-disciplinary program in the field of
Biophotonics Imaging and regulatory science at the University of Maryland (UMD)
and FDA. UMD was recently awarded as the Center for Excellence in Regulatory
Science and Innovation (CERSI) by FDA. The proposed research will further
strengthen the research and education collaboration between UMD and
FDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
develop and validate a series of novel phantom-based test methods for
standardized, quantitative assessment of fluorescence imaging instruments. The
components of this work will include: 1) Development of NIR fluorescence systems
and characterization of potential phantom constituent materials; 2) Development
of phantoms for evaluation of resolution and illumination/detection uniformity,
as well as the contrast-detail analysis and low-contrast detectability; 3)
Investigation of the potential to use three-dimensional (3D) printing to
generate fluorescence phantoms based on conventional-geometries as well as
biomimetic phantoms based on image volumes to replicate realistic tissue
morphology.