* 1445149
* Travel Awards for 2014 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM-2014)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

Bioinformatics and Biomedicine research are fundamental to our understanding of
complex biological systems, impacting the science and technology of fields
ranging from agricultural and environmental sciences to pharmaceutical and
medical sciences. The research requires close collaboration among multi-
disciplinary teams of researchers in quantitative sciences, life sciences, and
their interfaces. The 8th Annual IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Biomedicine will provide an open and interactive forum to promote multi- and
interdisciplinary research and education in Bioinformatics and Biomedicine,
facilitating the cross fertilization of ideas and bridging knowledge gaps. The
scientific program will cover synergistic themes on genomics, systems biology,
translational bioinformatics, and cross-cutting bioinformatics infrastructure to
promote new research collaboration. Two special panels, Big Data and
Bioinformatics, and the Bioinformatics Educational Workshop will foster
discussion on research and education opportunities and barriers. As an effort to
engage young researchers, BIBM-2014 has involved them in the meeting
organization and has included mentoring activities in the conference program.
This support will provide the crucial funding needed to support the
participation of early career researchers and graduate students, especially
those from underrepresented groups, as a training opportunity for the next
generation of scientists and engineers, thereby, broadening the scientific
impact of this international conference.