* 1445210
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: THE GEO-CC&amp;CP FOUNDRY BUILDING INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY FOR BROADENING PARTICIPATION IN THE GEOSCIENCE WORKFORCE
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* David Mogk, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2016
* USD 63,967.00

Many underrepresented minorities attend two year technical and community
colleges (2YCs) or minority-serving institutions (MSIs) as undergraduates; but
these institutions commonly lack adequate geoscience programs. The purpose of
this project is to identify strategies that will help 2YC and MSI institutions
to better prepare underrepresented students for geoscience careers. This project
brings together partner institutions, individual faculty, educational resource
providers, educational researchers, and geoscience employers in a series of
focused workshops to determine the systems that would be ideal for increasing
geoscience capacity at the targeted institutions. This project directly involves
20 2YC/MSI institutional partners and faculty and 30 additional stakeholders.
The main project outcome is a series of reports and related web-based resources
for the general geoscience education community outlining challenges and
opportunities for improving and expanding geoscience teaching at 2YCs and MSIs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack of access to undergraduate opportunities in two year
colleges (2YCs) and minority-serving institutions (MSIs) remains a major barrier
to improving the preparation and diversity of the geoscience workforce. The
specific goals of this project are to (1) identify and clarify barriers and
opportunities for better use of existing instructional resources that engage
underrepresented students in the geosciences at 2YCs/MSIs and (2) explore with
stakeholders what an ideal model of resources, professional development, and
ongoing support for faculty and institutions might look like. These goals are
addressed through holding a series of focused stakeholder needs assessments
workshops. The needs assessments workshops will yield information about barriers
and opportunities by bringing together five key stakeholder groups including (1)
instructional faculty at 2YCs and MSIs, (2) educational resource providers, (3)
academic chairs and administrators, (4) discipline-based geoscience education
researchers, and (5) geoscience workforce employers. Reports and related web-
based resources generated during each of these workshops will highlight
sustainable institutional infrastructure that will increase access and usability
of existing educational resources. Evaluation and project team activities will
synthesize findings across the groups to generate knowledge and align future
proposals with stakeholder needs. This project focuses activities at the
institution and system level, directly involving 20 2YC/MSI institutional
partners and faculty, and 30 other individuals from additional stakeholder
groups. By working at the system level, it will be possible to ensure that not
only individual courses but also pathways to the geosciences are created. The
external evaluation will (1) provide an independent, objective view as to how
well the project management is functioning as a team, (2) evaluate the extent to
which the needs assessment workshops are meeting the project goals, and (3)
review stakeholder reports and the project team's final report for accuracy and
completeness. The evaluator will be a participant observer in all project team
activities and will collect qualitative data from the management team after
project management activities via short questionnaires. The evaluator will have
access (via the SERC content management system) to all documents and records
produced by the management board making it possible to track core project
activities and evaluate how the team is progressing. Feedback will be provided
at least quarterly to inform the PIs as to where improvements can be made. To
complete the second task, the external evaluator will develop and administer a
questionnaire about participant satisfaction with the workshops.