* 1445097
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Micro and Nanofabricated Semiconductor and Ceramic Blade Arrays for Surgical and Hair Removal Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,11/30/2015
* M. Saif Islam, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2015
* USD 199,895.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating atomically
sharp disposable surgical blades through standard semiconductor processing
techniques used by the microelectronics industries in Silicon Valley. The
technology will address the need for low cost blades used in cataract surgery,
tissue cutting and hair removal applications. The project will enable high-
throughput manufacturing of ultra-sharp semiconductor and ceramic based cutting
tools with associated safety features and potential integration of a variety of
electrical, optical and mechanical sensors that are not possible in metal based
blade platforms. Conventional metal blades used in surgical or hair removal
applications experience oxidation and become blunt over time due to micro-
chipping, rusting and burr formation. In cataract surgery, a single-use blade is
desirable. However, surgeons in most countries re-use them on several patients
due to their high cost (around US$50 per blade) emanating from a serial
manufacturing process. Such practice may lead to a risk of compromising patient
safety. This project will result in massively parallel blade manufacturing
processes to produce several thousand identical blades from a single wafer with
atomic level sharpness and ultra-long durability at a fraction of the cost of
their existing counterparts. Further, the cutting edge profile, sharpness, size
and angles of such blades can be fine-tuned and controlled using matured
micro/nano-fabrication techniques. Blade technologies developed in this project
could dramatically reduce the cost of disposable ophthalmic surgical blades and
offer improved shaving experience with integrated sensors for skin and hair
condition monitoring. Atomic sharpness achieved via micro-fabrication processes
will play a key role in breaking the status quo in the saturated hair removal
blades market.

This project will pursue micromachining of silicon and ceramics to fabricate
micro-ridges with atomically sharp cutting edges. Unlike the sequential
polishing process using harsh chemicals for the fabrication of current blades,
this project will develop and employ a massively parallel microfabrication
process commonly used by the semiconductor industry. Commercialization of such
blades will depend on addressing several technology gaps that this project will
address. These include the (a) development of high-throughput fabrication
protocol based on a combination of wet and dry etching of thick silicon and
ceramic wafers along with conformal thin film coating processes with tightly
controlled composition, thickness and hardness, (b) establishment of
manufacturing device design space and yield geometrical window, (c) development
of an early stage prototype by integrating handles to blades and packaging them
cost-effectively, (d) conducting lab tests for mechanical and maneuvering
stability, and (e) process development for large-scale production. Semiconductor
and ceramics are rust-free, more biocompatible, micro-machinable and their
applications in blade fabrication are enabled by highly matured, inexpensive and
green micro-nanofabrication technology. A graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher at the University of California, Davis (UC Davis) will have the
opportunity to be educated in the immersive transdisciplinary nature of this
project, uniquely preparing them with training in technology translation to
solve important problems in the engineering marketplace and succeed in today?s
highly competitive entrepreneurship and industrial environments.

The project engages a Co-PI from Graduate School of Management of UC Davis to
guide this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.