* 1445686
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Zn-based syntactic composite foams for high energy absorption applications
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Nikhil Gupta, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 94,580.00

This project supports a cooperative research effort by Dr. Nikhil Gupta,
Polytechnic University of New York with Dr. Atef Daoud, Central Metallurgical
Research and Development Institute, Helwan, Egypt. They will study "Casting and
Characterizations of Zn alloy Based Composite Foams for High Energy Absorption".
The goal of the project is to develop light-weight and low-cost energy absorbing
foams that are useful in a variety of industrial applications. These foams will
be manufactured using fly ash, thereby recycling an industrial waste material
while also reducing cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on
developing a low cost synthesis method for Zn-alloy composite foam,
characterizing the synthesized composites for a wide variety of loading
conditions and applications, and studying the failure mechanisms. The high
density of Zn-alloys is a limitation in several significant applications, so the
development of lightweight composite foams will help broaden the applications
for these materials. The use of fly ash cenospheres as hollow particles will
provide a valuable mechanism to use this industrial waste material and also
reduce the cost of the composite. The synthesis work will be led by the Egyptian
team, working on producing composites containing high volume fraction of fly ash
cenospheres (up to 50% in volume). The characterization will be led by the
American team and will include compressive, tensile, vibration, impact, and high
strain rate compressive testing of materials. Numerical simulations will be
conducted on the composite foam microstructure to obtain an estimate of the
mechanical properties. Both groups have complementary expertise and facilities
to help ensure the effectiveness of this collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual merits of the project include
development of lightweight Zn-alloy composites, understanding of mechanical
properties of Zn-alloy composites and their strain rate sensitivity, and
knowledge of failure mechanisms of these composite foams. It is potentially very
valuable to develop a low cost material that is also lightweight enough for many
industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's broader impacts
include the cross cultural exchange and intellectual development produced by
bringing the complementary expertise of these two teams from two countries
together. The training of undergraduate and graduate students as well as junior
scientists on both teams will be very valuable. The U.S. team will also
integrate an education component with the research, building upon existing
collaborations to develop a k-12 educational video, and both teams will ensure a
wide dissemination of the research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science and Technology Fund Program.
Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative projects is provided to the
National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department of State. The Egyptian
Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the collaboration.