* 1445814
* Support for the Core Research Activities and Studies of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2019
* USD 640,000.00

This CISE award funds part of the core operations of the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Academy of Sciences for a period
of 5 years. The CSTB provides objective, scholarly analysis, blending expertise
in computer science, electrical engineering, telecommunications, and various
applications and impacts of information technology (IT). CSTB's work is known
and used by a wide and growing circle of agencies, officials, and experts in the
field. CSTB has come to be seen as an authoritative source on IT trends, IT
policies, and their implications for broader public policy. CSTB delivers its
reports and provides briefings to key decision-makers and practitioners in the
research, education, and policy-making communities. Its study groups engage
significant numbers of women, minorities, and people from across the country.
Core support enables it to plan for, oversee, and follow up on projects, and to
be forward-thinking and proactive in formulating new activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding provides for the core research activities and
studies of the CSTB. Through its membership of national leaders and industry,
CSTB has an ambitious program of activities addressing the health of U.S.
computer science, telecommunications, and their applications. CSTB engages
experts from the entire IT community in mixed collaborative groups, developing
ideas, explanations, assessments, and recommendations reflecting diverse points
of view and rigorous peer review. It is a focal point for engaging the research
community in the development of new research agendas and in raising the level of
policy debate. Core support enables CSTB to plan, oversee, and follow up on
projects and students and continue to provide strategic leadership in an area of
critical importance to the nation.