* 1445596
* Workshop on Meteorological Sensitivity Analysis and Data Assimilation; Roanoke, West Virginia; June 1-5, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Ronald Errico, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

This NSF fund is solely for support of student participants at the Workshop on
Meteorological Sensitivity Analysis and Data Assimilation. The 75 expected
participants will present, review, discuss, and evaluate works pertaining to
atmospheric sensitivity analysis and data assimilation, but will include
representation from oceanography and other fields that employ similar
techniques. The fund will provide partial support for at least 8 students or
postdocs who will attend. The workshop will be held at a fairly remote, self-
contained facility at which all participants will share meals and evenings,
providing many opportunities for dialogs with and between experts to make
maximum use of our time. Presentations will include a mix of tutorials on
fundamentals, overview talks on recent paths of developments, posters or short
seminars on new works, and some informal debates. The students will also have an
opportunity to present their own works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the work is in extending the notion of
model tuning to align it with the basic tenets of spatial verification. The
framework will improve forecasts by allowing a user to tune the model parameters
to have desirable spatial features. The PIs have contributed to the development
of the spatial techniques as well as to the sensitivity analysis methods
suitable for this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the research are multi-pronged. The student involved in this
project will become an expert in some of the most sophisticated topics in
numerical prediction models: spatial verification, sensitivity analysis, and
model tuning. This highly interdisciplinary framework itself has general
applicability in that it can be employed to improve predictions from any
numerical model involving inexact parameterizations of physical processes or
inexact knowledge of physical constants, including weather, climate, ocean, etc.
Given that spatial verification is emerging as the verification method of choice
for future forecasts, the method will have wide-spread use. The method will be
disseminated in the form of journal articles, and computer code to be included
in a verification R package produced by National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR).