* 1445500
* Collaborative Research: Cubesat--Ionospheric Scintillation Explorer (ISX)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Jordi Puig-Suari, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2020
* USD 448,097.00

This project is to design, develop, construct, operate and analyze the results
of a spacecraft CubeSat mission named "Ionospheric Scintillation eXplorer"
(ISX). Ionospheric scintillation refers to random fluctuations in amplitude and
phase of radio signals traversing a region of turbulence in the ionosphere. It
impacts the power and phase of the radio signal and is caused by small-scale
(kilometer to centimeters) structure in the ionospheric electron density along
the signal path. Ionospheric scintillation affects trans-ionospheric radio
signals up to a few GHz in frequency and, thus, can have detrimental impacts on
satellite-based communication and navigation systems, such as GPS-based systems,
and also on scientific instruments requiring observations of trans-ionospheric
radio signals, e.g. for radio astronomy. The physics behind the generation of
the plasma irregularity structures that cause scintillation is not fully
understood, largely due to a lack of adequate observations. An obvious
consequence of this is that neither does a reliable capability exist for the
prediction or mitigation of the effects of scintillations on radio waves. ISX
will generate an extensive dataset for applying diffraction radio imaging, which
enables the prediction of scintillations at any frequency determined from the
imaged structure, and potentially the mitigation of distorted signals by
canceling phase fluctuations. Another broader impact of the proposed project is
that it is a pilot effort to provide global, space-based monitoring of
ionospheric radio wave distortion using signals of opportunity available
worldwide. While a single spacecraft cannot provide real-time monitoring, it can
show the way for a constellation of spacecraft to provide such a space weather
service in the future. Scintillation effects occur predominantly in the
equatorial region in ionospheric density structures termed Equatorial Spread F
(ESF). The main goal of this project is to provide new observations on the
structure of scintillation-scale ionospheric irregularities associated with ESF.
Specifically, ISX will simultaneously record scintillation patterns of multiple
ground-based digital television (DTV) carrier signals. Scintillation patterns
for a unique set of experimental geometries will be compared to determine how
far along the magnetic field the turbulence maps, which is crucial observational
data on the three-dimensional electrodynamics of these sub-km
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the lifecycle of the project, it will
provide extensive student training opportunities, including student involvement
through Cal Poly spacecraft design classes and funded graduate students. Each
year, 20-40 students will be involved in the design, fabrication, and flight of
this mission. Cal Poly has flown many student satellite missions; the proposed
effort will leverage the heritage and experience from all of
these.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the science question: To what
distance along a flux tube does an irregularity of certain transverse-scale
extend? It has been difficult to measure the magnetic field-alignment of
scintillation-scale turbulent structures because of the difficulty of sampling a
flux tube at multiple locations within a short time. This measurement is now
possible due to the worldwide transition to DTV, which presents unique signals
of opportunity for remote sensing of ionospheric irregularities from numerous
vantage points. DTV spectra, in various formats, contain phase-stable,
narrowband pilot carrier components that are transmitted simultaneously. A
4-channel radar receiver will simultaneously record up to 4 spatially separated
transmissions from the ground. For most experimental geometries, the
corresponding transmitter-satellite lines-of-sight will cross the same magnetic
flux tube within 1-10 s, a reasonably short time to assume "frozen"
irregularities. Correlations of amplitude and phase scintillation patterns
corresponding to multiple points on the same flux tube will be a measure of the
spatial extent of the structures along the magnetic field. A subset of
geometries where two or more transmitters are aligned with the orbital path will
be used to infer the temporal development of the structures. The radio receiver
is based on the instrument developed and successfully demonstrated on the
previous Radio Aurora eXplorer (RAX) NSF CubeSat project.