* 1445726
* EAGER:  Dynamic Flux Control Enabled by Synthetic Metabolic Valves
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Michael Lynch, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 299,256.00

This EAGER project, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology program in MCB
and the Energy for Sustainability program, will lead to the development of new
tools that will enable investigators to control the allocation of carbon,
energy, and other resources in cells in a precise way during the biomanufacture
of chemicals. This will allow carbon and energy to be diverted from cell growth
to product formation, which should increase product yield. In addition, the
tools could be transferred from bacteria used in biomanufacturing to other
organisms, and used to address fundamental questions about control and
regulation of metabolism in these systems. The investigator will train graduate
and undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary environment and mentor
undergraduates who participate in the International Genetically Engineering
Machine (iGEM) competition, an international competition that engages young
people in science and engineering by asking them to design and build new
function into microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This
project aims to develop flexible (controllable) valves in metabolic pathways
that will allow carbon flux through pathways to be redirected at will. This
would enable the dynamic optimization of microbial metabolism, shifting
metabolic flux from pathways associated with growth to those associated with
product formation. Researchers will use CRISPRi gene silencing technologies
coupled with controlled enzyme degradation to achieve the desired carbon flux.
The researchers will then test the effectiveness of these strategies thru
detailed metabolic flux measurements. The tools could not only improve current
metabolic engineering and synthetic biology practices, and thus impact
biomanufacturing of renewable chemicals, but if transferable to other hosts, the
technology could be used to address important questions about regulation of
metabolism and metabolic pathways.