* 1445364
* I-Corps:  Robotic Hands for warehousing & Automation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Robert Howe, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

A typical customer for automatic product handling is a warehousing business with
high throughput of products with a wide range of shapes and sizes. These
warehouses provide storage and fulfillment logistics for online businesses
operating in areas such as consumer electronics, food distribution, and
pharmaceuticals. Examples include Amazon, Target, and CVS. There are
approximately 172,000 warehouse workers involved in moving inventory by hand.
These warehouses face a constant but fluctuating demand for shipping orders that
can be influenced by seasonal holidays, fashion trends or even day of the week.
The current solution for these warehouses is to hire additional staff to pick-
and-pack these packages when the demand grows. Automating these order-picking
tasks would also solve issues of seasonal labor fluctuations, and the poor
working conditions. This research team has developed a developed a patented
robotic hand that will revolutionize picking and packing. The proposed
technology will create value by packing and shipping products faster while
eliminating employee injuries related to repetitive tasks in stressful
environments.

The capability of the robot hand technology is enabled via two key advances:
adaptive mechanical design and high reliability tactile sensors. The mechanics
of the hand is based on specially designed flexure joints with multiple degrees
of freedom that enable the fingers to passively shape themselves to the object,
simplifying control, reducing the information required to grasp an object,
lowering costs, and providing a gentle touch. The tactile sensing technology
helps the hand adapt to object shape (especially for light objects), and detect
errors. The devices are more sensitive and far easier to manufacture than
competing technologies. The team will be working on developing this robotic hand
technology for the product handling market. The current gold standard for
handling objects is by using vacuum grippers. These grippers are simple in
design and implementation, but the range of the products they can handle is
quite limited. Additionally, state-of-the-art automation systems use specialized
grippers, such as parallel jaw grippers, that only perform a narrow range of
tasks, require experts to select the proper gripper (a costly and slow process),
and must be replaced if product lines change.