* 1445583
* Classroom Implementation Indicators for K-12 Common Core State Standards in Mathematics (CCSSM)
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* William Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2016
* USD 297,118.00

This project focuses on indicators outlined in the National Research Council
report Monitoring Progress Toward Successful K-12 STEM Education: Indicator 4,
regarding instructional materials that embody the Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics (CCSSM), and Indicator 5, classroom coverage of content and
practices as specified in the CCSSM. This project seeks to clarify these ideas
and develop mechanisms to measure both the alignment of instructional materials
and classroom instruction with key elements of the CCSSM. The project will
accomplish its work through three types of activities: 1) meetings convened with
STEM educators to work towards developing a consensus around the identification
of appropriate concepts and their operational definitions; 2) a thorough review,
evaluation, and synthesis of the current evidence base for such indicators; and
3) the drafting of specific recommendations towards the implementation of the
measurement of such indicators. This project builds on and extends the knowledge
and expertise gained from previous NSF-funded projects including the Survey of
Mathematics and Science Opportunities (SMSO) that resulted in the indicators and
instrumentation used in the 1995 Third International Mathematics and Science
Study (TIMSS) and the Promoting Rigorous Outcomes in Mathematics/Science
Education (PROMSE) MSP.

Recent work has highlighted ambiguity in teachers' understandings of the CCSSM
mathematics practices along with some differences in interpretation among
mathematics educators. Effort is needed to secure greater consensus on these
fundamental definitions before reasonable operational definitions for any
indicator may be developed. The discourse methodology developed in the SMSO work
in which informed experts wrestle together with appropriate data to develop
consensus will be employed in multiple meetings with appropriate mathematics
educators to make progress towards these important fundamental and operational
definitions. Similar meetings to review and evaluate the current database on
instructional materials (textbooks) and teachers' classroom practices will be
held in order to move towards a synthesis of the data and a consensus around
which indicators may be developed. Finally, based on these two efforts, experts
in indicator measurement and development will be brought together with
mathematics educators to draft recommendations towards the creation and feasible
measurement of such indicators.