* 1445488
* EAGER: Bio-Inspired Nanostructured Microsensor Arrays for Selective Chemical Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Peter Hesketh, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 157,125.00

Proposal: 1445488&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hansen, Karolyn M.&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Bio-
Inspired Nanostructured Microsensor Arrays for Selective Chemical
Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms detect odors with great specificity and
sensitivity using highly evolved olfactory systems. While the structure and
specificity of olfactory organs and systems varies species to species, there are
two common themes -- high surface area for interaction with odors and odorant
receptor proteins for capture of specific odors. The combination of high surface
area and odorant receptor proteins allows the detection of multiple odors that
are of interest to the organism and that are present in a wide range of
concentrations, for example the detection of different flower scents by insects.
The insect olfactory organ, the antenna, is the bio-inspiration for our proposed
research: fabrication of a highly sensitive and selective micromechanical sensor
that uses both high surface area and specific capture proteins for odor
detection. This new biosensors will be significantly more sensitive than current
analogs and will enable earlier and more precise detection of volatile organic
compounds. Such compounds are important for applications ranging from explosives
detection to cancer diagnostics, therefore proposed technology will have
significant societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
proposed sensor platform, the micromechanical cantilever, will be fabricated
with high surface area silicon dioxide nanostructure to which odorant receptor
proteins will be tethered thereby mimicking the two principles widely found in
biological olfactory systems. We will explore a fundamental cantilever-based
sensing modality: dynamic-mode operation in which the mass of the bound odor
molecules changes the frequency of a resonant cantilever. In an innovative
approach, the silicon dioxide nanostructures are created using low-temperature
glancing angle deposition (GLAD) of silicon dioxide in a post-processing manner,
i.e. after the fabrication of the cantilever platforms. GLAD deposition
facilitates fabrication of selectable (nanostructure elemental composition) and
tunable (density, shape, aspect ratio) surface structure. Nanostructured
surfaces will be locally functionalized with receptor peptides derived from
human odorant receptor proteins sequences, which selectively bind the volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) of interest. Microcantilever technology allows
fabrication of multiple cantilever sensor arrays in which the elements of the
array are individually functionalized to sense a number of target analytes
simultaneously. This interdisciplinary project integrates biological sensing
with micromechanical nanostructured sensors for low-level (parts per billion)
detection of VOC analytes.