* 1445570
* ERASynBio: Intensification of the Synthetic Biology Design Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2017
* George Church, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 334,523.00

This ERASynBio EU-US collaborative project is funded jointly by the NSF Systems
and Synthetic Biology Program in BIO/MCB and the Biotechnology, Biochemical and
Biomass Engineering Program in ENG/CBET. The project addresses a fundamental
need in synthetic biology, namely, how to optimize and reduce the Synthetic
Biology design/build/test cycle. The goal is to develop and provide a method for
the rapid and comprehensive design of system parts and their functional
analysis. The proposed intensification process is derived from the close
integration and determination of an informational polymer, DNA or XNA (synthetic
DNA variants), and their functional characterization in time and space. To
achieve this, the team will develop and implement the IODA technology platform
(Integration Of the Determination of DNA-sequence And function) by coupling the
available Roche hardware infrastructure of next generation sequencing with in
situ and in vitro platforms for characterization of the encoded functions.

Work package 4 of the project is spearheaded by Prof. Church from Harvard
University. His laboratory's role is to develop a suitable platform for in vitro
protein synthesis and enzyme assaying capabilities using a Streptavidin-based
protein scaffold for the evolution of new-to-nature enzyme catalytic properties.
Part of this concept is that the platform has the capacity to recruit novel co-
factors such as organometallic catalysts attached to a biotin group into the
protein scaffold. The in vitro creation of focused streptavidin libraries will
be screened for metathesis-competent catalysts by generating immobilized
fluorescent reaction products. Integration of this process into the IODA
platform will enable an automated, high-throughput, synthesis and analytical
platform for the screening of evolved protein functions under various reaction
conditions. The proposed proof of principle of this technology will generate an
artificial enzyme that can carry out the ring-closing metathesis at high
efficiency under physiological conditions. The project, if successful, will
provide enormously useful tools for the field of synthetic biology. In addition
this project offers exceptional training opportunities to students and
postdoctoral researchers associated with the project. The technology itself will
have direct economic impact with novel instrumentation, and indirect impact
derived from the development of novel industrially useful catalysts.