* 1445545
* ERASynBio: Induced Evolution of Synthetic Yeast Genomes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Joel Bader, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2018
* USD 922,578.00

This project, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in CBET, is part of a
larger ERASynBio funded collaborative. The researchers have previously developed
the capability to design and synthesize entire yeast chromosomes, and have
inserted into the chromosomes sites that make it easy to modify or recombine
pieces of the chromosome. In this work, they leverage this capability to evolve
yeast strains that will be particularly well suited for production of chemicals
or fuels or other biomanufacturing tasks. In addition, they will collect data
that will help them address questions about how chromosomes evolve in laboratory
or manufacturing settings, and what characteristics give rise to more stable
chromosomes and better growing yeast strains. At the same time, the researchers
will develop on line courses to teach ethics related to the field of synthetic
biology, and expand their laboratory classes that enable undergraduates to
synthesize parts of the yeast chromosome and learn the tools needed to enter
into this research field.

Technical Description: Induced Evolution of Synthetic Yeast genomes (IESY) will
use the first synthetic eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae 2.0 (Sc2.0), as a
platform for metabolic engineering and genome minimization, and more importantly
for generating and understanding industrially high-value phenotypes. Synthetic
chromosomes in Sc2.0 permit rapid and comprehensive genome evolution through
synthetic chromosome rearrangement and modification by loxP-mediated evolution
(SCRaMbLE). SCRaMbLE will be exploited here to evolve strains selected for high-
value phenotypes for biofuels and biotechnology, using both chemostats and batch
transfer methods in the USA and Europe. Technologies for neochromosomes and
orthogonal SCRaMbLE of gene classes will be developed. Evolutionary trajectories
will be analyzed to relate genome structure with genome function: DNA sequencing
will reveal the genome sequence, rearrangements, and copy number changes in the
evolved strains; chromosome conformation capture will show how massive
rearrangements affect 3D structure; and deep sequencing technologies will relate
sequence and structure to gene expression and isoform abundance. Computational
analysis will identify the evolutionary drivers for high fitness, with the
potential for further optimization. IESY builds on resources uniquely available
from the international Sc2.0 consortium and will be an international resource
for efficient evolution of high-value phenotypes. This project represents a new
paradigm in synthetic biology in which a genome is pre-programmed to explore
combinatorial diversity space to evolve new and useful function.