* 1445448
* Health Systems Optimization Workshop; Chicago, Illinois; 12-13 September 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 02/28/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The goal of this workshop is to bring together experts from the fields of
medicine and operations research in order to identify and address important
issues pertinent to improving the cost, quality, efficiency, and efficacy of
health systems. Events where experts in both fields can interact are scarce, and
this workshop is unique in its expected ability to initiate and foster research
collaborations among leading researchers in the two fields that can, through the
synergy of their respective expertise, better address the next generation of
health systems challenges.

A large number of problems in medicine and health systems can benefit from
insights and capabilities developed in the field of mathematical modeling and
optimization. At the same time, the difficulty of many of these problems is
expected to require new methodological contributions in the field of operations
research: accommodating data and model uncertainties, the large-scale nature of
real-world problems, the dynamics of changing human anatomy, interplay of
systems across scales, and competing policies and criteria, etc. Therefore, this
workshop has the potential to advance knowledge in both fields. In addition to
allowing key participants from both fields to participate, this award will also
allow a large number of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and medical
interns to take part in the workshop as well.