* 1445191
* Air-sea Interaction and Island Geography Impacts on Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Initiation and Propagation Through the MAritime Continent
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Charlotte Demott, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 513,084.00

Results of this research will benefit the weather forecasting and model
development communities, and promote collaboration with other scientists. The
project supports one full-time student. Research results will be documented in
peer-reviewed publications and shared through participation in national and
international workshops and conferences.

The Madden-Julian oscillation (MJO) is a large-scale intraseasonal (30-50 day)
tropical disturbance with coupled convection and circulation anomalies that
propagate eastward at about 5 m/s. The MJO impacts tropical weather across the
globe, and influences weather at higher latitudes via teleconnections. The
extratropical impacts are especially pronounced when MJO heating is centered
over the Maritime Continent and West Pacific. Most state-of-the-art general
circulations models (GCMs) struggle to simulate eastward-propagating MJO
convection, and those that do typically have difficulty with its propagation
across and beyond the Maritime Continent. Coupling an atmosphere-only GCM to an
interactive ocean model often improves the magnitude, periodicity, and
propagation characteristics of its MJO simulation, but there is no consensus as
to why this is true.

This research will advance our understanding of the roles of air-sea interaction
and Maritime Continent geography on the simulation of the MJO. Expected outcomes
of this research are 1) improved understanding of processes critical to MJO
initiation and propagation and 2) new insights into why so many GCMs struggle to
simulate an eastward propagating MJO capable of translating the Maritime
Continent. The objectives of this project are 1) to understand the mechanisms of
air-sea interaction on MJO convective development and its impact on moist static
energy and 2) to understand the relative influences of air-sea coupling and
Maritime Continent geography on MJO propagation. Reanalysis and model output
from the super-parameterized Community Atmosphere Model (SPCAM) will be analyzed
to assess the mechanisms of air-sea interaction on MJO convective development in
coupled and uncoupled simulations, and for MJO events that do and do not
propagate across the Maritime Continent. A series of modeling exercises using
idealized island geography will be performed to test existing hypotheses
concerning the Maritime Continent's impact on MJO convection and its
propagation. Analysis methods will be applied to a limited set of coupled
climate models to examine the extent to which results are model dependent.