* 1445604
* High Performance Computing System Acquisition: Jetstream - A Self-Provisioned, Scalable Science and Engineering Cloud Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2022
* Nirav Merchant, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 11/30/2022
* USD 14,496,404.00

High Performance Computing System Acquisition: Jetstream - a self-provisioned,
scalable science and engineering cloud
environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jetstream will be a new type of computational
research resource open for the national (nonclassified) research community - a
data analysis and computational resource that US scientists and engineers will
use interactively to conduct their research anytime, anywhere. Jetstream will
complement current NSF-funded computational resources and bring a cloud-based
system to the NSF computational resources incorporating the best elements of
commercial cloud computing resources with some of the best software in existence
for solving important scientific problems. This system will enable many US
researchers and engineers to make new discoveries that are important to
understanding the world around us and will help researchers make new discoveries
that improve the quality of life of American citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of technical details, Jetstream will be a configurable large-scale
computing resource that leverages both on-demand and persistent virtual machine
technology to support a much wider array of software environments and services
than current NSF resources can accommodate. As a fully configurable "cloud"
resource, Jetstream bridges the obvious major gap in the current ecosystem,
which has machines targeted at large-scale High-Performance Computing, high
memory, large data, high-throughput, and visualization resources. As the open
cloud for science, Jetstream will:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;*Provide "self-serve"
academic cloud services, enabling researchers or students to select a VM image
from a published library, or alternatively to create or customize their own
virtual environment for discipline- or task-specific personalized research
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Host persistent VMs to provide services beyond
the command line interface for science gateways and other science services. For
example, Jetstream will become a primary host of the popular Galaxy scientific
workbench and its main datasets, bringing many Galaxy users to the NSF ecosystem
from day one.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;*Enable new modes of sharing computations,
data, and reproducibility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;*Expand access to the NSF XSEDE
ecosystem by making virtual desktop services accessible from institutions with
limited resources