* 1445811
* Making Science Accessible to Inuit, Inughuit, and Iñupiat Arctic Indigenous Communities in Their Own Languages
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Shari Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2017
* USD 329,289.00

This project supports Iñupiaq (Northern Alaska), Kalaallisut (Western Greenland)
and Inuktitut (Eastern Canada) versions of the award winning book, "The Meaning
of Ice: People and Sea Ice in Three Arctic Communities." "The Meaning of Ice,"
with contributions by over forty Inuit, Inughuit, and Iñupiat from three Arctic
countries, offers personal detailed stories, original illustrations and artwork,
photos, and maps in over 400 color pages that describe a great depth of
knowledge of sea ice and the critical and complex role that sea ice plays in
Arctic Native peoples relationships with their environment and with one another.

This project will translate "The Meaning of Ice" into three new books, each
being one of the three Indigenous languages of the contributors. The Indigenous
language versions are critical for distributing the book in Alaska, Greenland,
and Nunavut. Offering the book in Iñupiaq, Kalaallisut and Inuktitut is a
transformative approach to research and publishing, as well as research
outreach, making research more widely available to an Indigenous audience. The
project demonstrates the value and importance of supporting, promoting, and
preserving Indigenous languages and directly addresses Indigenous empowerment
through research and publishing.

This will be the first time a book of this scientific importance will be
translated into four Arctic indigenous languages, as such it has the potential
of transforming the way scientists and communities collaborate and how important
scientific information is communicated back to communities. This project also
ensures that heritage language speakers will have access to scientific and
traditional knowledge critical to their daily lives in their own languages.
Translating ?The Meaning of Ice,? into three Arctic indigenous languages will
make the research and writings of Inuit, Inughuit, and Iñupiat more accessible
to their own communities in Alaska, Greenland, and Nunavut. The translation
supports the growing need and interest of supporting and preserving Arctic
Indigenous languages and also engages Arctic residents throughout the research
process, including publishing, as a way to encourage participation and further
leadership in research activities.