* 1445875
* The Role of Radiation in Tropical Cyclone Genesis and Early Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 594,675.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to transform our knowledge of the role of
radiation in tropical cyclogenesis. Evidence suggests that radiation could play
a crucial role in the early stages of genesis, particularly with the nighttime
cooling and enhanced convection in the early morning hours. However, the
complicated pathway to genesis under the influence of radiation and induced
circulations is not well understood. Two genesis pathways have been identified
in past work by the investigators in this study, and the role of radiation in
these pathways will be examined in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This study will add
to our understanding of tropical cyclogenesis by elucidating the role of
radiation in the core of tropical cyclones and in the surrounding environment.
The investigation will also explore other phenomena like the diurnal cycle of
deep convection that appear to be connected to radiative forcing. While the
vorticity field appears to be full of both positive and negative components near
cold pool edges, overall vorticity increases with time. These are cutting-edge
questions to explore now that we have the computational horsepower to simulate
radiation and microphysics on cloud-resolving grids. Previous generations of
models showed a diurnal cycle of convection (thunderstorms) but weren't able to
simulate growth of the cirrus cloud canopy and the expanding cold rings aloft--
features that are evident in nature. Progress under this proposal would build on
previous work and improve our knowledge in this area of tropical meteorology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve our
understanding of the role of radiation in tropical cyclogenesis and could
eventually lead to improved forecasting of these destructive storms. This
research should help us understand how tropical cyclogenesis in future climates
may differ from the present. Results will be disseminated to the community
through conferences, workshops and published in peer-reviewed journals. A web
site will be established to more broadly disseminate research results and
provide open communications with the community.