* 1445083
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Drought, Water And Sustainable Cultural Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michael Aiuvalasit, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 29,154.00

Researchers, the public, and governing agencies are increasingly concerned about
how societies will sustainably manage precious natural resources, such as water,
in the face of both increasing demands and climate change. Archaeology can
provide insights into how communities confronted similar problems in the past.
Under the direction of Dr. Christopher Roos, Michael Aiuvalasit will investigate
how prehistoric droughts impacted the long-term sustainability of Ancestral
Puebloan communities in the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico. This study is timely
because the American Southwest is experiencing a drought of a magnitude and
severity last seen by prehistoric Ancestral Puebloans in the 15th and 16th
centuries. By integrating existing archaeological datasets and high resolution
paleoclimatic data with new low-impact data recovery techniques at prehistoric
water storage features, this study will provide a long-term perspective on how
communities adapt to climate change. Science and history curriculum exploring
the relationship between water, climate, and culture will be developed for
students in descendant Native American communities in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will serve as an example for how
archaeologists can move beyond making simple causal links between changes in
climate and culture by acknowledging the social dynamics that ultimately drive
community resilience (or vulnerability) to climate change. The adjacent Jemez
and Pajarito Plateaus in the Jemez Mountains provide an ideal context for this
investigation. While these regions share similar physical contexts, climate
histories, and prehistoric adaptations the cultural histories of these regions
diverged during droughts in the 15th and 16th centuries. Large communities of
the Pajarito Plateau were abandoned, while those of the Jemez Plateau persisted
until the Spanish removed local populations in the 17th century. Drought has
often been evoked as a cause for the abandonment of the Pajarito, but little
consideration has been given to how this happened, or why communities of the
Jemez Plateau persevered through analogous conditions. Water storage features,
thought to be reservoirs used to hold domestic water, are found at large village
sites in both regions. These features will be directly tested to reconstruct the
use-life histories of these features, which will then serve as a proxy for
understanding how communities took collective action to solve resource
management problems. Using archaeological geology, hydrogeology, and
predications derived from economic modeling, the responses to droughts by
communities between these regions will be compared. Models of community water
budgets and tree-ring based reconstructions of drought periodicities will be
compared to when and how these features functioned to establish the
contributions these features to overall community water budgets, and whether or
not there were differences in communal responses to droughts between these
regions. Formal cost-benefit analyses will be used to model whether the payoffs
for participating in collective management of water were different before,
during, or after droughts. This study has the potential to assess the
relationship between climate change, resource management, and community
sustainability using similar approaches to those used by social scientists who
evaluate the vulnerability of modern communities to climate change.