* 1445615
* RAPID - Quantifying the effects of a catastrophic flood on ecosystem components of Colorado mountain streams
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* William Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2015
* USD 61,330.00

A rainstorm of unprecedented magnitude caused widespread flooding in Colorado
during September, 2013. In addition to loss of life and damage to homes and
roads, the flooding caused severe disturbance to stream ecosystems. These
ecosystems include the natural range of the endangered greenback cutthroat trout
and are important for water supplies and recreation. Understanding the
consequences of the 2013 flood on stream ecosystems is particularly important
given the expected increases in the frequency of extreme precipitation events as
a result of climate warming. This project will assess the impacts of the 2013
flood on stream beds, stream algae, and stream food webs. Current interest in
the flood presents an opportunity for outreach activities related to flood-
safety awareness, climate variability, and the role of disturbance in stream
ecosystems. Many Colorado residents, especially school age children, remain
deeply concerned about the future risk of extreme precipitation and flooding.
The investigators will work with the City of Boulder Keep it Clean Partnership
to expand their professional development workshop for teachers, in order share
the results of their research on the flood and information on flood safety with
local teachers and their students. This project also will help scientists and
managers understand the short-term and long-term effects of the 2013 flood on
stream ecosystems.

The 2013 flood offers a unique opportunity to study the effects of severe and
infrequent disturbance events that are outside the normal range of selective
forces driving assembly of stream communities. By combining approaches from
fluvial geomorphology (e.g., quantification of bed movement, riparian
disturbance) and stream ecology (e.g., measurements of biomass and production
for periphyton and benthic consumers, estimates of trophic position and basal
food resources from stable isotope ratios), the investigators will test the
hypothesis that the effects of severe flood disturbance are driven by changes in
stream geomorphology associated with flooding. Specifically, the project tests
the hypothesis that streams in which riparian zones and watershed hillslopes are
altered will show long-lasting effects of the flood on flow of carbon and energy
across trophic levels, whereas communities will recover rapidly following flood
disturbance that affected only surface sediments in the stream channel. The
project also tests the generality of the Telescoping Ecosystem Model for stream
ecosystems, which could serve as a template for the study of disturbance across
diverse ecosystems. Preliminary field studies indicate that sediment transport
and alteration of bed stability have reduced periphyton production at some
locations, suggesting that flood-induced structural changes have cascading
effects on higher trophic levels long after recolonization occurs. In addition
to quantifying recovery of ecosystem processes during the first year following
severe flooding, the proposed research will provide a foundation for long-term
studies of recovery in these severely flooded streams. The working hypotheses
will be tested at multiple locations on tributaries of the South Platte River in
Colorado, at stations that span a range of disturbance intensity associated with
the extreme precipitation in September, 2013. St. Vrain Creek and other
tributaries of the South Platte River have been studied extensively by the
investigators over a range of hydrologic conditions, thus providing an important
point of reference for the 2013 flood.