* 1445762
* 2014 Workshop on Noninvasive Brain Imaging
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2015
* USD 45,094.00

The workshop will result in identification of research efforts that will be
needed to close the gaps between the future potential and the current state-of-
the-art in NIBF technology. Specifically, major outcomes of the workshop will
include the increased awareness of research, education, and technology transfer
related to additive manufacturing; ideas enabling the transformation of research
and STEM education in light of NIBF technology; partnership opportunities among
government, academia, industry, and the general public; and synergism for
transformational activities in the application of NIBF technology.

The workshop will help realize the full potential of NIBF technology. Increased
awareness of NIBF research, education, and technology transfer will have a
transformative impact on the national BRAIN initiative, and will catalyze
invention and innovation in topics related to understanding brain function and
curing brain disorders. Each of these has enormous societal importance. The
ideas coming from the workshop attendees will be helpful to decision makers in
setting the priorities and strategies of research and education at government
agencies, academic institutions, and industrial companies. A better
understanding of this technology is expected to increase NIBF impacts. Also, the
workshop will foster the development of novel transformational technologies,
STEM education approaches, and technology transfer models not hitherto
considered. Finally, the networking function of the workshop will allow
establishing new collaborative relationships among the workshop participants and
other individuals spanning widely across research, education, and technology
transfer. It will lead to new collaborations that will advance the state- of-
the-art and workforce preparation in NIBF technology, leading to the increase of
US competitiveness in this field.