* 1445643
* Proposal for Organizing the 21st GENI Engineering Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Jon-Paul Herron, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,999.00

This project supports hosting the four day 21th edition of the GENI Engineering
conference, including organizing and hosting the demo session, to be held
October 20 to 23, 2014 at the Indiana University (IU) in Bloomington, Indiana.
The Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) is a virtual instrument
that is rapidly emerging in prototype form across the United States. GENI is an
instrument designed to address three issues: &lt;br/&gt;1) Science Issues: We
cannot currently understand or predict the behavior of complex,large-scale
networks. &lt;br/&gt;2) Society Issues: We increasingly rely on the Internet but
are unsure we can trust its security, privacy or resilience. &lt;br/&gt;3)
Innovation Issues: Pre-GENI substantial barriers existed to at-scale
experimentation with new architectures, services, and technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;GENI addresses these issues via scale (from federation) and support
for two kinds of experiments: 1) controlled and repeatable experiments, which
will greatly help improve our scientific understanding of complex, large-scale
networks; and 2) in-the- wild trials of experimental services that ride atop or
connect to today's Internet and that engage large numbers of human participants.
The GEC meeting and Demo sessions provide graduate students with both an
opportunity to demonstrate and explain their work to the GENI community prior to
formal publication. It is a key part of helping new graduate students understand
what is being done with GENI and who amongst their peers at other institutions
might be valuable resources. It also supports outreach to new community members,
including the emerging US Ignite community. GENI is already being used as an
instrument for research. This project supports the development and use of the
research instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four-day conference will be held
at the Indiana Memorial Union (IMU) Biddle Hotel and Conference Center at the
heart of the Bloomington campus. The demo night event will be held at the
Cyberinfrastructure Building (CIB), located in IU's growing tech park at the
edge of campus. Event planning and logistical support for the event will be
coordinated by the IT Communications Office's events team, which has extensive
experience in conference planning and access to executive and internal technical
support. The IT Communications Office is part of University Information
Technology Services (UITS), which maintains a modern IT environment throughout
the university in support of research, teaching, outreach, and lifelong
learning.