* 1445712
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Seismic Risk Assessment of Wind Turbine Towers in Zafarana Wind Farm Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Ahmed Elgamal, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 252,499.00

This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr Ahmed Elgamal,
University of California-San Diego in collaboration with Dr. Khaled El-Zahaby,
Chairman, Housing and Building national Research Center (HBRC) in Cairo, Egypt.
They will performe a Seismic Risk Assessment of Wind Turbine Towers in the
Zafarana Wind Farm in Egypt. The Zafarana wind farm in 2012 was generating a
capacity of 517MW, making it one of the largest onshore wind farms in the world.
It is located in an active seismic zone along the west side of the Gulf of Suez.
An extension of the wind farm southward is under consideration for construction
in the near future. Seismic risk assessment is needed to assess the structural
integrity of wind towers under expected seismic hazard events in this location,
and this risk assessment procedure is likely to be valuable whenever wind
turbines are located in a potentially active seismic region. The project
objective is to pursue interdisciplinary studies to define seismic risk and
seismic loads via a range of seismic analyses that are coupled with measured
structural values in the field. The ultimate goal is to define and improve
seismic design of wind turbine structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind turbines
are unique structures. They are tall, slender and flexible and susceptible to
dynamic loads. In addition, they are operating/moving structures as compared to
buildings or bridges which are stationary. As alternative energy sources such as
wind become more important globally, we will continue to have more wind turbine
structures; therefore, pursuing research for these structures is important and
broadly relevant. This international project combines a team of scientists,
engineers, students and researchers from two countries. The diverse expertise of
the two teams is a strength of the research effort and the cultural exchange
between them is an important broader impact of this project. The research will
be integrated into several facets of the structural and geotechnical engineering
programs at the participating institutes. Results of this study will be of
relevance to similar projects in the Middle East, as well as in other
seismically active regions worldwide. Graduate and undergraduate students from
the US and from Egypt will participate in the research, which ranges from
numerical modeling of structure and soil structure interaction of wind turbine
towers to the practical aspects of conducting a field investigation and
instrumentation, thus providing a well-rounded education for the participants.
In this regard, students from STEM under-represented communities will be
actively recruited. Additionally, the international/intercultural collaborative
aspects of the proposed research will provide a unique experience for those
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed seismological studies, geo technical
studies for loads, dynamic field measurements, and structural seismic analyses
of existing wind towers will greatly enhance the associated design
recommendations and provide strong intellectual merit for this project. The
actual estimated site loads can be applied to the new towers that will be
located in the same zone. The new wind turbine ambient vibration datasets to be
acquired at Zafarana will constitute a basis for calibration of analysis tools
for studies elsewhere. This data will be professionally archived and made
available for use by interested researchers and practitioners worldwide.
Valuable recommendations will be deduced for provisions in design codes based on
realistic data and detailed structural assessments of the wind turbines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science
and Technology Fund Program. Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative
projects is provided to the National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department
of State. The Egyptian Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the
collaboration.