* 1445108
* Engaged Learning and the Ethos of Discovery -- Achieving the Promise in a Tumultuous Era
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Kathleen Pickering, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 48,500.00

This award provides partial support to the national biennial conference of the
Reinvention Center. The Reinvention Center was formed in 2000 to support the
recommendations of the Boyer Commission in the widely read publication:
"Reinventing Undergraduate Education, a Blueprint for America's Research
Universities" (1995).

The overarching goal of this Reinvention Center Convention is to re-establish
the Reinvention Center as a force in achieving the goals of the Boyer Commission
and to connect directly with major college and university associations. The
first plenary will be a panel discussion entitled" "Twenty Years after Boyer,
Research Universities' Enduring Promise to Undergraduates: the Ethos of
Discovery Matters."

The goals of the Boyer Commission are: 1. Make Research-Based Learning the
Standard 2. Construct an Inquiry-based Freshman Year 3. Build on the Freshman
Foundation 4. Remove Barriers to Interdisciplinary Education 5. Link
Communication Skills and Course Work 6. Use Information Technology Creatively 7.
Culminate with a Capstone Experience 8. Educate Graduate Students as Apprentice
Teachers 9. Change Faculty Reward Systems 10. Cultivate a Sense of Community

This Reinvention Center conference will lay the groundwork for an evaluation of
how consortia of universities can deliver on the promise that research
universities provide a distinctively valuable undergraduate educational
experience. The conference will launch a cluster of collaborations, each
comprised of a network of faculty, staff, administrators, and other educators
that will be supported on a continuing basis. Five new networks will be
launched: (1) Applied Analytics; (2) Science of Learning (and Pedagogical
Innovation); (3) Curricular and Co-Curricular Integration; (4) Distinguished
Teaching Scholars; and (5) Student Success. Each of these will include
disciplinary subgroups including STEM fields. (Already established are focused
networks of (1) directors of undergraduate research programs, (2) assessment
specialists and STEM educators, and (3) writing-to-learn experts. These networks
have functioned effectively since their formation.]