* 1445878
* 2014 Salt and Water Stress GRC: From Molecules to the Field Sunday River Resort, Newry, ME  August 3-8, 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Eduardo Blumwald, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Global changes due to increasing temperatures and greater variation in climate
and precipitation patterns are expected to have major (negative) impacts on
food, fuel, and fiber production in the U.S. and throughout the world. Water
deficit and salinity are two of the most important environmental stresses
affecting the crop productivity of agricultural systems with water deficit from
drought being the leading cause of agricultural productivity losses. In order to
develop stress-tolerant plants that can help to mitigate the impact of climatic
variations, information flow between basic and applied research and discussion
of strategies are essential. The Gordon Research Conference on Salt and Water
Stress in Plants offers a unique platform for intensive information exchange and
informal discussion between molecular biologists, physiologists, breeders and
industrial representatives from all over the world. It facilitates a dialogue
that is essential to achieve a seamless translational pipeline from the
laboratory to the field, from the molecule to the crop. The organizers want to
motivate the participation of young, talented early career stage scientists in
this dialogue, and are further committed to raising the participation from
underrepresented groups. The current program lists fifteen women as chairs or
speakers. Representation of minority groups will be further promoted with the
selection of additional speakers from the submitted poster
abstracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salt and water stress in plants caused by
drought and soil salinisation restricts world food production. The problem is
further exacerbated by climate change and additional pressure on land usage for
biofuel production. Scientists have made and continue to make impressive
progress in identifying the biological mechanisms underlying abiotic stress
responses and resistance in plants. The knowledge gained now needs to be
translated into crop improvement in the field. This is a research area where
excellent fundamental science is met by considerable interest from breeding
institutes, agricultural agencies and companies worldwide, and hence presents an
opportunity for a concerted effort to achieve sustainable food and energy
production worldwide. Success in this undertaking critically relies on a regular
and open dialogue between all parties involved. This proposal requests funding
to contribute costs for registration and travel of 10 -12 U.S. scientists to the
11th Gordon Research Conference on Salt &amp; Water Stress in Plants, to be held
from 3th and 8th of August 2014 at the GRC site "Sunday River Resort" in Newry,
ME, USA. Additional funding from the GRC and private industry will be available
to cover some of the registration and travel costs associated with the
participation of scientists from other countries, especially those where
salinity and drought cause serious problems for agriculture. NSF funds will be
used to promote the attendance of U.S. scientists at the early stages in their
careers. Particular attention will be given to the representation of minority
groups. The GRC format provides ample opportunity for informal discussion and
personal contact, and is therefore particularly beneficial for young
researchers. Specific session topics of the 2014 meeting cover evolutionary
aspects of stress adaptation, transcriptional and post-translational regulation
of stress-related genes and proteins, stress perception and signal transduction,
metabolic responses, ion and water homeostasis, co-ordination of the whole plant
response, and crop improvement for a changing global environment. The Conference
is unique in that it will bring together researchers from all over the world who
conduct abiotic stress research at diverse scales of organization and it will
foster synergistic interactions and long-term collaborations.