* 1445641
* Moving beyond Subject Matter Knowledge: Assessing Elementary Teachers? Content Knowledge for Teaching Science
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Geoffrey Phelps, Educational Testing Service
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2017
* USD 290,655.00

The goal of this project is to develop a better understanding about the key
design features important for developing valid and reliable assessments of
Content Knowledge for Teaching (CKT) science. The science education professional
development landscape is full of a variety of learning opportunities to enhance
K-12 science teachers' abilities to effectively support their students'
learning. However, the field is hampered by a lack of valid and reliable
assessments of science teachers' knowledge that can be used for making decisions
about which aspects of teachers' knowledge should be the focus of these
professional learning opportunities. This project will provide an important step
towards building consensus in the field about the most productive approaches for
developing assessments of elementary teachers' knowledge in order to inform
ongoing professional development efforts in science. This study is poised to
support efforts to develop indicators that can be used to monitor and improve
elementary science teachers' learning in both teacher preparation and
professional development settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed
to build upon the robust evidentiary base for the importance of science
teachers' practice-based knowledge, which suggests that it is important for the
field to have measures that can assess not only teachers' subject matter
knowledge, but also their knowledge about how to teach these subjects. This
validation study concentrates on examining how two types of science measures --
practice-based CKT items and subject matter knowledge items -- assess distinct
aspects of elementary teacher's knowledge and how these measures relate to other
indicators of teachers' professional preparation and experience. This work
directly addresses indicator 6 , teachers' science and mathematics content
knowledge for teaching, of the National Research Council report Monitoring
Progress Toward Successful K-12 Education: A Nation Advancing? The project will
assess 150 grades 3-6 teachers with items developed to measure science CKT,
followed by cognitive interviews of 24 of these teachers to explore the content
validity of the items and explore the relationship among science CKT and other
measures of teacher quality such as years of experience teaching, self-efficacy,
and self-reported confidence in teaching particular concepts.