* 1445632
* Classroom Artifacts as Indicators of Quality in STEM Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Drew Gitomer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sarah-Kay McDonald
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The National Research Council in 2013 released the report Monitoring Progress
toward Successful K-12 STEM Education: A Nation Advancing?, which outlined 14
Indicators as well as the needed research and development to create a system to
monitor the quality of STEM education in the nation. This project is funded in
response to a Dear Colleague Letter request for research in the Promoting
Innovation in Measurement and Evaluation program focused on developing research
and tools to advance the nation's capability to measure these indicators. The
researchers in this project will address Indicator 5: Classroom coverage of
content and practices in the "Common Core State Standards" and "A Framework for
K-12 Science Education." The quality of instructional practice is generally
considered among the most important factors influencing student learning in
STEM, yet is costly to reliably assess through direct measures such as classroom
observation. The Classroom Artifacts as Indicators of STEM Classroom Practice
project will design and study a set of protocols that use typical classroom work
such as homework, projects, quizzes and tests as a source of evidence for
measuring the range and quality of instructional practices in mathematics and
science classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities will be carried
out in four phases. In phase one the research team will review literature and
available protocols for artifact evaluation, and will survey large-scale data
collection systems that make use of classroom artifacts. In phase two the
project will convene a working session with an expert advisory committee to
collaboratively design the mathematics and science artifact protocols, scoring
processes, and the Phase three pilot study. In phase three the project will
pilot the protocols with 500 teachers of mathematics and science and will
convene the advisory committee to review findings and further revise the
prototypes. The project will also gather validity information through structured
interviews of the artifacts with a subset of the math and science teachers who
submitted classroom artifacts. In phase four, the project will produce webinars
that will reach and be useful to a national audience of researchers,
practitioners, and policy-makers. The project will develop prototype measures
that have potential for broad use or adaptation in a range of national and
international data collections and/or at the district level to gather evidence
about the nature and quality of instructional practice in mathematics and
science classrooms.