* 1445934
* EAGER: Cooperative Spectroscopy for Real-time In Vivo Nano-biosensing: Towards Health-centric Smartphones
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Qiaoqiang Gan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 299,939.00

Proposal: 1445934 PI: Jornet, Josep Institution: SUNY at Buffalo EAGER:
Cooperative Spectroscopy for Real-time In Vivo Nano-biosensing: Towards Health-
centric Smartphones

Significance: The project is expected to pave the way for the development of in
vivo nanosensors networks for biosensing applications with direct application to
the next generation of health-centric smartphones and wearable devices. This
technology has the potential to radically change current disease diagnosis and
treatment techniques. The idea of improving the accuracy of existing diagnostic
techniques based on individual nano-biosensors by utilizing a distributed
network of coordinated nano-devices, is transformative. This project contributes
to a much wider and ambitious vision of advanced health-monitoring and drug
delivery systems, using a novel interdisciplinary approach to leverage and
combine the state-of-the-art in nano-biosensing, wireless communication and
networks, as well as distributed data collection and signal processing.

Intellectual Description: The objective of the proposed research is to prove the
feasibility of cooperative spectroscopy for real-time in vivo nano-biosensing
applications. The ultimate goal is to replace the external independent
excitation and measurement system used in classical spectroscopy by a network of
coordinated nano-devices, able to both excite and measure the response of nano-
biofunctional particles. The benefits of this approach are several. First, the
much smaller size and lower power requirements than classical spectroscopy
systems will allow the integration of the proposed platform in the next
generation of health-centric smartphones as well as new types of wearable
devices. Second, the placement of the nanodevices in close contact with the
entity to measure on a fingerprint touch scanner or eventually inside the human
body, allows for the transmission and detection of low-power, low-noise signals.
Third, the collection of the received signal at different nano-devices that
collaborate with each other, allows for much more accurate sensing using
advanced signal processing for distributed data collection.