* 1445831
* Collaborative Research:   Cloud System Evolution in the Trades
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Virendra Ghate, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 416,142.00

This study aims to understand the evolution of the boundary layer cloud, aerosol
and thermodynamic structures along trajectories within the north-Pacific trade-
winds using observations from the NSF/NCAR Gulfstream V (HIAPER). This effort
includes characterization of the cloud, precipitation and aerosol fields in the
stratocumulus (Sc) and the fair-weather cumulus (Cu) regimes within the
subtropical easterlies over the northern Pacific and the use of Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) models to simulate the cloud evolution along the trajectories
sampled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;These
characterizations along trajectories will be designed to aid in our
understanding and simulation of the transition between the two convective
regimes - a critical factor in the climate system. LES models have become a
robust tool for Lagrangian simulations of subtropical cloudiness transitions,
but there are few good datasets for comprehensively testing these simulations.
In particular, adequate observations of the coupled evolution of aerosol, cloud
droplet number concentration and precipitation during such transitions are
lacked. Thus, the observing strategy will be to sample aerosol, cloud,
precipitation, and boundary layer properties upwind from the transition zone
over the North Pacific and to resample these areas two and four days later. This
Lagrangian approach is designed to minimize uncertainties in the large-scale
forcing due to horizontal advection in the lower troposphere as air masses move
from colder to warmer sea surface temperatures and thus facilitate model
simulations and isolate critical physical processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
key elements of the observing system will be a newly developed HIAPER Cloud
Radar (HCR) and the HIAPER High Spectral Resolution Lidar (HSRL). The HCR will
be used to provide cloud and precipitation characteristics. The HSRL will
provide cloud boundaries and aerosol characteristics when viewing non-cloudy
volumes. A full suite of probes on the aircraft will be used for in situ
measurements of aerosol, cloud, precipitation, and turbulence properties. Two
modes of operations will be made on flights between the west coast of California
and Hawaii. One will include remote sensing (mapping) of the clouds and boundary
layer from flight levels above the boundary layer made upstream and downstream
from the Sc to Cu transition zone. The other will involve detailed profiling in
the subcloud and cloud layer in two or three selected areas upstream and
downstream from the transition zone to make detailed in situ measurements of
aerosols, clouds, precipitation, and turbulence. On the surveying legs
dropsondes will be used to obtain the thermodynamic and wind structure in and
above the boundary layer. Several flight sequences are planned for the June-July
2015 timeframe. The observations made on these flights will be used to evaluate
the moisture, dry static energy and mass budgets by estimating the changes in
these parameters between the upstream Sc region sampled on one flight and the
downstream Cu region sampled on the subsequent flights. The synthesis of the
observations will provide an observational framework for LES studies that will
provide a better understating of cloud system evolution in the trades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
observing and analysis techniques and strategies that will facilitate the
development of future missions aimed at studying boundary layer clouds in remote
areas that are not easily reached by other observing platforms. The data sets
developed will be useful for evaluating satellite retrieval techniques and for
evaluating models and model parameterizations applied to a wide range of scales
--microphysical, mesoscale, regional, and global. The educational components of
this project will include the training of graduate and undergraduate students on
the technical aspects of the data collection processes, flight operations, and
the subsequent analysis of data to address key science questions. Further,
integration of observations from the project into teaching and learning modules
that can be used at both the undergraduate and the graduate level will be
developed.