* 1445546
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Nanostructured Multiferroics for Solar Hydrogen Production
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Arunava Gupta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2016
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports a cooperative research effort by Dr. Arunava Gupta of the
University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa with Dr. Atef Daoud of the Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Helwan, Egypt. They plan to
study "Nanostructured Multiferriocs for Solar Hydrogen Production." The project
will support one year of preliminary research to develop a full collaborative
research proposal. The increasing demand for clean energy has motivated
considerable effort to exploit the properties of various solar-harvesting
materials and photocatalysts. Solar hydrogen is considered to be an important
fuel for the future as it is based on clean renewable precursors - solar energy
and water. The scientific outcomes of the project are expected to include both
advances in the synthesis of a new class of nanostructured photocatalysts and
fundamental understanding of their materials and physical characteristics. The
project will also conduct feasibility studies on the use of functionalized
nanomaterials for water splitting reaction which will provide a foundation for
further research and technology development for hydrogen generation from solar
energy and water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the first reported photocatalytic
production of H2 from water in 1972 using TiO2, a variety of semiconductor
materials have been developed for the production of solar fuels. Some of these
materials have achieved high quantum efficiencies using ultraviolet light (about
4% of the sunlight), but the efficiency of operation with visible light (about
43% of the sunlight) is much lower (near 2.5%). This is primarily because of
materials-related issues and limitations, such as the control of the band gap,
band structure, optical properties and available surface area for reaction. The
PIs plan to investigate the feasibility of using nanostructured materials and
composites based on multiferroic bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) as photocatalysts for
hydrogen production from water. The use of multiferroic materials(combining the
properties of ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism and ferroelasticity) for water
splitting remain largely unexplored; although BiFeO3, for instance, has a
suitable energy band gap around 2.6 eV. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory
research will include: developing chemical routes for the synthesis of rare
earth doped bismuth ferrite multiferroic nanostructures and metal/multiferroics
nanocomposites, exploring size-property relationships of the nanomaterials, and
assessing their capabilities for water splitting and hydrogen production. The
novel nanostructured photocatalysts based on multiferroics are likely to possess
band gaps for efficient absorption of solar radiation and also result in
efficient separation of charge carriers. Chemical routes, such as sol-gel,
hydrothermal and combustion synthesis, will be utilized to synthesize the
nanostructured photocatalysts. The synthesis work will be carried out at
Alexandria University, while the characterization and physical property
measurements will be carried out by at the University of Alabama.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research requires a multidisciplinary effort
that will make significant contributions to scientific knowledge, education
outreach and infrastructure. The planned travel by the US PI and US student to
work with their Egyptian partners will provide them a direct opportunity to
learn about carrying out research in that country. Beyond fundamental discovery
and technology development, the US-Egypt team will establish and maintain a
valuable network that provides for competitive, interdisciplinary, and globally
engaged research. The US PI is an active participant in the multi-disciplinary
Center for Materials for Information Technology (MINT) and will leverage the
existing resources available for the maximum impact of outreach and
dissemination of results specifically related to this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science
and Technology Fund Program. Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative
projects is provided to the National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department
of State. The Egyptian Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the
collaboration.