* 1445978
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Climate Processes with Causal Discovery and Graphs of Information Flow in the Coupled Atmosphere-Land-Ocean System
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Imme Ebert-Uphoff, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,062.00

The goal of this project is to develop graphical models of causal discovery and
apply them to topics the field of climate dynamics. In these models lagged
correlations are used to identify pathways of causal influence among components
of a coupled system, and the model is constructed by representing each component
as one node of a directed graph. Edges between node are assigned values
representing the extent to which one component is predictable given prior
knowledge of another. A key issue in causal discovery is accounting for indirect
effects, in which component A influences component B which in turn influences
component C, as opposed to the case in which component A directly influences
component C. In graphical terms the distinction is whether or not an edge exists
between A and C, or whether A's connection to C is only through B. This
evaluation is done through a statistical calculation of conditional
probabilities. Previous work by the PIs applied causal discovery to identify
relationships among four well-known teleconnection patterns, the Western Pacific
and Eastern Pacific Oscillations (WPO and EPO), the North Atlantic Oscillation
(NAO), and the Pacific/North America (PNA) pattern. In this case the method
shows that the EPO can affect the NAO 18 days later, while the NAO can influence
the PNA pattern three to six days later. Although the application to atmospheric
science is novel, the method has been used successfully in other disciplines
including economics, systems engineering, and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under the project will further develop
the modeling technique, with a goal of increasing computational speed by a
factor of 100 through improvements in parallelization and localization of memory
access. Visualization tools will also be developed to display results. In
addition to these development efforts, the PIs will apply the technique to
address three topics in climate dynamics: the onset dynamics of the Asian summer
monsoon, the subseasonal variation of the Northern Hemisphere annual mode (NAM),
and changes in the characteristics of information flow in global warming
simulations. Work on monsoon onset will focus on three questions: What are the
critical processes responsible for the establishment of the cross-equatorial
flow? How important is the mechanical and thermal forcing associated with the
Tibetan Plateau for the onset compared to local air-sea interaction in the Bay
of Bengal and South China Sea? Is the onset a direct manifestation of
atmospheric instability? For subseasonal NAM variability, the research goal is
to investigate the relative importance of tropospheric dynamics, stratosphere-
troposphere coupling, and troposphere-surface coupling in determining the phase
transition of the NAM. The work on global warming is based on a preliminary
analysis of one simulation in which information flows in the Northern
midlatitudes become weaker as the climate warms, suggesting a reduction in
atmospheric predictability in the tropics and mid-
latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts through the
introduction of a methodology developed in one scientific discipline (economics)
into another (climate dynamics). The PIs will promote the adoption of the
modeling technique by making their algorithms and software available to the
community of climate dynamics researchers through a web portal. They will also
offer tutorials at scientific conferences including the annual meetings of the
American Meteorological Society and the American Geophysical Union. Tutorial
materials will also be made available online and through published papers. In
addition, the project will support and train a graduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.