* 1445540
* Analyzing Funding and Publication Patterns in STEM Education Research: Establishing a Baseline for Improved Monitoring of Research to Advance STEM Education
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Joseph Taylor, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2017
* USD 295,025.00

This project, to be conducted by Biological Sciences Curriculum Study, will
analyze and synthesize information about education research funding and
publication patterns, to increase understanding about the state of science
education research as recommended in a 2013 report by the National Research
Council (NRC). This project will examine past research studies in terms of
methodology. In addition, the project will examine how studies address outcomes
related to expanding and broadening participation in STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) education and the STEM workforce, as well as
increasing STEM literacy for all students. The project will advance the work of
the Education &amp; Human Resources (EHR) directorate in fostering research on
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education research studies funded or
published from 2001 to the present will be considered eligible for review.
Questions to be addressed will include the following. What are the number and
proportion of experimental or quasi-experimental studies that attempt to
disentangle program effects from student selection effects? What are the number
and proportion of correlational, experimental, or quasi-experimental studies
that attempt to address the effects of context on the teaching and learning
process and what context factors are being studied? What are the number and
proportion of correlational, experimental, or quasi-experimental studies that
address outcomes related to NRC strategic goals for STEM education?