* 1445194
* RAPID: Ukrainian Politics Panel Survey
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Henry Hale, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2015
* USD 92,918.00

The project investigates how citizens formulate attitudes and make political
choices when confronted with political upheaval. The study centers around
understanding how Ukraine's citizens make election choices for president in the
context of four institutional crises: (1) the weakening of ordinary channels of
representation and the associated rise in protest activity and revolution; (2)
the challenge that has been posed to Ukrainian national identity, territorial
integrity, and statehood; (3) the forced choice between "Europe" and "Russia";
and (4) the failure or subversion of existing state institutions. To address
these questions, a nationally representative panel survey will be carried out by
Ukraine's premier survey agency, the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology
(KIIS). The panel will consist of two waves, the first conducted prior to the
May 25, 2014 presidential election and the second conducted immediately after
it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the project are connected
with its use of a panel survey to investigate questions related to protest and
revolution, vote choice, and identity. The panel design will enable researchers
directly to study patterns of change in individuals' dispositions during this
highly uncertain period, to address issues in vote choice by measuring many
dispositions both before and after a vote, and to study how voters choose
strategically due to dynamics in the campaign and election. The study will also
include set of embedded experiments, taking advantage of the opportunity to
randomly divide the sample and ask different versions of the same question to
the different resulting subsamples. This feature is particularly important in
studying support for ultranationalist parties/candidates, the ability of
external actors like Russia to shape Ukrainian preferences, and the impact of
potent historical symbolism on attitudes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project are especially connected with its implications for
foreign policy. Ukraine's crisis represents the most serious threat to European
stability since the end of the wars in former Yugoslavia back in the 1990s, with
some fearing it could spread to countries that are now in the EU and NATO. By
shedding unique light on the public opinion dimensions of this crisis,
especially by studying patterns of change at the individual level over time, the
project will contribute vital information for American policymakers seeking to
understand the crisis and develop better policy as well as for Ukrainians
themselves.