* 1445489
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Nanoparticle Catalysts Supported on Graphene for High Activity and Selectivity Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis of Liquid Fuels
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 98,718.00

This project supports a cooperative research effort by Dr. M. Samy El-Shall of
Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, VA and Ahmed Abdel-Hamid of the
Egypt-Japan University of Science and Technology in Alexandria, Egypt. They plan
to study the development of nanoparticle catalysts supported on graphene for
high activity and selectivity in the Fischer-Tropsch synthesis (FTS) of liquid
fuels. The project aims to develop an innovative approach to the design and
synthesize a new class of efficient and selective FTS catalysts supported on
graphene nanosheets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort has the
potential to develop a new family of highly active and selective graphene-
supported, nanomaterial catalysts for the production of efficient and clean-
burning liquid fuels. The research will develop new concepts and processes that
will provide a platform for a rational catalyst design and optimized catalyst
performance for the synthesis of liquid fuels and a variety of useful organic
compounds. The project is expected to enhance the scientific knowledge of the
FTS process and other related fields, and it may lead to new exciting
technologies that could transform the new graphene-supported catalysts into a
practical reality to increase energy supply and reduce worldwide greenhouse gas
emissions at the same time. Successful results will likely initiate new efforts
involving the industrial sectors in the United States and in Egypt for clean and
sustainable energy production and conversion efficiency. Therefore, this
cooperative research may lead to economic development in both countries. In
addition, the project will train junior scientists and students in the multi-
disciplinary cross-cutting research areas of catalysis, nanomaterials synthesis
and characterization, surface science, industrial chemistry and energy
conversion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use nanocatalysts to promote
the efficient and selective conversion of gas phase products derived from
biomass into clean burning liquid fuels (C8-C18 n-alkanes). The key innovation
in this proposal is the combination of established synthesis methods for
transition metal nanocatalysts that control size and shape with the large
surface area, unique electronic and defect-engineered properties of graphene.
The goal is to develop a novel nanosheet catalyst support that leads to a new
family of highly active and selective FT catalysts for the production of liquid
fuels. With this new approach, catalyst-support interaction will be tailored to
produce highly efficient, selective and recyclable FTS catalysts for the
synthesis of long-chain hydrocarbons which can be used as liquid fuels as well
as oxygenated hydrocarbons which can be used for the production of valuable
chemicals for a variety of industrial applications. The efforts will greatly
extend the capabilities of the proposed methods and will develop a new
multidisciplinary area of research focused on catalysis on graphene nanosheets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science
and Technology Fund Program. Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative
projects is provided to the National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department
of State. The Egyptian Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the
collaboration. Egyptian side.