* 1445378
* International Conference on Nanoscience and Technology (ICN+T 2014); Vail, Colorado; July 20-25, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* James Murday, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This award is for the partial support of the International Conference on
Nanoscience and Technology (ICN+T 2014), to be held in Vail, Colorado, July
20-25, 2014. This major international meeting will provide a single forum for
discussion of the latest developments in nano-scale science and technology and
recent advances in scanning probe and related instrumentation techniques.
Regular meetings of the key researchers in this field are necessary for the
exchange of ideas, information, and state-of-the-art technologies, in order to
enable and accelerate advances and breakthroughs the fields of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. This international conference is a key mechanism for linking
basic science with engineering towards the development of nano-enabled products,
which are of significant importance to the US and world economies. This
conference is held biannually and offers a forum for the open exchange of new
and previously unpublished scientific ideas. It will cover a variety of topics
ranging from nanoelectronics to nanomedicine to nanomanufacturing. The
conference includes presentations and extended discussions and interactions
among international participants. This forum has been instrumental in the
generation and incubation of breakthrough and transformative ideas in many areas
of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support the
participation of junior participants, including graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early career faculty members. A total of 400 attendees are expected
at the conference.