* 1445839
* Sun Valley Workshop: Musculoskeletal Biology; Sun Valley, Idaho; August 3-6, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* David Burr, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 10,229.00

This award provides funds to support the participation of young investigators in
the annual meeting of the Sun Valley Workshop on Musculoskeletal Biology held in
Sun Valley, Idaho, August 3-6, 2014. The Workshops have a 40 year tradition, and
emphasize active interaction of junior faculty and students. The Workshops
promote interdisciplinary communication, and are unusual in that discussion time
equals or exceeds time allotted for formal presentation. The goals of the
Workshop are to (1) work toward a multidisciplinary basic and clinical synthesis
of molecular, tissue and biomechanical processes related to the pathogenesis,
prevention and treatment of bone and joint diseases; (2) provide training
workshops for young investigators that help bridge the gaps between disciplines;
(3) provide a forum for student training and the opportunity for junior
investigators to talk with more senior scientists in a small group setting. This
2014 Workshop will address the theme of The Interaction of Bone with Other Organ
Systems through sessions focused on the Regulation of Skeletal Processes by
Neuropeptides, the Association Between Bone Fragility and Vascular
Calcification, the Association between Skeletal Muscle and Bone Biological and
Biomechanical Properties, the Interaction of Bone and the Immune System, and the
Regulation of Bone Health by the Gut Microbiome. This Workshop is relevant to
public health concerns because it brings a multi-disciplinary group of senior
and junior scientists together to discuss the interaction of bone with other
organ systems. It provides vertically-oriented integration, from basic science
to clinical pathology, to practitioners and scientists who are not completely
familiar with all aspects of these diseases of societal
concern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Opportunities are provided for junior
investigators to interact with more senior investigators. A Career Development
Workshop geared toward young investigators will include sections on "How do I
put together a curriculum vitae?" and a panel discussion on "The Interview
Process". As an additional aspect of mentorship, pre-workshop young investigator
mentors have been assigned to work with young investigators who will be giving
talks. An internationally-recognized scholar, Dr. Steven Goldring, has been
invited to provide a Plenary Lecture. The summarized results of the workshop are
disseminated widely through BoneKEy, the online journal of the International
Bone and Mineral Society: http://www.bonekey-
ibms.org/misc/Meetingsupplements.dtl. The abstracts can be accessed prior to the
Workshop as well: www.ibmsonline.org/Meetings.