* 1445387
* EAGER: Bioprinting Personalized Islets
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sha Jin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 1445387&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ye, Kaiming&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Bioprinting
Personalized Islets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award from the Biomedical
Engineering Program in CBET will fund the development of new technologies for
creating functional islet cells capable of secreting insulin in response to a
glucose challenge for potential treatment of diabetes. The new technology is
based on starting with cells derived from human skin, transformed into stem
cells (human induced pluripotent stem cells or hiPSC). These cells along with
helper cells that provide cues to these cells for their differentiation will be
printed using an 3D printer, along with an appropriate polymer matrix, to create
functional "islet-like" tissues. The work will contribute to the generation of
personalized engineered tissues through advanced biomanufacturing technologies
that could potentially be used to either screen drugs or treat human
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creation of highly organized multicellular
constructs, including tissues and organoids, will revolutionize tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine. These lab-produced high order tissues and
organs can be used for therapy or as disease models for pathophysiological study
and drug screening. This EAGER award is designed to explore the feasibility of
generating biologically functional islets from human induced pluripotent stem
cells multicellular assemblies that include instructive cells such as
endothelial cells through 3D bioprinting. PIs previous work suggested a
beneficial effect of 3D environments on hESCs (human embryonic stem cell)
pancreatic differentiation and maturation. A line of evidence acquired from
developmental biology suggests that active communication between vascular
endothelial cells, duct epithelial cells, and pancreatic endocrine cells is
critical to pancreatic islet cell differentiation and maturation. It is
hypothesized that patient-specific pancreatic islets can be customly generated
by differentiating hiPSCs within 3D printed multicellular assemblies. It is
proposed to generate personalized islets by patterning hiPSCs with endothelial
cells, which provide instructive signals critical for hiPSC pancreatic
differentiation and maturation, within 3D scaffolds. Two objectives are
proposed: 1) To identify biomaterials for 3D printing hiPSCs into desired
multicellular assemblies and 2) To characterize pancreatic differentiation of
hiPSCs in 3D printed multicellular scaffolds. The long-term goal is to generate
personalized islets by printing patient-specific hiPSCs into 3D scaffolds
patterned with endothelial cell-embedded vascular conduits.