* 1445551
* Building Understanding and Measurement of Secondary Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching (MKT)
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Y.-J. Yvonne Lai, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* robert ronau
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,550.00

The National Research Council in 2013 released the report Monitoring Progress
toward Successful K-12 STEM Education: A Nation Advancing?, which outlined 14
Indicators as well as the needed research and development to create a system to
monitor the quality of STEM education in the nation. This project is funded in
response to a Dear Colleague Letter request for research in the Promoting
Innovation in Measurement and Evaluation program focused on developing research
and tools to advance the nation's capability to measure these indicators. The
researchers in this project will address Indicator 6: Teachers' science and
mathematics content knowledge for teaching. This research builds on a successful
program that is developing valid measures of teachers' Mathematical Knowledge
for Teaching (MKT), which indicates that the mathematical knowledge teachers
need to be successful with students is different than conventional mathematical
knowledge. The research will test two hypotheses as follows: 1). the assessment
design theory for elementary MKT assessment items extends to secondary MKT item
design; and 2). Strong conventional mathematical knowledge, with a focus on
knowledge of advanced mathematics, is more integral to secondary MKT than to
elementary MKT. The project will include a convening of experts to identify the
implications of the findings for future research and development around
Indicator 6 in mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use items for
secondary teacher MKT that have been developed in prior NSF-funded research. The
researchers will conduct cognitive interviews to determine the extent to which
the teachers correctly respond to the items and the extent to which their
rationale for their response is in alignment with the reasoning around
specialized knowledge of mathematics for teaching or with conventional
mathematical reasoning. The findings of the study will be the focus of an expert
forum in which the findings from the study will structure the development of
recommendations for the research and development agenda needed to develop valid
and reliable indicators of secondary teachers' understanding of mathematical
knowledge for teaching.