* 1445700
* NSF/FDA Scholar In Residence: 3D Printed Biomaterials for MSC Attachment and Targeted Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* John Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 126,662.00

PI: Fisher, John P.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1445700&lt;br/&gt;Title: NSF/FDA Scholar
In Residence: 3D Printed Biomaterials for MSC Attachment and Targeted
Differentiation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The clinical promise
of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine will likely depend upon a viable
strategy for the isolation, culture, and delivery of stem cells. Therefore, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) must be on the forefront of stem cell
biology. Although a variety of stem cell populations exist, autogenic and
allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells are among the most widely investigated
population owing to their ability to be readily differentiated into any of the
mesodermal tissues, including bone, cartilage, fat, tendon, and ligament.
Currently an enriched population of MSCs is obtained by differential
centrifugation and/or plastic adherence. While both of these methods yield an
enriched MSC population, neither offers a means to isolate and subsequently
culture MSCs in one step. Most critically, these methods are only useful for in
vitro culture of MSCs. The PI proposes the development of a modified biomaterial
that can capture, culture, and differentiate an enriched MSC population,
resulting in phenotypically stable chondrocytes. The proposed work will allow
the FDA to remain on the forefront of stem cell technologies, both in the
techniques utilized in the development of biomaterials for regenerative medicine
and the interaction of stem cells with novel biomaterials. Finally, this work
will promote FDA?s regulatory role by developing the in-house expertise to
evaluate stem cell based technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), a multipotent stem cell
line, have tremendous therapeutic potential, as they are capable of
differentiating into various lineages such as bone, adipose, and cartilage.
However, MSCs represent only a fraction of the cells that are found in the bone
marrow and adipose tissue and lack unique identifying markers, which increases
the difficulty of isolation. The goal of this proposed work is to develop a
tissue engineering strategy to characterize MSC isolation based on adhesion, and
to mimic the specific adhesive interactions on the surface of a biodegradable
biomaterial to capture, culture, and differentiate MSCs for engineered cartilage
tissue applications. To this end, the PI proposes to develop a device that will
allow for in vivo recruitment and enrichment of MSCs, as well as provide a
simple method for in vitro capture of MSCs.