* 1445344
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Making Software Engineering Work for Computational Science and Engineering: An Integrated Approach
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Jeffrey Carver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,410.00

Scientific and engineering advances are increasingly dependent upon software,
and this overall field is often called Computational Science &amp; Engineering
(CSE). With the increase in the reliance on software for many critical decisions
and advances, it is of utmost importance for that software to be correct and
easy to maintain. As a result, scientists and engineers are devoting a larger
percentage of their time to the development and maintenance of code, leaving
less time for the underlying science or engineering. The discipline of software
engineering (SE) is focused on creating techniques and tools to help developers
work more effectively and efficiently. Historically, the use of SE practices for
science and engineering software (in CSE) has been relatively low. Modern SE has
a number of light-weight practices that would likely fit well into the workflow
of science and engineering software projects. The low use of SE in CSE appears
to be the result, at least partially, of the lack of properly-tailored,
lightweight, practices that have been shown effective in science/engineering
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main
activities:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Continuing the Software Engineering for Computational
Science &amp; Engineering Workshop (SE-CSE) series. This will bring together
members of both communities and inform them about the problems and solutions
each community has, and will lead to collaborations between the
communities.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Evaluating the usefulness of peer code reviews on
scientific and engineering software. By building and validating a set of
checklists to support scientific/engineering peer code review, a deeper
understanding of the types of defects commonly made by CSE developers will be
obtained. This knowledge will not just motivate checklist items, but it will
inform the development of additional SE methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Developing
and evaluating whether properly chosen and clearly presented metrics can be
beneficial for scientific and engineering developers. A community survey
concerning metrics will provide unique insight into the type of information the
CSE developers are currently using and would be interested in using if provided
properly. This type of knowledge does not currently exist and will be quite
valuable to others in the community wishing to support the use of metrics. The
project will build an initial version of a metrics dashboard. This dashboard
will act as a proof-of-concept to illustrate that a standard SE methodology
(i.e. using metrics to provide insight into the software development process)
can be used effectively by CSE developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the results of the individual activities, all of them together will help advance
scientific/engineering progress by helping developers build higher quality
software. The project will provide examples of how appropriate SE practices can
be used effectively within the CSE domain. Dissemination of these results into
the appropriate SE, CSE, and additional venues will allow them to have broad
impacts.