* 1445006
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Dielectrophoretic Fractionation of DNA for Next Generation Sequencing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Alexandra Ros, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 249,045.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on nucleic acid
fractionation to fill the need for adequate sample preparation for the rapidly
increasing field of next generation genome sequencing. The microfluidic nucleic
acid sorter is important because genome sequencing is fundamental for
deciphering biological pathways leading to malfunction and disease. All
sequencing technologies require the fractionation of nucleic acids tailored to
the specific sequencing approach. This project will result in a proof-of-concept
design for a microfluidic nucleic acid sorter. This microfluidic nucleic acid
sorter has the following unique features: a dielectrophoretic process
fractionating nucleic acids by size and conformation, realization on a
microfluidic platform and operation under continuous flow. These features
provide the advantages of nucleic acid fractionation in tunable size ranges,
cost effectiveness, minute sample amounts and applicability to both DNA and RNA
when compared to the leading competing shearing technology and bead purification
technology in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
previously little explored technology gaps in next generation sequencing as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application, comprised of
the development of a versatile device applicable to a wide range of nucleic acid
lengths, conformations and nucleic acid types and, the micro-preparative
approach realized through microfluidic integration. Specifically, the project
aims in the development of nucleic acid array and constriction fractionators
based on insulator-based dielectrophoresis suitable for fragment lengths between
100 bp and ~20 kbp and in volumes and quantities applicable for next generation
sequencing. The design of the dielectrophoretic fractionation process will be
optimized with the aid of numerical simulation tools and improved device
fabrication technologies. A systematic study of size fractionation capabilities
of the proof-of-principle devices for DNA and RNA will be performed and
optimized fractions will be tested on existing next generation sequencing
platforms. The versatility of the approach will allow the application for
existing but also future next generation sequencing platforms and their
requirements in nucleic acid sample preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, personnel involved in this project, undergraduate students and post
docs, will receive innovation and technology translation experiences through
active involvement in the research components of this project, the proof-of-
principle development and the collaboration with an industry partner. Mentoring
activities further fosters the participation of women in the research aspects of
this project.