* 1445725
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Inkjet Printing of Electronic and Optoelectronic Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Vivek Subramanian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This project supports a cooperative research effort by Dr. Vivek Subramanian of
the University of California-Berkeley in collaboration with Dr. Ahmed Khalil of
the Egypt Nanotechnology Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study "Inkjet
Printing of Electronic and Optoelectronic Devices". Inkjet printing is a
valuable method for fabricating electronic and optoelectronic devices on large
areas and at low-cost. Although tremendous progress has been made in integrating
inkjet printing into various electronic systems, inkjet printing still produces
lower resolution compared to conventional and generally more expensive
patterning techniques. The PIs will attempt to expand the capabilities of inkjet
printing to fabricate devices such as transistors, solar cells, and sensors by
developing techniques to improve the capabilities of inkjet printing. This
project will support exchange visits and preliminary research efforts. The PIs
plan to submit a long-term collaborative research proposal following based on
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two teams will together examine the
possibility of increasing the quality of printed structures as well as the
resolution at different printing parameters. The interaction between the ink and
the substrate will be studied in details using different homogeneous and pre-
patterned substrates as well as different ink materials. For pre-patterning of
the substrates, microcontact printing and gravure printing will be utilized with
the aim to control the wettability as well as the roughness of the substrates.
Different types of inks will be used to study the interaction between the ink
and patterned substrates. This process will allow PIs to pattern inks with
resolutions never previously achieved by inkjet printing. The PIs have
complementary background in the control of surface energy (Egypt) and printed
electronics (US). The proposed techniques will allow the PIs to achieve
significantly enhanced resolution of the printed electronic structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will facilitate intellecutal and cultural
exchange between the two complementary research groups. Graduate students will
be exchanged in both directions, providing important exposure to broader
cultural and research approaches for these scientists and engineers at an early
stage in their professional careers,enabling them to become broader, well-
rounded researchers. This project will also support research by undergraduates
who will be involved in all stages of effort and will also be candidates for
researcher exchange. It is expected that these exchange opportunities will serve
as a tremendous recruiting and retention tool for undergraduates, and further,
will broaden their global awareness, helping them advance in their future
careers. Within the project, graduate students from Egypt and USA will be
trained in developing low-cost printing techniques for different applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science
and Technology Fund Program. Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative
projects is provided to the National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department
of State. The Egyptian Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the
collaboration.