* 1445684
* NSF/FDA SIR: Bioimpedance of stimulating electrodes for the safe placement of retinal implants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Nathalia Peixoto, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,018.00

PI: Peixoto, Nathalia L Proposal: 1445684 Title: Bioimpedance of stimulating
electrodes for the safe placement of retinal implants

Significance This project may provide society are a better understanding of the
design issues that cause a loss of effectiveness of retinal stimulus electrodes
in blind subjects. In retinal implants, the distance between the stimulating
electrode and the surface of the retina is a critical variable for determining
perceptual thresholds and for implant safety in general. When the electrode is
too far from the target ganglion cells, the current density achieved in the
retina is low, in part due to current spreading through the vitreous humour,
thus raising the perceptual threshold and therefore decreasing spatial
resolution. If, on the other hand, the electrode touches the retina, mechanical
damage can be expected. There is therefore a need to determine the distance from
the electrode to the retina in situ. The PI proposes to investigate methods to
reliably measure electrode proximity to the retina, with the objective of
establishing techniques which are readily translatable to current technology.

Technical Description Retinal prostheses for the blind are in clinical trials
worldwide, including the FDA-approved Argus II prosthesis. Each retinal
prosthesis attempts to position stimulus electrode arrays in close proximity to
the retina in order to effectively activate the remaining retinal neural
circuitry. Retinal activation by electrodes in different locations on the
retinal surface are not all equivalent. Stimulus pulses can be markedly
attenuated by resistive and capacitive barriers in the eyewall, which in some
cases could prevent effective activation of the retinal tissue. Here we plan to
investigate the impedance correlates of mechanical damage to the inner retina by
the stimulus electrodes, as well as electrically-mediated damage (due to high
charge density). The main objective of this project is to determine safety
throughout the period when the implant is used, in situ, leveraging currently
available technology for retinal implants.