* 1445384
* EAGER: The Midwest CyberCenter
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* John Sands, Moraine Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 02/28/2017
* USD 297,548.00

Moraine Valley Community College (MVCC) seeks to perform a feasibility study of
replicating and refining the Brookdale Community College (BCC) CyberCenter
Program (NSF funded as DUE-1331170). Both projects design, implement and
evaluate an innovative pathway from cyber talent to cyber workforce. It includes
a scalable, competition-driven, hands-on education model that has a potential to
help with the nation's critical shortage of cybersecurity workforce. It will
incorporate on-line courses, virtual labs and access tools to decrease overall
per student cost in the CyberCenter program. The student cohort will include
veterans and other underrepresented populations. The project will introduce
significant modifications to the existing project that focus on maintaining
student preparedness while reducing program cost. The students will be provided
a 24-hour access to a virtual learning environment and will be required to
complete a series of labs aligned with the NICE framework. If successful, the
proposed competition-based model for developing the cybersecurity technical
talent has a potential for dissemination and implementation in a large number of
the 1,200 community colleges nationwide. Documenting that the available open
courses are sufficient to obtain industry certifications will significantly
decrease the overall cost of implementing or replicating this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comparative analysis will be performed between
the project's participants and data collected on the first cohort of the BCC
program. The team will specifically measure each participant's ability to pass
industry certification exams, the scores they earn as well as their overall
readiness for both industry residency programs and the permanent placement in
the Cybersecurity workforce. The project team will redesign elements of the BCC
program to utilize existing introductory level curriculum developed with funding
from the NSF. Participants will then complete the advanced SANS courses. The
original project is in the second year and this project is testing a variation
of the approach to increase experiential learning and open course material for
foundational courses. Both projects are considered a pilot of a possible large-
scale implementation in multiple states and in collaboration with the Department
of Homeland Security (DHS). The DHS Cyber Skills Task Force recommended creation
of a community college program that would feed technical talent to mission
critical cyber components of DHS. It is very likely that this pilot may be
implemented widely to respond to DHS Task Force recommendations.