* 1445470
* EAGER:  A Systems Biology Based Mathematical Abstraction for Programming Engineered Microbes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This EAGER project, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology program, will
lead to the development of tools that will allow researchers to change the
behavior or state of bacteria without the introduction of new genes. Analogous
to the development of programming languages for computers, the investigator will
develop the rules and theory that will enable the programming (or change of
state) of bacteria. This should enable other researchers in the field to more
rapidly alter bacteria to perform useful functions such as the manufacture of
chemicals, or to prevent harmful functions such as biofouling of surfaces. The
investigator will engage in interdisciplinary training at all levels from K-12
to graduate and postdoctoral students, with a focus on enhancing diversity.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical: The PI will use a systems biology approach to
describe different phenotypic states during P. aeroginosa biofilm formation
under different nutrient conditions. Her hypothesis is that temporal
transcriptomic profiles of bacteria can be described using a state space
formalism. The PI will then use this state space systems biology framework to
develop a 'soft' programming language, that doesn't require insertion of
external DNA circuits, to modulate the phenotypic states of the cells. The
development of soft programming for bacteria will have a significant impact on
the fields of synthetic biology and metabolic engineering.