* 1445541
* EAGER: Cell Excretion, a Novel Mechanism of Cell Clearance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jason Pellettieri, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 07/31/2017
* USD 152,546.00

Genetically programmed forms of cell death occur at a high rate throughout life
in many animal tissues, necessitating rapid clearance of the resulting cell
corpses to preserve tissue homeostasis. In the canonical cell clearance
mechanism, remnants of apoptotic cells are engulfed by phagocytic cells and
degraded in the lysosome. However, recent work has revealed that alternative
forms of cell clearance are also important for meatazoan development and
physiology. The objective of this proposal is to characterize one such novel
process in the planarian flatworm Schmidtea mediterranea. The proposed
experiments will address the hypothesis that light exposure triggers pigment
cell death, but that the resulting corpses are redistributed to the gut and
excreted, instead of being subjected to lysosomal degradation. Student
researchers will gain valuable experience in current techniques, including RNA
interference and confocal microscopy, developing skills that prepare them for
scientific careers and/or graduate programs in the biological sciences. The work
associated with this award will therefore augment the state of New Hampshire's
efforts to expand the pipeline for future STEM professionals, a central goal of
the state EPSCoR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data produced by the
PI show that prolonged exposure to intense visible light induces complete bodily
depigmentation in adult planarians and that this is associated with excretion of
large amounts of heavily pigmented material from the gut. By revealing the
cellular mechanisms underlying this response, the research component of this
project is likely to provide new insight into how self-renewing adult tissues
clear dead or damaged cells. Histologic analyses will be combined with a double-
labeling approach incorporating TUNEL and fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) to characterize the cellular mechanisms of a light-induced depigmentation
response that appears to result from selective elimination of pigment cells. The
research project will significantly advance our understanding of metazoan tissue
homeostasis by complementing our existing knowledge of the canonical apoptotic
cell clearance pathway. Results from the study will be disseminated through
scientific conference presentations and by publication in peer-reviewed
journals.