* 1445656
* Support for the Academic and Research Leadership Symposium at the National Society of Black Engineers Convention
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,957.00

Computer science and engineering must diversity its workforce to meet the future
demands for the technical professions. professional development for minority
scholars to meet the anticipated needs in the technical workforce. Racial and
ethnic minority groups, including African Americans, Hispanics, and Native
Americans, remain substantially underrepresented in engineering and science,
especially at the level of Ph.D. researchers and faculty. The Academic and
Research Leadership Symposium (ARLS) is a symposium that is co-located with the
Annual Convention of the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE). The purpose
of the ARLS is to develop minority engineers in academia, industry, and
government laboratories, whose careers involve a strong focus on research, in
order to prepare them for leadership and success in their chosen discipline. The
ARLS has two threads: (1) a faculty development thread, and (2) a researcher
development and networking thread. It provides an opportunity for seasoned
researchers (university, corporate, government) to nurture connections with
their peers, and be excited and inspired by the latest discoveries and technical
advances across many disciplines of engineering and science. Opportunities for
new collaborations and strategic career advancements are anticipated. The
researcher development and networking thread consists of a networking reception
with a keynote presentation by a high-profile researcher, a session on career
development in an R&amp;D centric environment (e.g., The Researcher Entrepreneur
and Senior Leadership Strategies), and a poster session organized by members of
the ARLS network for more in-depth technical discussions.