* 1445242
* Group Travel to Attend 6th International Symposium on Advances in Computational Heat Transfer, May 25-29, 2015 at Piscataway, Rutgers University, New Jersey
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Yogesh Jaluria, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 12/31/2015
* USD 14,000.00

CBET-1445242&lt;br/&gt;Jaluria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests partial travel support for several researchers and invited speakers to
attend the conference. The conference is scheduled to be held May 25-29, 2014 at
Piscataway, Rutgers University, New Jersey. The main objective of this proposal
is to support participation at the 6th International Symposium on Advances in
Computational Heat Transfer.The conference will provide an important forum for
linking the basic work being done in computational heat transfer, particularly
on new approaches and methods, with new areas, which could affect society in
general. Areas like biosystems, sensors and diagnostics, electronic devices,
global climate change, transportation systems, heating and cooling systems, and
energy storage are strongly dependent on the computational approach for
analysis, prediction and control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
conference is to provide a forum for the exchange of ideas, methods and results
in computational heat transfer. The conference will provide an excellent venue
for presenting recent research and advances in this field and for interaction
with researchers from academic and research institutions, as well as from
industry, around the world. The interaction among researchers will improve the
understanding of the fundamentals and expand the application to a wide variety
of new and emerging areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of topics is
covered in these conferences, ranging from the fundamentals and challenges in
computational heat transfer to applications in energy, environment,
manufacturing and biological systems. Though the focus is on thermal transport,
the associated fluid flow and mass transfer are also considered. New and
emerging areas such as micro/nanoscale transport phenomena, sustainability and
materials processing are of particular interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will be chosen based on their application for
funds and acceptance of their submitted papers. Priority will be given to
students and under-represented minorities, followed by keynote speakers. The
participation of students will be useful for training graduate students and
gaining meaningful research experience, particularly for under-represented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The papers presented at the conference will be
available to the participants and will also be posted on the digital library of
the International Center for Heat and Mass Transfer. Selected papers will be
encouraged to submit to the Journal of Computational Thermal Sciences and other
journals.