* 1445403
* EAGER: III: CIFRAM: Distributed Computing Approaches for the Analysis of Enterprise and Systemic Risk using a Financial Contract-Based Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Donald Berndt, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 298,727.00

Following the recent financial crisis, regulatory responses and academic
initiatives spurred significant research into the measurement of systemic risk.
Most systemic risk models are bound however by the constraints of available data
and computing platforms. Many researchers argue that the possibilities for
understanding systemic risk will be greatly enhanced if the relationships and
contractual arrangements between markets participants can be modeled at a
granular level. The objective of this research is to accelerate our
understanding of systemic risk monitoring approaches that leverage granular data
(transactional, positional and other) by establishing a model for (and
implementation of) the underlying distributed computing
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the implementation of a
reference architecture and technical platform designed to cater to the specific
data fabric of the financial system and addressing the computational
requirements associated with the analysis of systemic risk using granular
contract-level data. Research efforts are focused around the following two
objectives: (1) Evaluation and implementation of granular contract-level data
models using scalable database technologies. This will entail the analysis of
alternative design patterns and data models, the evaluation of database
technologies (including the relational model but with specific focus on the
NoSQL universe) and the implementation of data models using the best fit
technology; (2) Prototyping and evaluation of distributed computing approaches
based on the underlying database foundation. This will entail using MapReduce or
other parallel computing frameworks to harness the power of many processing
resources. The ACTUS (Algorithmic Contract Types Unified Standard) calculation
engine will be integrated with the computing environment in order to provide
granular event vectors and state-contingent cash flows. Building on the granular
cash flow information, this research will prototype, test and evaluate various
aggregation frameworks for the calculation of summary
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site: http://www.usf.edu/business/departments/isds/projects/gsrisk