* 1445385
* I-Corps:  Ultra-low Power Chemical Vapor Nano-sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Peter Hesketh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

There are numerous areas where air quality or gas composition can enhance the
quality of life and safety. These areas include health and safety (such as
detection of methane during mining), medical (breath diagnosis), law enforcement
(such as detection of illicit drugs), and vehicle safety (such as checking for
alcohol and drugs for safe driving). Current technology meets some of the needs
but is expensive, bulky and power hungry. This project proposes a miniature,
ultra-low power, sensitive, microbridge thermal conductivity based gas sensor
that uses less than 50 microwatts of power. In addition, the reproducibility and
stability of the sensor are excellent achieving over 30 billion measurements
before failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key advantages of the proposed sensors
are their ultra-low power consumption and the lack of need for recalibration in
the field. This results in substantial cost savings since most chemical sensors
require calibrations at given time intervals as well as frequent changes in the
battery power. As the sensor is conductimetric, the instrumentation for
measurement is very straight forward. The team has investigated methods for
minimizing noise and improving stability of the data with pulsed operation. The
team has also investigated transient measurements for which the response time is
recorded as a function of the gas composition.