* 1445610
* Developing a System for Tracking State Assessment Policies in Science and Mathematics Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Rolf Blank, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,049.00

The National Research Council in 2013 released the report Monitoring Progress
toward Successful K-12 STEM Education: A Nation Advancing?, which outlined 14
Indicators as well as the needed research and development to create a system to
monitor the quality of STEM education in the nation. This project is funded in
response to a Dear Colleague Letter request for research in the Promoting
Innovation in Measurement and Evaluation program focused on developing research
and tools to advance the nation's capability to measure these indicators. The
researchers in this project will address Indicator 12 - States' use of
assessments that measure the core concepts and practices of science and
mathematics disciplines. Determining the alignment of state assessments with the
core concepts in the current college and career readiness standards adopted by
states is a complex process that requires coordination of state policy and
assessment practices. This project will design and test an online method and
develop a database for tracking and reporting on policies regarding student
assessment systems of the 50 states. In addition, the project will develop
cross-state criteria for reporting on the content alignment of state assessments
to state-adopted standards to improve methodologies for such alignment.

Research activities will be carried out in three phases. In phase one, the
project will gather available information about assessment policies of the
states and the two national consortia to develop the database of existing policy
documents and to structure the online information gathering portal. In the
second stage, the researchers will work with expert advisors to refine the
online process for expanding the database to make it easily updatable. In the
third phase the researchers will work with a subset of state science and
mathematics supervisors to test out the collection system. Parallel to the
development of the system to report state assessment policies will be the
development of frameworks for determining the alignment of state assessments and
standards based on the work of the two assessment consortia, state-contracted
studies, and the models of state assessments systems recommended by work
conducted by the National Research Council science assessment committee.