* 1445881
* UC Bioengineering Symposium: Educational Awards to be held in Irvine, CA on June 18th-20th, 2014.
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2014
* Jered Haun, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 11/30/2014
* USD 7,000.00

1445881&lt;br/&gt;Khine, Michelle&lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;Title: UC Bioengineering Symposium: Educational Awards to be
held in Irvine, CA on June 18th-20th, 2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layperson
description&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this UC Systemwide Bioengineering
Symposium is to bring leading experts in biology, medicine, materials, and
engineering with industry leaders to translate innovative engineering
technologies and methodologies to effectively sense, diagnose and treat medical
disorders and diseases. &lt;br/&gt;This symposium will draw new participation
and foster interdisciplinary research and education, particularly students and
junior faculty, including underrepresented groups. There will be numerous
networking opportunities to stimulate scientific and technical discussion with
senior investigators and industry leaders. We will also have a focus on engaging
women at the undergraduate level to stay in the engineering field. We will have
special emphasis on undergraduate senior design awards. The broader impacts and
goals are to develop a robust pipeline for discovery and development of medical
therapies, diagnostics and research technologies to cure diseases and
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical grand
challenges facing our society can be addressed in part or in whole by
interfacing stem cell -, synthetic -, or systems biology with biomedical
engineering tools (including microfluidics, nanomaterials and nanotechnology,
cellular and molecular machines, bioinspired materials and structures) and
engineering principles (such as biophotonics, transport phenomenon, drug
delivery). By drawing leaders from each of these fields (from both industry and
academia) together to discuss ways to address pressing medical issues with the
most cutting edge technology in a highly interactive venue, we will enable
progress at the interface of science, engineering, and medicine. Requested
funding for this proposal will enable support for registration fees for the best
student participants, provide funding for student awards (oral and poster
presentations and innovation competitions) and provide funding for junior
faculty awards (innovation competition).