* 1445577
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Plasma-Assisted Chemical Vapor Synthesis versus Conventional Synthesis Methods of Advanced Ceramic Nanopowders
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* H. Y. Sohn, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 112,211.00

This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr. H.Y. Sohn of the
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah and Mohamed Khedr fo the Beni-Suef
University, Beni Suef, Egypt. They plan to study "Plasma-Assisted Chemical Vapor
Synthesis versus Conventional Synthesis Methods of Advanced Ceramic
Nanopowders." The research techniques will be applied to nanosized ceramic oxide
powders which have important applications as advanced materials in many
technological areas such as electronics, energy conversion, aircraft, catalysis,
and structural materials. Improving the synthetic methods to prepare these
materials will promote their cost-effective use in the many applications that
rely on attractive properties such as high catalytic and electro-catalytic
activity, superior mixing characteristics required for use in a host of
applications such as coatings and fillers, enhanced sintering properties, and
superior electronic and optical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical
Vapor Synthesis (CVS) process for producing nanoparticles provides unique
features that are often difficult to achieve with more conventional synthesis
techniques, producing uniformly sized nanoparticles that also possess highly
uniform compositions. This project aims to compare the properties of the
materials prepared by the plasma vapor synthsis method with materials prepared
using conventional methods. The proposed work will apply a plasma reactor to CVS
of nanosized oxide powders as well as using an electrical resistance heated
furnace. The oxide nanopowders made by the plasma-assisted CVS process will be
carefully characterized to determine their properties for a range of
applications. In the U.S. partner's laboratory, the CVS method has been applied
to the synthesis of metallic and intermetallic fine powders and these results
provide confidence that the process can be advantageously applied to the
synthesis of useful ceramic powders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
contribute to the increased development of the plasma-assisted chemical vapor
synthesis process as an advanced tool for producing many useful materials. The
project will also promote the training of young scientists in this field,
especially providing training opportunities for underrepresented groups in the
U.S. and junior scientists in Egypt. The PI will actively recruit women and
other minority students to assist in the performance of the project.
Participants from both the U.S. and Egypt will also gain experience on
international collaboration by mutual visits and exchange of ideas. The results
of the proposed activities is expected to be disseminated broadly through
conferences and publications, promoting applications of this technology that
will benefit the scientific community and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the US-Egypt Joint Science
and Technology Fund Program. Support for the U.S. side of these cooperative
projects is provided to the National Science Foundation by the U.S. Department
of State. The Egyptian Government provides support for the Egyptian side of the
collaboration.