* 1445710
* I-Corps:  WikiHyperGlossary - an information literacy technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Daniel Berleant, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The importance of literacy, the ability to read and comprehend a written
document is so great in the modern world that the United Nations considers
literacy to be a fundamental human right. From legal documents to educational
materials to cultural heritage, the importance of understanding the information
contained in written texts is fundamental to modern society. The Internet has
created new challenges for literacy, where people can easily access a document
that they lack the domain specific background to understand. Consequentially,
they often surf to other documents, seeking ones they can understand, even if
they contain less useful information than the original document. The proposed
work assists people in burrowing down into documents they are specifically
interested in understanding, instead of having to browse off to other often
tangential and potentially less reliable documents, in their quest for
comprehensible information. Although this proposed technology was created to
assist people in understanding or analyzing chemical documents, it can be of
value to understanding documents in any technical or other specialized domain.

Information and Communication Technologies have been changing how our society
shares, communicates and manipulates information. The proposed technology
"WikiHyperGlossary (WHG)" is an Information and Communication Technology that
uses both social (web 2.0) and semantic (web 3.0) technologies to both increase
the readability of digital printed documents, and connect them to new forms of
information. The WHG allows the public to follow hyperlinks that are
automatically added to words in a document of interest, based on whatever
glossary the user chooses. As a semantic tool demonstrated in the chemical
sciences, the WHG allows access to cheminformatic information like spectra and
physical properties of compounds mentioned in an article, as well as the ability
to edit those molecules and acquire information on the newly created molecules.
This team plans to apply this architecture to other domains as well, as it seeks
multiple commercialization opportunities.