* 1445708
* EAGER: Testing geographic range-expansion models: Population genetics of a colonizing parasite
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* James Demastes, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2018
* USD 149,937.00

The long-term survival of a species is dependent on the genetic diversity of the
populations that comprise that species. Any reduction in genetic diversity
weakens the ability of a species to adapt to changes in the environment,
including emerging diseases or changing climate. Understanding how populations
lose genetic diversity, and how they may recover from this loss, is fundamental
to conservation efforts. This study will cap a 25-year-long project by
addressing the foundational topic of the loss of genetic diversity across 270
generations of an insect (chewing louse) with a very short (33 day) generation
time. This insect serves as a model for organisms with much longer generation
times; for example, a 270-generation study of rodents would take more than 300
years to complete, and a similar study of human genetics would span more than
5,000 years. The distinct advantage of using this insect as a model organism
promises to produce new insights that have the potential to change the way
scientists think about changes in species distributions and the effect of this
change on the genetic diversity of at-risk species. The study also will provide
numerous research opportunities for undergraduate students and will foster
discussion at the local level via the establishment of a Science Caf√© for
informal interactions between research scientists, students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide empirical genetic data from
a parasitic chewing louse (Geomydoecus aurei) for testing predictions produced
by simulation studies. G. aurei is experiencing an ongoing range expansion that
dates back at least to the 1920's. The research will take advantage of a library
of louse samples collected since 1991, which documents a yearly southward
movement of the parasite's geographic distribution of about 200 meters per year.
To test models of population expansion, the spatial distribution of genetic
variation associated with the population expansion will be compared to spatial
genetic variation within the core of the species range. Genetic recovery models
will be tested by comparing populations previously bottlenecked by the
colonization process with populations from those same locations now embedded
within the expanding range of G. aurei.