* 1445737
* NSF/FDA SIR: Modeling Observer Performance in CT Dose Reduction Assessments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Craig Abbey, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 102,287.00

PI: Abbey, Craig K. Proposal: 1445737 Title: Modeling Observer Performance in CT
Dose Reduction Assessments

Significance Dose reduction in CT imaging has become an important priority in
medical imaging that has emerged with the increased use of this imaging
modality. The estimated annual rate of CT scanning in large integrated
healthcare systems has increased roughly three-fold in the last 15 years, with
worrisome estimates of induced cancers as high as 2%. This has motivated
intensive investigations into dose reduction, including reduced-dose imaging
protocols that use computer-intensive reconstruction techniques to recover
information that may otherwise be lost in the in additional noise engendered by
these protocols. The FDA has been asked by sponsors to approve claims concerning
reduced-dose protocols recently, and expects to see more such applications in
the near future. However, demonstrating effective dose reduction is challenging.
By definition, such techniques seek to retain diagnostic quality with little or
no measureable effect on diagnostic performance. Clinical reader studies using
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) methodology are the accepted standard
for evaluating effects on diagnostic performance. However, these studies are
very expensive and time consuming, and identifying small effects, or non-
inferiority, requires prohibitively large sets of readers and cases. As a
result, the field is increasingly turning to model-observers as an alternative
to standard observer performance studies. To be effective at predicting human
observer performance, model observers require extensive validation with human
data in psychophysical studies. The goal of this project is performing a
validation in the context of x-ray CT imaging at low doses. The aims of the
project are to collect a large set of psychophysical data relevant to CT dose
reduction and analyze this data using classification image methods translated
from vision science to better understand how human observers perform tasks in
these noisy images.

Technical Description How human observers perform tasks on the basis of noisy
and possibly distorted images is still an open question. The investigation
proposed will provide observer performance data and an approach to modelling
human observers that are well beyond what has been done to date. Using the
classification image methodology with both detection and localization tasks,
they will have the opportunity to model how human observers utilize information
in noisy CT images, and how the use of image information changes as dose is
reduced and/or dose reduction methods (smoothing, etc.) are applied. The results
will therefore be of interest to the broader vision science community as well as
the fields of medical image perception and CT image reconstruction. The results
of our studies will allow better models of observers to be used for assessing
dose reduction. By providing a much more tractable model-observer study, which
can be conducted in a laboratory setting without the need for a clinical readers
and cases, investigators pursuing new CT imaging techniques will be more willing
to evaluate and optimize dose in their studies. This is expected to result in a
more widespread use of model based approaches to fine tune image dose
procedures. It is also expected that the results will have impact in vision
science with more insightful models of how human observers perform visual tasks
in the presence of noise.