* 1445161
* NSF CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop at the 2014 ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences; Buffalo, New York, 19 August 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Kemper Lewis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 9,995.00

The on-going expansion of research in systems engineering and design makes the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) International Design and
Engineering Technical Conferences one of the largest conferences organized by
ASME. Every year, many doctoral students and junior faculty attend the
conference with the aim of presenting their work and establishing themselves in
the community. However, there is a need at these types of conferences to further
develop and attract new scholars within the design community. Currently, the
main focus of such conferences is on presenting papers, rather than on nurturing
advanced doctoral students to successfully transition into design research
scholarship positions in academia or in industry. By supporting a career
development workshop, this award provides conference participants with
information on how to develop a strategic plan for their lifetime and career
goals. It will enable graduate students and junior faculty to make a smooth
transition into a meaningful career by helping them discover the crucial
components of career development and self-representation. In addition, it will
increase the enthusiasm of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior
faculty toward their future positions, and teach them significant technical
skills as well as communication and leadership skills. Finally, the workshop
will continue to foster lines of communication for the Design Engineering
community at the national level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure the continuity
and further development of the design engineering community, an NSF CAREER
Proposal Writing Workshop will be held at the 2014 ASME International Design
Engineering Technical Conferences. In addition to focusing on career development
skills, choices, and practices, this workshop will present information about how
to develop an effective "CAREER development grant," bringing together a pool of
graduate students and leading faculty investigators interested in becoming
independent scholars. The workshop is integrated with the Design for
Manufacturing and Life Cycle Technical Conference schedule, and will provide
participants the opportunity to meet distinguished researchers and educators
from a diverse array of interrelated fields within the design community.