* 1445168
* Collaborative Research: Long Term Sublimation/Preservation of Two Separate, Buried Glacier Ice Masses, Ong Valley, Southern Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 59,723.00

Putkonen/1445205&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the study
of a large body of ice that is buried beneath approximately a meter of debris in
the Ong Valley of the Transantarctic Mountains of East Antarctica. Preliminary
analyses of this material suggest that it could be over a million years old.
Most glacial ice contains tiny air bubbles that have trapped the atmospheric
gases and other atmospherically transported materials existing at the time that
the ice was deposited such as plant pollen, microbes and mineral dust. Samples
will be collected from this buried ice mass, down to a depth of 10 meters, and
cosmogenic nuclide concentrations both in the overlying debris and in the till
contained in the ice will be measured. This site could contain some of the
oldest ice on Earth and studies of the material contained within it may help
researchers to better understand the processes involved in its survival for such
long periods of time. This work will also help inform scientists about the
processes involved in the development of landforms here on earth as well as
those on Mars where similar dirt covered glaciers are found
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samples of the buried ice will be collected in Ong
Valley and analyzed to determine the cosmogenic nuclide concentrations in both
the overlying debris and in the mineral matter suspended in the ice. The
combined analysis of the target cosmogenic nuclides (Beryllium-10, Aluminum-26,
and Neon-21) will allow the age of the ice to be uniquely determined and will
enable determination of the rate that the ice is sublimating. The intellectual
merit of this research is to unequivocally determine the age of the ice and the
sublimation rate of the ice in Ong Valley, Antarctica and to better understand
if this an uniquely Antarctic process or whether it could exist elsewhere on
earth or on other planets. The work may also lead to the recognition of the
oldest buried ice ever found on Earth and would provide a source from which
direct information about the atmospheric chemistry, ancient life forms, and
geology of that time could be measured. The broader impacts of this work are
that it will be relevant to researchers in a number of different fields
including glaciology, paleoclimatology, planetary geology, and biology. Several
students will also participate in the project, conducting Antarctic field work,
making measurements in the lab, attending meetings, participating in outreach
activities, and producing videos. A graduate student will also write a thesis on
this research. The results will be published in scientific journals and
presented at conferences. The project requires field work in Antarctica.