* 1445635
* Activities of the Polar Research Board
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Laurie Geller, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Polar Research Board (PRB) is the focal
point within the US National Academies for providing scientific advice on issues
related to the Arctic, Antarctic, and cold regions in general. The PRB does not
conduct scientific research, but instead works to synthesize existing
information so it is useful to decision makers. The PRB seeks to increase
understanding of the polar sciences among state and federal decision makers and
others. The Board's overall mission is to help polar science have a broader
impact on society, both in the United States and in the international arena.
This award will provide partial support for the expenses associated with the
activities and operations of the PRB over a period of three years. NOAA and NASA
provide additional funds toward the PRB's operations and
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PRB serves
at the interface of polar science and policy, across disciplines, and across
both northern and southern polar regions. The PRB's mission is to advance
understanding of the polar regions, including all areas of science, engineering,
human dimensions, and policy; foster application of polar science to benefit the
public and decision makers; advise U.S. research programs so they are responsive
to the needs of the nation; encourage interdisciplinary and cross polar
perspectives; and provide a forum for independent discussion of polar issues.
Activities include discussion forums, program reviews, assistance in setting
priorities and identifying research opportunities, evaluation of relevant
technologies, analyses of controversial and nationally important topics, and
other tasks as needed. The Board does not conduct research, but helps to focus
and integrate information and thus give polar research more visibility and a
broader impact on society, both in the United States and internationally. The
PRB also serves as the U.S. National Committee to two international polar
science organizations -- the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
and the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PRB's activities bring diverse scientific perspectives together in service to
national needs. The PRB strives to enhance understanding of the Arctic and
Antarctic, provide independent views on U.S. research efforts, ensure that the
polar science community is involved in government decision-making, and grow US
leadership in international activities. The Board asks the "best and brightest"
scientists to volunteer their time, and these volunteers are the intellectual
force behind all the Board's work. Participants are selected with care to bring
a diversity of expertise and experience; they are broad thinkers who can both
react to requests for assistance and look ahead to anticipate issues. The Board
is increasingly effective, conducting more visible activities, and has earned a
reputation for timely and frank guidance.&lt;br/&gt;In the three years of this
award, the PRB expects to serve the Nation by addressing priority issues either
requested by agencies or identified by the Board's members -- through informal
discussions at the Board meetings, and through the development of new ad hoc
study and workshop activities. The Board will also continue to facilitate U.S.
participation in IASC and SCAR, and seek ways to make these organizations
valuable to U.S. interests.