* 1445578
* COLLABORATIVE: WORKSHOP: Identifying and prioritizing research questions for long-term ecological experiments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* louis kaplan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 57,787.00

The value of data increases as data sets grow longer, as this information can be
used to answer new suites of questions that are different from those that
originally motivated the data collection. This award supports a three-staged
process that will engage early-career researchers to identify new frontiers for
the application of long-term data sets, with a particular focus on long-term
experiments. The lead investigators propose a unique approach to identifying
these questions. Results from their approach will add significant value to
ongoing investments in long-term data. They will advance the fields of ecology
and ecosystem science by identifying new questions and by encouraging early-
career researchers with novel perspectives to play a central role in defining
directions for future long-term research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-
term experiments established through research networks or individual researchers
provide some of the best illustrations of the value of long-term research, yet
the potential applications of these experiments to diverse questions in ecology
and evolution remain untapped. The investigators combine three activities to
ensure an open and democratic development and prioritization of new research
directions. An on-line survey will be used to engage the broad ecological
community in identifying research questions uniquely addressed by long-term
ecological experiments. Questions will be primarily closed-ended, but a small
number of open-ended questions is necessary to ensure a comprehensive assessment
of the community's viewpoints. Survey results will be summarized in
collaboration with The Yale Project on Climate Change Communication, which
delivers and analyzes online surveys to public, governmental, and academic
sectors. The second stage of the project is a workshop, held at the Kellogg
Biological Station, during which early-career researchers will present their own
questions, evaluate and categorize questions from the survey, and use horizon
scanning to identify leading questions and the rationale for their importance. A
report synthesizing the approach and the leading research questions will be the
final stage of the project. This report will first be reviewed by 'opinion
leaders,' or senior researchers well established in the area of long-term
ecological research. Their comments and critiques will be incorporated as
appendices to the workshop report, which will be submitted for publication to a
leading ecological journal. The proposed activities - a broad survey, a
workshop, and a publication - will identify the next generation of questions
that can capitalize on the funds already invested in long-term ecological
research.