* 1446511
* CPS:  Breakthrough:  Cyber-Physical System Securitization by Responsibility Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Patrick Cousot, New York University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Programs describe successions of actions to be performed by computers.
Unfortunately programmers make errors which are exploited by attackers to divert
program actions from their goals. Accordingly, program actions must be checked
to be always safe and secure. Program security starts with the definition of
which actions might be insecure and when they are bad. Insecure actions cannot
be always forbidden as for safety. This project formalizes the concept of
responsibility analysis. Responsibility analysis aims at determining
automatically which program entities cause bad insecure actions to happen. This
is possible by examining the program text only, because this text precisely
describes all possible actions that can happen when later running a program.

Based on an operational semantics of programs, the project formally defines
semantic responsibility as the most precise way of locating the possible origin
of bad actions. A sound static responsibility analysis will be designed by
abstract interpretation of this operational semantics, on top of traditional
safety analyses of C programs. A prototype static responsibility analyzer will
be built to check for the security of cyber-physical systems (given bad actions
and a security policy). The result of the analysis will be used to check that
all entities responsible for bad actions are duly authorized (or the security
policy is wrong). This tool will help programmers to soundly cure potential
vulnerabilities at program design time as opposed to present-day post-mortem
remedies after those attacks on programs that get detected. This would be a
breakthrough at the confluence of cyber security, privacy, and cyber-physical
systems.