* 1446327
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental constraints on marine Fe isotope effects - Biology, ligands, and particles
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kristen Buck, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 155,641.00

Iron is an essential micronutrient for marine phytoplankton, which plays a key
role in the global carbon cycle and marine ecosystems, and there is a need to
better understand the sources and sinks of this essential micronutrient in the
oceans. Iron isotopes are a recently developed tracer of iron biogeochemical
cycling, and new iron isotope results indicate that iron-binding ligands may
play a critical role in the isotopic fractionation of dissolved iron. At
present, however, the quantitative importance of iron dissolution or biological
iron uptake in the isotopic fractionation of dissolved iron in the oceans is not
well-known. In this study, researchers from the University of South Carolina and
the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences will collect and analyze samples from
the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Station (BATS) in order to; 1) measure the rate
and isotope fractionation of iron dissolution from natural aerosols and oxic
sediments in the presence of natural iron-binding ligands, and; 2) examine how
phytoplankton fractionate iron isotopes during biological uptake. Results from
this study will advance the development of iron isotopes as a tool for tracing
iron biogeochemical cycling in the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The project will provide scientific training and development to undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students. Results of the study will be used to raise
public awareness of biogeochemical science via a webpage, outreach activities,
and public tours at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences.