* 1446798
* An Exploration of Multi Decadal, Continental-Scale Evapotranspiration Inferred from Weather Data
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Guido Salvucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 02/28/2019
* USD 333,635.00

An Exploration of Multi Decadal, Continental-Scale Evapotranspiration Inferred
from Weather Data

Land surface evapotranspiration (ET) is the transformation of water in soils,
plants and lakes into atmospheric water vapor. It is a significant part of the
regional water balance with direct influence on streamflow and groundwater
recharge. ET is also a significant part of the atmospheric water balance with
direct influence on humidity and rainfall. Because of the energy required to
vaporize water, the ET process also influences land and air temperature. Despite
its relevance to water resources and climate, ET is notoriously difficult to
measure, especially at regional scales. This proposal develops and applies a
newly discovered method for estimating ET from readily available weather data,
based on daily patterns of relative humidity. With this method, the proposal
addresses these questions: * What is the seasonal and geographic variability of
ET over the U.S? * What are the seasonal and geographic roles of forcing
(temperature, humidity, wind and precipitation) and surface properties (soil,
vegetation, topography) in these space-time patterns? * What trends have
occurred in ET over the last 50 years, and what is responsible for those trends
(for instance, wind, moisture availability, radiation, temperature)? * How do
these seasonal, geographical, and decadal variabilities (including trends)
compare with state-of-the art climate models; and * How do the interactions
between the land surface, the lower atmosphere, and cloud formation influence
relative humidity? Broader impacts of this work include development and
demonstration of a practical means for water resource managers to estimate ET,
better understanding of geographic water resource availability and new
observational constraints on climate models. In addition, the work will involve
a graduate and undergraduate student, as well as a high school senior.

Progress in understanding surface and atmospheric controls on ET, feedbacks
between the surface and atmosphere, and decadal time scale variations in ET,
require reliable estimates of ET. Direct, continuous measurements, however, are
recent (approximately one decade old), and spatially limited (a few hundreds of
flux stations, each measuring approximately one square kilometer of land area).
Because of this, hydroclimatological research on ET has been either limited in
space and time or has relied on model output. The proposed work overcomes these
limitations and addresses critical questions related to the space-time
variations of ET over decadal time scales (including trends), the drivers of
these variations, and the ability of current climate models to capture these
variations. Typically estimating ET requires either measurement of soil water
status and surface temperature, or temporally integrated modeling of the water
and energy balance. For broad use, the former requires remotely sensed
observations, and the latter requires calibration of numerous soil hydraulic and
vegetation parameters, leading to highly model-formulation dependent results.
The method developed here provides ET estimation without site-specific
calibration. The parsimony of required forcing and surface data allows for broad
geographic and temporal (e.g., prior to the satellite era) application, and
yields results that are significantly less model dependent. The intellectual
merit of the proposed research is in addressing a vital questions of hydrologic
sciences - determination of the terrestrial evaporation component of the water
balance at hourly to decadal time scales over continental scales.