* 1446328
* Collaborative Research:  Revealing the Role of Less-Mobile Porosity in Hyporheic Denitrification and Greenhouse Gas Production?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Jay Zarnetske, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 239,033.00

Streams and rivers have a remarkable cleansing function for natural and human
generated contaminants, as microbes living in the streambed can transform these
contaminants into less harmful compounds. Excess nitrogen in our terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems is now considered one of the greatest global-scale threats to
humanity by degrading water quality and producing a powerful greenhouse gas.
This research couples the cleansing function of rivers to this global excess
nitrogen issue. Streambed bacteria can break down the reactive nitrogen
compounds, primarily releasing non-reactive nitrogen gas that returns harmlessly
to the atmosphere. However, a fraction is released as the strong greenhouse gas
nitrous-oxide (N2O). Compelling data indicates pockets of longer-term water
storage in streambeds, or microzones, create the low-oxygen conditions needed to
both break-down dissolved nitrogen and form N2O. New remote sensing techniques
of streambed microzones will allow us to better resolve the how nitrogen is
attenuated and transformed through river transport, improving evaluations of
watershed nutrient mitigation and helping better predict future climate change.
Further, this research will dovetail with STEM education via community level
partnerships with established outreach institutions. Outreach partners
(Impression 5 Science Center and MSUSiFest) specialize in developing, executing
and evaluating STEM exhibits and activities for children ages 4-12 and community
"life-learners", both of which are key STEM demographics. Project PIs will
connect with UConn undergraduate design teams and outreach partners to develop
novel groundwater and streambed flow model exhibits and inquiry-based
demonstrations designed to harness society's increasing fascination with real-
time sensing and interaction. Outreach partners will use these products to
illustrate principles of groundwater flow, contaminant transport, and greenhouse
gas production, reaching 150,000+ students and community members each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will link and quantify transient storage
via dual-domain mass transport principles with the biogeochemical functions of
stream sediments to reveal new insights on hyporheic denitrification and stream
N2O production. This work is timely because recent global assessments reveal
that rivers are major N2O producers, but the mechanism and spatial distribution
of production remain unknown. Contrary to existing biogeochemical models for
stream sediments, it is hypothesized that nitrate reduction to N2O occurs
predominantly within streambed sediments that are oxic in a bulk sense but have
local, anoxic less-mobile pore spaces. Largely overlooked in past work, these
anoxic microsites must be mechanistically understood in order to upscale
freshwater nitrogen dynamics from point, to reach, to basin scales. New
observation methods and process-based models are needed to account for the role
of anoxic microsites in fluid exchange and nitrogen biogeochemistry. Recently,
project team members developed electrical geophysical methods for inference of
less-mobile parameters, as the electric field can directly sense spatially
variable solute dynamics in less-mobile porosity. Other team members have
focused on developing labeled 15N tracer methods to reveal residence time
controls on denitrification. These techniques will be combined to unlock the
presence and function of anoxic microsites. The workplan comprises controlled
laboratory experiments, numerical modeling, and field experiments at an
established research site in the Ipswich Watershed, MA, USA. Our work will
directly connect new process-based understanding to existing river network
nitrate models, extending and capitalizing on previous NSF LINXII research.
Specifically, the intrinsic properties of less-mobile pore space will be
characterized, the existence of anoxic microsites and denitrification occurring
in anaerobic microsites will be quantified, and multi-scale patterns of river
nitrogen biogeochemistry will be enhanced. Overall, this work will transform the
current understanding of hyporheic microsite processes, providing new
mechanistic models of the role of hyporheic zones on watershed solute transport,
nitrogen cycling and greenhouse gas production. The proposed research will
address big questions about some very small places in our watersheds by
quantifying hydrodynamic exchange with previously uncharacterized less-mobile
hyporheic pore space.