* 1446509
* Characterization of Small-scale Heterogeneity in the Deep Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Vernon Cormier, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Little is known about three-dimensional structures in the deep earth whose size
is less than 100 km. These small-scale deep structures are important to
understanding the historical and future evolution of earth's composition and its
surface tectonics. They affect the shapes and amplitudes of seismic waves used
to forecast the size of earthquake ground motions and to predict the differences
between the seismic signatures of earthquakes and underground nuclear tests.
Such small-scale structures cannot be imaged by conventiional seismic
tomography, which processes travel times of seismic waves with methods similar
to medical CAT scanning. Instead, this project employs a technique using
seiismic recordings by many, closely spaced, seismometers to retrieve a
characterisitic spectrum of scale lengths of small-scale structures. This
specturm constrains the sizes, shapes, and composition of the heterogeneities.
The project also trains graduate students in seismic data retrieval, processing,
imaging, and computer programming. These are skills important in resource
exploration and remediation of contaminated groundwater. Results will be
incorporated in undergraduate courses in the physical sciences to enhance
recruitment and training in both academic and industrial applications of
geophysical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
characterization of small-scale heterogeneity (&lt;100 km) is important to
understand the surface sampling of Earth's mantle chemistry and the time history
and nature of chemical mixing controlled by convection and plate tectonics.
Directionally dependent scattering of seismic waves by small-scale heterogeneity
can affect estimates of viscoelastic attenuation and anisotropy, which in turn
are important for estimating temperature, mineral composition, and mineral
phase. Amplitude and phase coherences of body waves recorded by dense arrays of
seismic stations will be inverted to image statistical realizations of small-
scale heterogeneity. This process of stochastic tomography will determine the
characteristic lenth scales and seismic velocity perturbatons of the small-scale
chemical and thermal heterogeneity of the earth that cannot be resolved by
conventional tomography. The resullts will and test fundamental assumptions of
convective miixing predicted from geodynamic models.