* 1446813
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Traffic Signal Control with Connected and Autonomous Vehicles in the Traffic Stream
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Sanjay Ranka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,296,428.00

Recent progress in autonomous and connected vehicle technologies coupled with
Federal and State initiatives to facilitate their widespread use provide
significant opportunities in enhancing mobility and safety for highway
transportation. This project develops signalized intersection control strategies
and other enabling sensor mechanisms for jointly optimizing vehicle trajectories
and signal control by taking advantage of existing advanced technologies
(connected vehicles and vehicle to infrastructure communications, sensors,
autonomous vehicle technologies, etc.) Traffic signal control is a critical
component of the existing transportation infrastructure and it has a significant
impact on transportation system efficiency, as well as energy consumption and
environmental impacts. In addition to advanced vehicle technologies, the
strategies developed consider the presence of conventional vehicles in the
traffic stream to facilitate transition to these new strategies in a mixed
vehicle environment. The project also develops and uses simulation tools to
evaluate these strategies as well as to provide tools that can be used in
practice to consider the impacts of automated and connected vehicles in arterial
networks. The project involves two industry partners (ISS and Econolite) to help
facilitate new product development in anticipation of increased market
penetration of connected and autonomous vehicles. The approach will be tested
through simulation at University of Florida, through field tests at the Turner
Fairbank Highway Research Center (TFHRC) and through the control algorithms that
also will be deployed and tested in the field. The project will support multiple
graduate students and will support creation of on-line classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is at the intersection of several different
disciplines (optimization, sensors, automated vehicles, transportation
engineering) required to produce a real-time engineered system that depends on
the seamless integration of several components: sensor functionality, connected
and autonomous vehicle information communication, signal control optimization
strategy, missing and erroneous information, etc. The project develops and
implements optimization processes and strategies considering a seamless fusion
of multiple data sources, as well as a mixed vehicle stream (autonomous,
connected, and conventional vehicles) under real-world conditions of uncertain
and missing data. Since trajectories for connected and conventional vehicles
cannot be optimized or guaranteed, the project examines the impacts of the
presence of automated vehicles on the following vehicles in a queue. The project
also integrates advanced sensing technology needed to control a mixed vehicle
stream, as well as address malfunctioning communications in connected and
autonomous vehicles.