* 1446312
* CPS: Frontier: Collaborative Research: Compositional, Approximate, and Quantitative Reasoning for Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Elizabeth Cherry, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 615,969.00

This project represents a cross-disciplinary collaborative research effort on
developing rigorous, closed-loop approaches for designing, simulating, and
verifying medical devices. The work will open fundamental new approaches for
radically accelerating the pace of medical device innovation, especially in the
sphere of cardiac-device design. Specific attention will be devoted to
developing advanced formal methods-based approaches for analyzing controller
designs for safety and effectiveness; and devising methods for expediting
regulatory and other third-party reviews of device designs. The project team
includes members with research backgrounds in computer science, electrical
engineering, biophysics, and cardiology; the PIs will use a coordinated approach
that balances theoretical, experimental and practical concerns to yield results
that are intended to transform the practice of device design while also
facilitating the translation of new cardiac therapies into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will lead to significant
advances in the state of the art for system verification and cardiac therapies
based on the use of formal methods and closed-loop control and verification. The
animating vision for the work is to enable the development of a true in silico
design methodology for medical devices that can be used to speed the development
of new devices and to provide greater assurance that their behaviors match
designers' intentions, and to pass regulatory muster more quickly so that they
can be used on patients needing their care. The scientific work being proposed
will serve this vision by providing mathematically robust techniques for
analyzing and verifying the behavior of medical devices, for modeling and
simulating heart dynamics, and for conducting closed-loop verification of
proposed therapeutic approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acceleration in
medical device innovation achievable as a result of the proposed research will
also have long-term and sustained societal benefits, as better diagnostic and
therapeutic technologies enter into the practice of medicine more quickly. It
will also yield a collection of tools and techniques that will be applicable in
the design of other types of devices. Finally, it will contribute to the
development of human resources and the further inclusion of under-represented
groups via its extensive education and outreach programs, including intensive
workshop experiences for undergraduates.