* 1446812
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Semantics of Optimization for Real Time Intelligent Embedded Systems (SORTIES)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* John Hauser, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Advances in technology mean that computer-controlled physical devices that
currently still require human operators, such as automobiles, trains, airplanes,
and medical treatment systems, could operate entirely autonomously and make
rational decisions on their own. Autonomous cars and drones are a concrete and
highly publicized face of this dream. Before this dream can be realized we must
address the need for safety - the guaranteed absence of undesirable behaviors
emerging from autonomy. Highly publicized technology accidents such as rocket
launch failures, uncontrolled exposure to radiation during treatment, aircraft
automation failures and unintended automotive accelerations serve as warnings of
what can happen if safety is not adequately addressed in the design of such
cyber-physical systems. One approach for safety analysis is the use of software
tools that apply formal logic to prove the absence of undesired behavior in the
control software of a system. In prior work, this approach this been proven to
work for simple controller software that is generated automatically by tools
from abstract models like Simulink diagrams. However, autonomous decision making
requires more complex software that is able to solve optimization problems in
real time. Formal verification of control software that includes such
optimization algorithms remains an unmet challenge.

The project SORTIES (Semantics of Optimization for Real Time Intelligent
Embedded Systems) draws upon expertise in optimization theory, control theory,
and computer science to address this challenge. Beginning with the convergence
properties of convex optimization algorithms, SORTIES examines how these
properties can be automatically expressed as inductive invariants for the
software implementation of the algorithms, and then incorporates these
properties inside the source code itself as formal annotations which convey the
underlying reasoning to the software engineer and to existing computer-aided
verification tools. The SORTIES goal is an open-source-semantics-carrying
autocoder, which takes an optimization algorithm and its convergence properties
as input, and produces annotated, verifiable code as output. The demonstration
of the tool on several examples, such as a Mars lander, an aircraft avionics
system, and a jet engine controller, shows that the evidence of quality produced
by annotations is fully compatible with its application to truly functional
products. Project research is integrated with education through training of
"tri-lingual" professionals, who are equally conversant in system operation,
program analysis, and the theory of control and optimization.