* 1446794
* EAGER: Assessment of the Numerical Reproducibility  in Large-Scale Scientific Simulations on Multicore Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Michela Taufer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 89,998.00

Trends in execution concurrency make a compelling case for the development of
methods able to automatically and efficiently model and mitigate
irreproducibility beyond petascale architectures and into the exascale. It is
expected that high performance computers at the exascale will exhibit a
massively large level of concurrency - a factor of 10,000 greater than on
current platforms - which will move computer simulations from bulk-synchronous
executions to multithreading approaches and asynchronous I/O. Simulation
calculations and analysis routines will also be tightly coupled on exascale
platforms, requiring these two workflow components to work at extremely high
levels of concurrency. As concurrency levels increase, the impact of rounding
errors on numerical reproducibility also increases, ultimately affecting the
ability of scientific simulations to reproduce program executions and numerical
results. Under these circumstances, irreproducible results may not be trusted by
a scientific community expecting reproducible behaviors and any attempt to
pursue reproducibility may come at a cost in performance that is too
high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This "high risk-high payoff" project studies the
impact of rounding errors on result reproducibility when concurrent executions
burst and workflow determinism vanishes in cutting-edge multicore architectures.
To this end, the project models rounding-errors in scientific applications with
a mathematical method called "composite precision floating-point arithmetic" and
shows how this method can mitigate error drifting. A benchmark suite used in
preliminary work is extended to cover a larger range of applications' patterns
and used to assess the mitigating impact of the composite precision on new
generations of multicore architectures. Lastly, the project quantifies the cost
and mitigation factors of the proposed method to mitigate error propagations for
the diverse benchmarks and platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance knowledge and understanding in numerical reproducibility at the exascale
by developing and disseminating effective software solutions to the rounding
error propagation problem for a broad set of applications and their codes when
executed with high degrees of concurrency on massively parallel systems.