* 1446901
* CPS: Breakthrough: Energy and Delay:  Network Optimization in Cyber Physical Human Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2019
* USD 499,330.00

Wireless body area sensing networks (WBANs) have the potential to revolutionize
health care in the near term and enhance other application domains including
sports, entertainment, military and emergency situations. These WBANs represent
a novel cyber-physical system that unites engineering systems, the natural world
and human individuals. The coupling of bio-sensors with a wireless
infrastructure enables the real-time monitoring of an individual's health,
environment and related behaviors continuously, as well as the provision of
real-time feedback with nimble, adaptive, and personalized interventions. Recent
technological advances in low power integrated circuits, signal processing and
wireless communications have enabled the design of tiny, low cost, lightweight,
intelligent medical devices, sensors and networking platforms that have the
potential to make the concept of truly pervasive wireless sensor networks a
reality. To develop the WBANs of the future, this breakthrough research will
pursue the interfaces of sensing, communication and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate energy and delay
sensitive sensing, communication, decision-making and control for health
monitoring application of wireless body area networks. In these systems, sensors
with varying accuracy observe heterogeneous source signals that must be
processed and communicated and used for inference and decision-making purposes.
All of these operations must be carried out in the presence of constraints on
power and energy resources at the sensors, limited communication and
computational abilities and with low end-to-end delay between the sensing of
information to its eventual utilization. In this project, a global (end-to end)
perspective is adopted that optimizes network operation to improve the
information quality and enhance the lifetime of the network, focusing in
particular on optimal use of sensor resources such as energy, new sensing and
communication paradigms that balance information quality and energy expenditure,
and real-time encoding and decoding methods that provide strict delay guarantees
on information delivery. The proposed work will contribute to several research
areas including optimal resource allocation at sensors, adaptive sensing
methods, real-time encoding and decoding and event-based communication. The
educational impact of the proposed research will come through the training of
new information technology professionals and scientists with expertise in cross-
disciplinary research, development of new courses based on the proposed research
activity and continued efforts to include women and under-represented minorities
in the research program.