* 1446423
* SAVI:  Virtual International Institute for Seismic Performance Assessment of Structural Wall Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* John Wallace, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

Structural walls, which are solid concrete walls commonly used in buildings
around stairwells and elevators, are used worldwide because they are economical
to construct, efficient to separate spaces, and effective in protecting
buildings from strong earthquake ground shaking. Unexpected damage that occurred
to structural walls in recent earthquakes, e.g., Chile in 2010 and New Zealand
in 2011, as well as damage observed in recent laboratory tests in the United
States and Japan, suggest that structural engineers have pushed seismic design
limits for structural walls beyond a critical boundary. Despite these
observations, engineers are increasingly choosing to use structural walls
because, historically, structural wall buildings are less likely to collapse in
earthquakes and are more likely to limit heavy damage to building contents.
Given recent observations, considerable research on the seismic performance and
design of structural walls has been initiated or is planned in the United States
and around the world. Many of the research needs identified for structural walls
require large-scale laboratory testing to validate and calibrate computational
models and to develop and refine seismic design recommendations for building
codes. Large-scale testing is expensive; therefore, the ability of any one
country to address the breadth of issues that have been identified is limited
and progress will be slow.

Given the critical research needs for structural walls and the limited resources
available to individual countries, this award will facilitate international
research collaborations using both in-person meetings and virtual collaboration
tools by creating a virtual international institute for the seismic performance
assessment of structural wall systems. Through this institute, researchers from
Chile, Japan, New Zealand, and the United States, who have a long history of
both informal and formal research collaboration, will share research test plans
and test data; develop, improve, calibrate, and validate component and system
models used for building design; achieve consensus, where possible, on critical
performance issues; prepare joint reports, papers, and design recommendations;
and develop collaborative new research directions. Institute results will be
disseminated by members participating in meetings, workshops, and code
committees, by involving earthquake professionals, by developing and
distributing educational materials and project results (e.g., data), and by
creating a project web site. Mentoring and training of young researchers
(students and faculty) will be enhanced through participation in both face-to-
face meetings and virtual collaboration with leading researchers and
practitioners from around the world. The broader U.S. and international
earthquake engineering research community will benefit from joint publications,
access to data, and opportunities for enhanced collaboration (in-person and
virtual). This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI)
award and is co-funded by NSF's Directorate for Engineering and NSF's Office of
Integrative and International Activities.