* 1446640
* CPS: Breakthrough: Improving Metropolitan-Scale Transportation Systems with Data-Driven Cyber-Control
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Tian He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 515,969.00

Traditionally, the design of urban transit services has been based on limited
sampling data collected through surveys and censuses, which are often dated and
incomplete. Lacking massive online feeds from multiple transit modes makes it
hard to achieve real-time equilibrium in demand and supply relationship through
cyber-control, which eventually manifests into multiple urban transportation
issues: (i) lengthy last-mile transit due to non-supply, (ii) prolonged waiting
due to undersupply, and (iii) excessive idle mileage due to oversupply. This
project addresses these issues by focusing on two types of transportation
systems in metropolitan areas: (i) public bike rental sharing systems and (ii)
fleet-oriented ride sharing systems. The public bike rental sharing systems are
used to allow commuters to rent bikes near public transit stations for the last
mile of their trips. The fleet-oriented ride sharing systems schedule a fleet of
participating vehicles for ride sharing among passengers in which shared
ridership reduces individual fare paid by passengers, increases the profit of
taxi drivers, and can improve the availability of
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory and practice of transportation sharing
systems have typically focused on isolated individual transportation modes. The
project will collect massive multi-modal online feeds from metropolitan
information infrastructure to model dynamic behaviors of transportation systems,
and then utilize massive micro-level trip information to apply fine-grained
real-time control to handle rapid changes in dynamic metropolitan environments.
General principles and design methodologies will be designed to build multi-
modal, integrated urban transportation systems. These research discoveries will
be applied toward commercial applications. Long-term deployment problem of bike
stations will be addressed, especially in the low-income districts, to provide
suggestions on the station deployment and assessment for specific deployment
plans. The project also solves the short-term bike maintenance issue to balance
the usage of shared bikes to prevent quick deterioration of rental bikes, and
improve availability of bike rental services in real time. This project will
also study fleet-oriented ride sharing systems that decide fares based on real-
time supply/demand ratio to handle dynamic metropolitan
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support two Ph.D. students who
will receive innovation and technology translation training through close
interactions with municipal governments and small-business companies. Such
partnerships expedite the adoption of cutting-edge technology, evaluate research
solutions in operational environments, and obtain user feedback to trigger
further innovations. The project will improve the efficiency of existing
transportation systems under sharing economy and ultimately the work would
noticeably improve the quality of every-day life in metropolitan areas across
the United States.