* 1446480
* Exploring the Causes for Indian Ocean Decadal Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Weiqing Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2019
* USD 572,940.00

Decade-to-decade changes in the sea surface temperature (SST) of the Indian
Ocean (IO) have been implicated in a variety of worldwide climatic fluctuations,
including variations in Indian monsoon rainfall, changes in the frequency of
cyclones in the Arabian Sea, and changes in drought frequency in the US, the
Mediterranean, and parts of Africa. Averaged over the basin, IO SSTs have been
increasing since the 1950s, often at a faster rate than SSTs in other tropical
oceans, and have continued to increase even during the recent global warming
hiatus. The goal of this research is to understand the mechanisms that produce
decadal variability of IO SSTs and accompanying variations of sea level pressure
(SLP), surface winds, and other meteorological conditions. A particular goal is
to identify the separate roles of remote influences from the Pacific sector, and
coupled ocean-atmosphere dynamics internal to the IO sector, in generating
decadal IO SST variability. The Pacific influence is associated with the
interdecadal Pacific oscillation (IPO), a slowly varying pattern of SST
anomalies with some resemblance to the more rapidly evolving SSTs of El
Nino/Southern Oscillation events. Previous work suggests that the positive phase
of the IPO, when SSTs warm over the central equatorial Pacific, can produce
uniform warming over the IO. The PI hypothesizes that the warming is caused by
strengthening of the Walker circulation, which enhances subsidence over the IO
and increases surface insolation by reducing cloudiness. But the more recent
observational record shows a continued increase in mean IO SSTs even as the IPO
has transitioned to its negative phase, so factors other than the IPO must also
play a role in basin-wide IO warming and cooling. While the Pacific influence is
linked to uniform SST anomalies, the IO basin contains a second prominent
decadal variability mode which is largely independent of the IPO. This mode is
an east-west pattern in which warm SSTs in the western half of the basin are
accompanied by cold anomalies off the coast of Indonesia, referred to as the
Indian Ocean dipole (IOD). The PI hypothesizes that the IOD is driven by coupled
atmosphere-ocean dynamics in which subsurface heat transport plays a key role.
In addition to attribution of IO variability in terms of internal dynamics and
external influences from the Pacific, the project also seeks to understand the
role of external forcing, including greenhouse gas-induced warming, solar
variability, and anthropogenic aerosols. A variety of statical techniques are
applied to diagnose the mechanisms of IO variability in observations, reanalysis
products, and climate model simulations. In addition, specialized climate model
experiments are performed in which atmosphere-ocean interactions are enabled
only in the IO sector to determine the extent to which IO-sector dynamics can
produce decadal variability. Complementary experiments are used to determine the
extent to which decadal variability in the IO sector is due to coupled
atmosphere-ocean dynamics external to the basin. Further climate model
experiments examine the role of external forcing by imposing changes in
greenhouse gases, aerosols, and solar irradiance.

The work is of societal as well as scientific interest given that that
conditions in the Indian Ocean affect the weather and climate of the adjacent
land region, which is home to perhaps a third of the world's population, much of
it in developing countries with heightened vulnerability. Also, as noted above,
there is evidence that the decadal variability of IO SSTs are linked to a
variety of climatic impacts worldwide, including some that affect the US. In
addition, the project would support and train a postdoc, thereby providing
workforce development in this research area.