* 1446930
* RAPID Collaborative Research:  Ground Truthing Coral Proxy Reconstructions of ENSO by Observing the 2014-15 El Nino
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Mark Merrifield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2015
* USD 73,012.00

The El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the dominant source of inter-annual
climate variability in the world and it impacts a variety of important economic
sectors in the U.S. and around the world like fisheries, agriculture and water
resource management. Thus, it is vital to understand how its properties
(magnitude, rate of occurrence, duration) might change under future climates.
State-of-the-art climate model projections show no agreement on the direction of
future ENSO changes and instrumental records are too short to constrain the
statistics of ENSO, making it imperative to use paleoclimate reconstructions to
establish a long-term observational context for ENSO. Record of isotopic oxygen
in corals collected in the central equatorial Pacific suggests that ENSO may
strengthen in the future, but a major caveat remains: the physics of the ENSO
influence on the properties of corals is poorly understood, as their chemical
composition is affected by water exchange in the reef environment, as well as by
precipitation. This project will collect in situ observations of physical
conditions (temperature, salinity,and currents) and isotopic variations (in
seawater, precipitation, and corals) during a rapidly approaching event: the El
Nino expected during winter 2014-15. The proposed dataset will be used to
validate ongoing modeling work, create a reanalysis of the 2014-15 El Nino event
with the goal of improving the interpretation of reconstructed records of past
El Ninos. A post-doctoral fellow will lead the project and in the process will
expand her technical and scientific expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tehcnical
description: Paleoclimate information from coral isotopic oxygen (Oxygen 18) is
a critical source of data on past climate variability, providing an
observational baseline for projections of future changes to ENSO. However, ENSO
affects Oxygen 18 through advective shifts, topographically-induced upwelling,
and surface fluxes: this makes it extremely difficult to use Oxygen 18 records
for quantitative comparisons with instrumental records or climate model output.
An ongoing NSF-funded study using a newly developed, isotope-enabled version of
the Regional Ocean Modeling System (isoROMS) has shown that the spatial scale of
processes affecting Oxygen 18 may be quite small, as proxy collection sites lie
in nearshore reef environments. Thus, obtaining additional in situ data is
critical for validating the isoROMS result and improving dynamical
understanding. The El Nino event expected during winter 2014-15 provides a
unique opportunity to collect both in situ physical oceanographic information
and isotopic measurements, which combined with the isoROMS work would provide
the most complete and dynamically consistent characterization of the El Nino
influence on proxy sites to date. The results would greatly advance
interpretation of existing oxygen 18 records as well as climate model validation
efforts. The proposed dataset would be a major asset for studies of coral
paleoclimate reconstruction as well as climate model validation. This project is
led by an early career female scientist, and will add an observational component
to the research she is conducting under an NSF Ocean Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship. Collaborations with colleagues from a range of disciplines will be
facilitated by this study. Finally, the results will be used to develop a
reanalysis of the 2014-15 El Nino event, which will be provided as a resource
for the community.