* 1446218
* Workshop: Enhancing Scientists' Capacities for Catalyzing Policy Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Angela Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 12/31/2015
* USD 52,001.00

The social and behavioral sciences create knowledge that has significant
potential for producing societal benefit. Scientific understanding of people's
behavior during hurricanes, floods, and other natural disaster has, for example,
led to the development of safer evacuation procedures, while studies of how
children learn have helped improve education policy. However, the mechanisms by
which such knowledge makes its way into public policy contexts are not fully
understood. In an era of increasingly complex policy challenges, defined and
acted upon by a diverse and wide-ranging set of stakeholders (e.g. legislators,
public administrators, and community leaders), the successful transfer of
scientific knowledge requires an in-depth understanding of policy development
and implementation. Understanding the interactions between science and policy
will help governments and communities better leverage scientific discoveries
into beneficial policy innovations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Building on the
findings from a previous workshop titled "Catalyzing Discovery for Social
Impact: Exploring the Power of the Research-Academic-Policy Nexus to Stimulate
Policy Innovation," this workshop will explore, in particular, the role of
entrepreneurial scientists in facilitating the exchange of knowledge between
science and policy. Social and behavioral scientists are often not trained in
how to transfer their knowledge into the public sector. Therefore, a major
element of this challenge is identifying and developing the necessary skill sets
social scientists need to help catalyze the transformation of their research
into practical application. This workshop will convene a dynamic group of the
nation's top researchers, thought leaders, and curriculum developers who are
actively studying or writing about the challenges posed by the creation and
sustainability of strong academic-research-policy relationships. Utilizing
participatory action methods and drawing on participants' expertise and
experience, this workshop will collaboratively build a skills inventory and a
curriculum to build such skills.