* 1446200
* Using horizontal and vertical deformation signals to characterize water availability in fractured and faulted crystalline-rock aquifer systems
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Nancy Ross, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 270,302.00

A large portion of the world's potable groundwater occurs in fractured bedrock,
and these aquifers are difficult to characterize for how much water is available
and how easily accessible it is. The ability to secure sustainable and
significant quantities of potable groundwater from fractured and faulted
crystalline-rock environments requires novel non-invasive ways to characterize
these complex aquifers. Successful characterization depends upon accurate
estimates of the parameters that govern flow, recharge, and storage capacity.
Most fracture characterization relies on measurements of water levels or
pressure changes in wells which have been shown to be inadequate for accurately
estimating aquifer properties. This project will measure vertical and horizontal
rock deformation signals at the land surface and within the borehole that result
from pumping-induced stresses. This project will demonstrate the use of these
data for characterizing local and regional fractured aquifers and for
quantifying parameters that support assessment water recharge and flow in these
systems. The results of this research will improve the estimation of the
quantity of water that can be safely extracted from fractured rock aquifers. The
investigation is focused on sites in Ploemeur, France, and in Virginia, USA,
that will establish a collaboration between the University of Rennes and
Virginia Tech that affords graduate students the opportunity to study abroad and
broaden their research perspectives and international
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will invoke surface horizontal and
vertical deformation signals at different temporal and spatial scales to
inversely calibrate a 3D coupled poromechanical and flow model to accurately
estimate fracture and host rock properties (transmissivity and storage) and flow
geometries (fracture or fault orientation and root depth). A local and a sub-
regional flow system in the crystalline rocks near Ploemeur will be studied. Two
distinct horizontal deformation signals exist there: a seasonal signal showing
deformation associated with a gently dipping horizontal contact zone and a
converging deformation signal oriented along strike of a sub-vertical fracture
zone associated with a 2-day aquifer test. The Ploemeur site will be used to
show how vertical deformation signals with seasonal water-level changes can be
used to accurately quantify groundwater recharge. The research will develop a
new analytical aquifer testing tool to estimate stress-dependent parameters
based on data collected at the fractured rock site in Virginia. The results of
this research improve upon traditional fracture tests using forced-gradient
packer tests that have been shown not to work because the measured water-level
and fracture strain are stress dependent.