* 1446444
* Separation Science and Technology as a Platform for SusChEM: Recovery of Critical Materials and Resources from Solutions and Wastes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Darlene Schuster, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,927.00

CBET- 1446444&lt;br/&gt;American Institute of Chemical Engineers&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Darlene Schuster&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a 1.5-day symposium during
the upcoming 248th American Chemical Society (ACS) National Meeting (August
10-14) in San Francisco. The symposium will provide a discussion forum for
Separation Science and Technology (SST). This symposium is a follow-up to an NSF
co-funded symposium held at the 2012 Fall ACS Meeting entitled ?Ensuring the
Sustainability of Critical Materials and Alternatives?.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objectives of the currently proposed symposium are to:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Bring into focus crosscutting research and education needs in SST associated
with the sustainable recovery and recycling of critical materials and (e.g.
metals) and resources (e.g. phosphorous) from liquid and solid wastes including
impaired water (e.g. seawater, brackish water, brines and domestic/industrial
wastewater), mine tailings and electronic wastes.&lt;br/&gt;2. Communicate these
research and education needs to the broader SST community of scientists,
engineers, policy makers, business leaders and
entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will contribute to the
advancement of separation science and engineering (SSE) and its application to
the sustainable supply of the critical materials and resources to build the
sustainable products, processes, technologies, farms and industries of the
future by inspiring a new generation of scientists, engineers and students to
enter this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIChE will develop and maintain a website
that will be neutrally branded and dedicated to the subject of critical
materials. It will serve as a repository for relevant materials from this
symposium and potential future symposia. The website can link to other sites
with pertinent information. The AIChE will permanently have the workshop
materials maintained for dissemination. This website will not only make
materials available to the research community but also serve to inspire and
engage the next generation scientists, engineers and policymakers.