* 1446983
* Photonic Synthesis of Large Aperture Telescopes from Multi-Telescope Arrays
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Stephen Eikenberry, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 131,202.00

The central technological theme of modern astrophysical instrumentation is the
development of ever larger telescopes, using larger-diameter mirrors to gather
more and more light. More light-gathering power translates directly to
sensitivity in studies of astrophysical phenomena. The largest visible-light
telescopes in operation today are ten meters in diameter, and thirty-meter
designs are being actively pursued. The cost of modern telescopes, however,
increases much more quickly than the size of their main mirrors, so that
ambitious increases in aperture have become almost prohibitively expense. The
proposal to which this award is made approaches the problem of increasing
astronomical light-gathering power in a different and highly innovative way. A
single large aperture is replaced by a number of smaller telescopes whose light
is brought to a common point by optical fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
scale of cost savings anticipated with the concept proposed under this award is
roughly a factor of ten over filled-aperture telescopes, possibly more. The
demonstration system will be a module of four small telescopes that, taken
together, are equivalent in light-gathering power to a single 0.7 meter
telescope. The system will be coupled to the bHROS spectrograph, in
collaboration with the ICATE institute in Argentina. This demonstration will
retire the risk for the primary technological&lt;br/&gt;issues for the photonic-
synthesis array approach, bringing this transformational technology into
consideration as a cost-effective alternative to traditional construction
methods for large advances in light-gathering power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will involve and train students in many aspects of the work. It also has
potentially large broader impacts in that it may enable improved practical
performance of a range of astronomical instrumentation, all of which will
benefit from increased light-gathering power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for
this project is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences
through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.