* 1446866
* CPS: Breakthrough: Towards a Science of Attack Composition, Mitigation, and Verification in Cyber-Physical Systems: A Passivity-Based Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Linda Bushnell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project focuses on modeling and mitigating cyber attacks on Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS), which are increasingly prevalent in all aspects of society such
as health care, energy, and transportation. Attacks initiated on the cyber
components of CPS can be mounted remotely at little economic cost and can
significantly degrade the safety and performance of CPS due to the tight
coupling between cyber and physical components. This project develops a
passivity-based framework for modeling, composing, and mitigating multiple
attacks on CPS. Passivity is an energy dissipation property that provides basic
rules for analyzing and composing interconnected systems. In addition to passive
adversary models and composition rules, this project will investigate techniques
for decomposition of composed attack models into basic primitives which will
lead to development of new mitigation strategies. Approximate bi-simulation
techniques will be introduced to verify the developed adversary models and
mitigation strategies. The proposed approach is general and will be applicable
to mitigate CPS security challenges arising in multiple sectors including
transportation, energy, manufacturing, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are as follows: (a) research and development of passive
dynamical models of multiple attacks, as well as characterization of the class
of attacks that admit a passive representation; (b) investigation and
development of passivity-based composition and decomposition rules, enabling
identification of new attack variants and associated mitigation strategies; (c)
research and development of approximate techniques for verification of composed
adversary models and mitigation strategies; and (d) validation and prototyping
of the proposed models through an experimental testbed.