* 1446997
* Cultural Engagement and Recruitment of American Indian Males into Computer Science through Computational Linguistics
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,11/30/2019
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2019
* USD 299,427.00

The Tribal Colleges and Universities Program includes a focus on increasing the
instructional capacity of tribal colleges and universities (TCUs) in the
sciences, mathematics, engineering, and technology. Desired impacts include
attracting more indigenous students and minority male students into programs of
study in these fields, thereby addressing underrepresentation on two fronts. The
goal of this project is to enhance the understanding of computational
linguistics while also increasing the number of declared computer science majors
among American Indian males at the participating institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will
investigate the effects of collaborative computational linguistics research
projects on the recruitment and retention of American Indian males into computer
science. Under the proposed activity, QEM will recruit five-person teams (one
computer science faculty member and four male computer science students) from
six tribal colleges with existing computer science or information technology
programs. QEM will host a two-day training and leadership development workshop,
during which participating teams will learn basic theory and applications of
computational linguistics to indigenous languages. At the workshop, students
will collaborate and decide on projects to undertake upon return to their
respective campuses. To increase collaboration during the academic year, the
cohort of schools will include pairs of tribal colleges whose founding tribes
speak each of three languages (Algonquian language family, Navajo language,
Sioux language). Participating teams will share their research results, project
benefits, and lessons learned at a follow-up workshop, where they also will
discuss dissemination, recruitment, and sustainability strategies to expand
interest among American Indian males in computational linguistics and computer
science overall.