* 1446284
* Collaborative Research: BIO IUSE Ideas Lab: Supporting Faculty in Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and Synthesis (QUBES)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Stith Gower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2015
* USD 223,581.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE) program, this project addresses the Nation's growing need to
better prepare undergraduate biologists with the quantitative and computational
skills needed to be successful in the workplace or in graduate school. The full
integration of mathematical reasoning skills into undergraduate biology
classrooms has been challenging, in part, because of the rapid pace of change in
many biological disciplines and an academic reward system that often overlooks
pedagogical development and research.

The Supporting Faculty in Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and
Synthesis (QUBES) project involves five interdependent initiatives that promote
the integration of quantitative and computational skills across the biological
sciences curriculum. The project is building on the investments of existing
communities by coordinating the efforts and resources of diverse groups that are
already involved in quantitative biology education reform. This approach allows
QUBES to amplify the strengths of organizations like professional societies and
specialized curriculum projects while streamlining the communications and
coordination required to grow broader community of reform-minded faculty
educators in quantitative biology (QB). Mentoring networks will be used to
support faculty understanding and classroom implementation of specific
quantitative biology concepts and teaching strategies. These mentoring networks
will be led by teams containing both quantitative and pedagogical expertise and
will serve spatially distributed groups of instructors who share a common
interest in reforming their current teaching practices. Participating
instructors will disseminate resources within their own institutions, organize
new mentoring networks, and take leadership roles in their professional
societies. The products from these collaborations will be captured as part of
the QUBES Hub, a virtual environment providing professional support activities
and access to curriculum resources for all QB educators. In order to address the
challenges of documenting teaching scholarship, the QUBES project is also
piloting a system for describing and tracking faculty contributions to the QB
education community. This high-risk, but potentially transformative, initiative
to develop meaningful metrics of teaching scholarship could have a long term
impact on academic reward systems across diverse institution types. By
strengthening QB research and development tools, the project is enriching the
discipline and catalyzing long-term academic cultural change across STEM
education. Finally, the collaborative is studying and disseminating what they
learn about the effectiveness of this educational reform effort. This research
will take a systems approach to characterize effective interventions and
barriers to change within the complex landscape of factors influencing the
success of educational reform. The efficient execution and management of a
project with this level of complexity requires thorough and ongoing evaluation.
The project team is embedding data collection systems throughout project
activities as a means to track progress in near real time, manage resources
effectively, and maintain clear communication across connected project
components. The QUBES approach to implementation, research, and development
promises to have a significant impact on QB education across the nation and,
more generally, to inform systemic STEM education reform efforts.

This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/