* 1446915
* FRACTURED AQUIFER CHARACTERIZATION USING SMART NON-NEWTONIAN TRACERS
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2018
* John Selker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 12/31/2018
* USD 284,986.00

Title: Fractured Aquifer Characterization Using Smart Non-Newtonian Tracers

Investigator: John S. Selker, Oregon State University

Proposal Number: EAR 1446915

Fractured rock aquifers are the only source of water in many parts of the United
States and much of the rest of the world. Understanding these waters, and the
materials that water transports, is critically needed for providing and
protecting safe water drinking water. In addition, the role of water flow
fractured rocks is important in the formation of mineral deposits and in the
development of deep geothermal systems. This research will also benefit the
extraction of oil and gas from fractured reservoirs, including those created by
fracking. Thus, this study is both theoretical and potentially very practical in
nature. Methods that can identify fluid flow paths in fractures have been very
limited. This research will conduct lab experiments that will use unique fluids
that can sample the major flow paths more effectively. These are the Non-
Newtonian fluids (e.g., guar gum and other food grade fluids). The novel methods
proposed seek a practical means of gaining insight into flow in fractured rock
aquifers and other fractured rock systems. In parallel to the laboratory work, a
field experiment will be performed at the observatory site of Ploemeur, France,
where a unique fracture-flow field site has been established for just this kind
of experiment. In addition, two undergraduate students will participate in the
research.

The identification of dominant flow paths, their connectivity, and their
hydraulic properties in fractured rocks is critical for fluid flow and solute
transport. Tracer testing can characterize such aquifer properties from
laboratory to field scales. Classical tracer test interpretations allow defining
a mean "effective hydraulic" aperture based on simplified transport models. This
research will: 1) develop an innovative tracer approach using non-Newtonian
("shear-thinning") fluids to identify aperture distributions of preferential
flow paths in natural fractured networks and 2) investigate flow behavior of
these "smart" tracers, knowing their rheology, in order to characterize the
hydraulic properties of fracture systems. By adjusting the viscosity, the
research will be able to select for specific thresholds or aperture size that
allow flow, while smaller apertures will be essentially "frozen" in a gel-filled
condition. This will be tested in the laboratory and at the instrumented field
site to demonstrate the utility in characterizing aquifer properties. The
experimental observations of the movement of shear-thinning fluid in realistic
rock apertures will be compared to theoretical models of fluid transport.
Additionally, numerical modeling will explore the hypothesis identified by the
experimental approach (e.g., stable (non-Newtonian chasing water) vs unstable
(water chasing non-Newtonian) fluid displacement). Based on preliminary results,
the field experimental approach will to test the validity of the proposed
approach. Coupled time-lapse GPR measurement will be used during tracer tests in
order to document the preferential paths taken by the tracer. The methodology
will be tested in a unique, well-characterized fractured granitic formation in
France where complete fracture geometry and hydraulic characteristic have
already been defined based on multiple hydro-geophysical approaches. Finally,
numerical models will investigate the sensitivity of first order parameters that
control flow transport of non-Newtonian fluids in such context. Theoretical
concepts related to fractured aquifer hydrogeology will be presented and
addressed experimentally in the lab.