* 1446398
* US-Mexico conference in representation theory and noncommutative algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Milen Yakimov, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 11/30/2016
* USD 49,940.00

This grant will fund participation of U.S.-based researchers in the US-Mexico
Conferences on Representation Theory, Categorification, and Non-Commutative
Algebra that will take place at Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico in
Mexico City, January 15-18, 2015 and the University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, January 14-17, 2016. Representation theory is a major branch of
mathematics that studies symmetries of of physical theories and of mathematical
objects. Often the main objects in representation theory are only the shadow of
richer structures that are recovered through deeper study. Non-commutative
algebra is another major, related branch of algebra that studies deformations of
commutative objects found in quantum theories, representation theory, and
geometry. The foci of the conferences will be on recent advances at the
interface of representation theory and non-commutative algebra; on fostering an
environment for the establishment of international collaborations between the US
and Mexico in this research areas; and on exposing graduate students, post-docs,
and young faculty in both countries to current developments in the field. The
conference series has an international component and is co-funded by the
International Science and Engineering Section.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
organize one four-day conference each academic year that will alternate between
the US and Mexico. The main scientific topics of the conference series will be
algebraic, geometric and homological methods in representation theory,
categorification, and non-commutative algebra. The talks will cover some of the
most recent trends including: cluster algebras, quantum groups, monoidal and
additive categorifications, Calabi-Yau algebras and categories, and non-
commutative projective algebraic geometry.