* 1446409
* National Workshop on Computational Challenges in Future Mobile Health (mHealth) Systems and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Santosh Kumar, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,999.00

This award support a workshop on Computational Challenges in Future Mobile
Health (mHealth) Systems and Applications. Recent advances in mobile technology
have opened up enormous opportunities for scientific advances and new tools that
may improve patients' health and well-being. mHealth technologies offer real-
time monitoring and detection of changes in health status, support the adoption
and maintenance of a healthy lifestyle, provide rapid diagnosis of health
conditions, and facilitate the implementation of interventions ranging from
promoting patient self-care to providing remote healthcare services. To realize
the potential of mHealth, however, significant innovations in computing are
needed. These innovations, however, must be closely integrated and informed by
close collaboration with health researchers for them to contribute to improving
human health. Due to the rich and unique challenges inherent in mHealth, there
is an opportunity to advance computing methods in the process of advancing
mHealth. A systematic discussion is needed among mHealth thought leaders to
outline a grand vision for computing research in mHealth and identify the major
hurdles and opportunities for advancing mHealth. The content of workshop
presentations, speeches, and discussions will be made available on the web so
they may be shared freely, with the expectation that the use of these materials
in published work will credit the original author/source. It is anticipated
that, by providing a forum that facilitates crosstalk among thought leaders from
the range of stakeholders interested in mHealth, a signature contribution
towards NSF?s interests in this broader scientific agenda will be made.