* 1446969
* Geophysics of Iron in the Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Wendy Mao, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 330,147.00

Located nearly 3000 km below the crust, the core represents the most remote
region within our planet. Seismology and geodynamics have provided detailed
descriptions of the core and its central role in the Earth's evolution and its
dynamic processes. Determining the high pressure-temperature behavior of iron
and iron-rich compounds and alloys is an important but challenging area of
research which is integral for gaining insight into the Earth's core. The PI
proposes to conduct laboratory experiments that simulate the high pressures and
temperatures that exist in the Earth's deep interior and measure the properties
of iron-rich materials which can be dramatically altered at extreme conditions.
The primary goal of the present research is thus to understand the Earth's core,
which plays a central role in the magnetism, dynamic processes, and thermal
evolution of our planet. The anticipated, high pressure-temperature data on iron
and iron-rich compounds will be valuable to a wide variety of researchers
involved in deep Earth studies (e.g. theoretical mineral physicists for
improving their calculations, seismologists for interpretation of their
observations, and geodynamicists for constraining their models). In addition,
the technical advances will be useful to other experimentalists in the
geosciences as well as fundamental and applied
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this renewal proposal is to
continue to improve our understanding of the high pressure-temperature shear
properties and strength of iron and iron-rich compounds and alloys through a
two-pronged approach, specifically by conducting both static and dynamic
compression experiments. The first direction will build on the team's progress
with diamond anvil cell measurements coupled with multiple synchrotron x-ray
techniques to investigate the aggregate sound velocities and strength of iron
and iron-rich compounds and alloys at high pressures and temperatures. The
second approach is focused on reaching core conditions via laser-driven shock
experiments and developing diagnostics to study the shear properties and dynamic
behavior of iron and iron-rich compounds and alloys. The combination of the
static and dynamic results will provide important information for helping to
understand and interpret the complex seismic signatures in the Earth's core. The
static and dynamic experimental measurements on the shear properties of Fe and
Fe-rich compounds and alloys represent a valuable data set for many other deep
Earth researchers. They provide comparisons for interpreting seismic
observations of sound velocities in the core. Geodynamicists can potentially use
the results for testing hypotheses on the geodynamo and crystallization/melting
processes. The team's experimental data will also provide a useful constraint
and comparison for theoretical mineral physics.