* 1446298
* CPS: Breakthrough: Development of Novel Architectures for Control and Diagnosis of Safety-Critical Complex Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Necmiye Ozay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2018
* USD 531,994.00

Title: CPS: Breakthrough: Development of Novel Architectures for Control and
Diagnosis of Safety-Critical Complex Cyber-Physical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing novel architectures for
control and diagnosis of complex cyber-physical systems subject to stringent
performance requirements in terms of safety, resilience, and adaptivity. These
ever-increasing demands necessitate the use of formal model-based approaches to
synthesize provably-correct feedback controllers. The intellectual merit of this
research lies in a novel combination of techniques from the fields of dynamical
systems, discrete event systems, reactive synthesis, and graph theory, together
with new advancements in terms of abstraction techniques, computationally
efficient synthesis of control and diagnosis strategies that support distributed
implementations, and synthesis of acquisition of information and communication
strategies. The project's broader significance and importance are demonstrated
by the expected improvement of the safety, resilience, and performance of
complex cyber-physical systems in critical infrastructures as well as the
efficiency with which they are designed and certified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
original approach being developed is based on the combination of multi-
resolution abstraction graphs for building discrete models of the underlying
cyber-physical system with reactive synthesis techniques that exploit a
representation of the solution space in terms of a finite structure called a
decentralized bipartite transition system. The concepts of abstraction graph and
decentralized bipartite transition system are novel and open new avenues of
investigation with significant potential to the formal synthesis of safe,
resilient, and adaptive controllers. This methodology naturally results in a set
of decentralized and asynchronous controllers and diagnosers, which ensures
greater resilience and adaptivity. Overall, this research will significantly
impact the Science of Cyber-Physical Systems and the Engineering of Cyber-
Physical Systems.