* 1446140
* 2014 Gordon Research Conference on 'Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage Research: Challenges and Complexity in Characterization and Conservation' and Gordon Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Francesca Casadio, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 7,000.00

NON TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This 2014 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage Research provides an exceptional forum
where scientists can discuss the latest research advances on the material
components, degradation processes, and conservation strategies for cultural
heritage objects. Materials science is a key primary discipline involved in
preserving our global cultural patrimony for future study, interpretation,
wealth generation through tourism, enjoyment and maintenance of cultural
capital. This GRC is a powerful conduit to create a robust network of US and
international scientists that can address important societal questions,
encourage diverse participation, create a pipeline of scientists into cultural
heritage science and STEM workforce, and attract positive media attention on the
role of science in society. With support of travel and registration expenses of
early career scientists and students, this project promotes the participation of
young investigators through the allied Gordon Research Seminar and the GRC
poster sessions. This conference also effectively enhances the infrastructure
for research and education by fostering partnerships between, for example,
museum scientists and scientists at large scale facilities, as well as
professors at small liberal arts colleges and minority-based colleges who use
art to teach science at the undergraduate level and to attract students to STEM
careers and graduate studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
award provides partial support to the 2014 Gordon Research Conference on
"Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage Research: Challenges and Complexity in
Characterization and Conservation" (July 27- August 1, 2014, Newry, ME). The
conference brings together thirty-four leading researchers representing 11
countries, 4 continents, and a diversity of backgrounds (Museums, Academia,
National laboratories and Libraries). Extraordinary participation of female
speakers and discussion leaders is a model of gender inclusivity, presenting
research conducted in almost equal amount by male and female researchers.
Support is provided also for the associated Gordon research Seminar "Molecular
and Material Analysis for Art, Archaeometry and Conservation", the first of its
kind. The conference advances discovery while promoting teaching, training, and
learning by offering a platform for graduate student and postdoctoral
researchers to present their research and participate fully in the conference
activities, fostering extended interactions with some of the most established
international leaders in the field. The 2014 conference highlights innovative
approaches to a) understanding time-dependent changes; b) investigating
structure/ property relationships at multiple length and time-scales; and c)
advancing our knowledge of materials processing, performance, and failure in
artworks produced in antiquity all the way to contemporary art. The examination
of the failure mechanisms of ancient and historic materials expands our
knowledge of how materials function and interact at the nanoscale, and has
direct relevance to our understanding of high performance materials being
developed for modern applications. For example, dye sensitized solar cells are
based on titanium or zinc oxides and organic dyes (including alizarin), that are
also used as artists' pigments. The solution-seeking research that is captured
at this Gordon Conference therefore speaks to the NSF priorities to pursue
innovative approaches to address cutting-edge challenges and to integrate
theoretical, experimental, observational, simulation and modeling results in a
holistic platform able to address increasingly complex research questions.