* 1446031
* RAPID: Affordable Housing and Equitable Recovery: A Study of the 2013 Colorado Flash Floods
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Deborah Thomas, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 07/31/2016
* USD 34,898.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID grant funds the collection of data on
housing recovery following the September 2013 flash floods in Colorado. The
research results will inform better local, state, and federal disaster
management policies and programs aimed at community recovery. The floods were
the costliest disaster in Colorado state history, destroying more than 1,500
homes and triggering over $2 billion in economic loss. Low and moderately priced
housing was particularly hard-hit, with hundreds of affordable units destroyed.
Communities are struggling with decisions about where, when, and if to rebuild
housing, while displaced residents are unable to return home because of the loss
of affordable housing options. The investigators will collect detailed data on
household and community decision-making at this crucial time of the disaster, in
order to better understand the issues and challenges facing communities who have
lost significant portions of their affordable housing stock.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fate of affordable housing is central to the character
of long-term disaster recovery, however, existing research is unclear on the
full range of variables that influence decisions about the reconstruction or
replacement of affordable housing post-disaster. To identify these variables and
understand how they affect recovery efforts, the research team will collect,
analyze and disseminate data on housing recovery in three Colorado communities
impacted by the 2013 flash floods. The project team will collect data in two
distinct waves. Wave "I" will be a baseline survey of 100-120 households living
in affordable housing prior to the disaster. Based on their analysis of the
results of this baseline survey, the team will then recruit a sub-sample of
respondents to take part in an in-depth interview for Wave "II" of the study.
These interviews will allow for a richer understanding of the processes of
displacement and how household losses complicate and disrupt daily living and,
eventually, longer term recovery. To supplement the household survey and
interviews, the team will interview key informants from local, state, and
federal government and civil society. The study will provide much-needed
insights into the dynamic nature of disaster recovery decision making at the
individual and community scale, and will advance our scientific understanding of
long-term disaster recovery.