* 1446763
* Collaborative Research: Surface water-groundwater connectivity in the Tidal Freshwater Zone and the fate of nitrogen in tidal rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Rebecca Barnes, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 94,909.00

Humans have dramatically altered the nitrogen cycle through food and energy
production activities. Increased nitrogen loading to landscapes often results in
nitrogen export to the coast, leading to algal blooms, dead zones, and declines
in fisheries. Nitrate removal in riparian aquifers and riverbeds provides an
important ecosystem service that mitigates nitrogen loads to coasts. However a
vast majority of nitrogen never reaches the coast, rather it is retained within
the watershed or transformed by microbes. Riverbanks and bottoms are prime
locations for this retention and transformation, providing a valuable ecosystem
service. In tidal freshwater zones (TFZs) where tides pump river water in and
out of the riverbanks and riverbed, nitrate removal may be particularly
effective. This study will determine the nitrogen removal efficiency of TFZs. If
TFZs play a disproportionately large role in nitrogen removal within watersheds,
management strategies should seek to protect TFZs by maintaining riparian buffer
zones and limiting sediment sources that could clog riverbeds, reducing their
removal efficiency. The research should improve our ability to manage nitrate in
freshwater and better value the ecosystems services of tidal freshwater zones
and estuaries. The results will be shared with the public in two ways: (1) Creek
Fest, an outreach event that promotes watershed stewardship to over 1000
attendees, the PIs will will discuss implications for TFZ management with local
stakeholders; and (2) the PIs will also develop a virtual field trip to educate
high school and college students in land-locked classrooms on ecosystem services
in tidal environments.

Rarely monitored for discharge or nutrient fluxes, TFZs are dynamic transition
zones between rivers and estuaries. In TFZs, semidiurnal stage fluctuations
should promote intense bank storage and release. Bank storage zones may be
efficient sites of nitrate removal. However, associated water table fluctuations
may also aerate shallow groundwater and enhance nitrification, adding nitrate to
groundwater. The net effect of these two tidally induced, opposing processes
could range from net nitrate production to removal within TFZs. This proposal
asks how tidally induced hydrodynamic processes such as bank storage and water
table fluctuations control nitrogen transformations within the riparian aquifers
of TFZs and how these processes upscale to influence nitrogen fluxes from land
to sea. It is hypothesized that: 1) TFZ hydrodynamics promote two hot spots of
nitrogen transformation in the riparian aquifer: a nitrification hot spot at the
soil-groundwater interface where semidiurnal water table fluctuations oxygenate
the shallow groundwater, and a denitrification hot spot near the river-
groundwater interface where surface water exchanges through oxygen depleted
sediments; 2) as tidal range increases in the downstream direction within the
TFZ, nitrate production via nitrification increases more than nitrate removal
via denitrification. These hypotheses will be tested using a combination of
field observations within a TFZ, laboratory experiments, and numerical models.
The field component will characterize fluid and nitrogen fluxes across the
river-aquifer interface and identify non-conservative nitrogen transport in the
riparian aquifer of a TFZ within the Christina River Basin (Delaware). Sediment
cores will be used in laboratory column experiments to explore relationships
between water table fluctuations, groundwater redox conditions, and nitrogen
transformation. Numerical models will be used to upscale nitrogen fate along the
TFZ of the Christina River Basin.