* 1446951
* Support for a Workshop on Instrumentation for Polar Glaciology and Geophysics Research
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Kelly Brunt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2015
* USD 33,819.00

This award provides partial support for a two-day workshop on Instrumentation
for Polar Glaciology and Geophysics Research to be held in the greater
Washington DC area, in October 2014. The funding will support participant
travel, participant travel arrangement, venue, and publication costs. Additional
funding from NASA will be provided to support personnel costs associated with
the organizing committee. This workshop is designed to bring together the
glaciology and geophysics communities to review ground-based, airborne, and
spaceborne instrumentation (e.g., radar, lidar, seismics, GPS, etc.) that either
exists or is in development and which is ideal for Arctic and Antarctic
research. Due to the spatial scale and depth of Earth's polar ice sheets, many
fundamental research topics, which are ultimately of global significance,
require remote-sensing or ice-penetrating techniques and instrumentation. There
are many scientists studying these ice sheets and their connections to other
Earth systems, who often use a variety of these techniques and instrumentation.
However, due to the nature of these techniques and instrumentation, which are
often specialized or refined for polar applications, many scientists are
unfamiliar with instrument capabilities that are complementary to their
scientific goals. This workshop aims to bring together these interested parties
to assess current polar instrumentation and identify a means of communicating
the nature and value of this instrumentation to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this workshop are to: 1)
assess the current state of both in-development and mature instrumentation; 2)
identify limitations within existing instrumentation; 3) develop a means of
communicating, and updating, the broader community (especially researchers that
are new to polar science) of these technical capabilities; and 4) provide
guidance to funding agencies (e.g., NSF and NASA) on how to continuously
communicate the available instrumentation to the broader community. Notes from
workshop discussions will form the basis of: 1) a report that summarizes the
workshop and addresses the 4 goals; and 2) a publication of the highlights of
the report in a journal such as EOS, to inform the broader community. The
workshop seeks to involve as many early career researchers as possible by
incorporating some of them into the Steering Committee and through funded
invitations to attend or present. Further, the workshop will provide a means of
informing the broader community of existing technologies that will assist
current and new polar researchers with many aspects of their NSF-funded
projects, including field-site selection and access to complementary
instrumentation or existing datasets.