* 1446342
* The Dynamical Influences of Low-Level Shear and Lifting Condensation Level on Supercell Tornadoes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Craig Epifanio, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 436,503.00

Abstract This research seeks to incorporate a vorticity decomposition technique
into a numerical model to determine how the sources of vertical vorticity and
mechanisms for its intensification, particularly focused on understanding the
link between environmental parameters and the outflow/updraft positioning,
relate to the development and intensification of near-ground rotation. This
study will also produce a climatological summary of radar data. Supporting
observations will be developed to corroborate findings from the modeling study.

Intellectual Merit This study provides a conduit for significantly advancing
our understanding in vorticity dynamics and mass balances in supercell
thunderstorm environments. This study will provide detailed knowledge of the
spatiotemporal distribution of vorticity sources, sinks and fluxes within severe
storms. The application of prior transformative research by Rotunno (1988) to
determine a "balance" between inflow and outflow in the vicinity of the
mesocyclone is potentially groundbreaking, by providing a framework for
determining an ideal balance relationship for radial mass flux (inflow vs.
outflow), especially at low levels. This work could also provide a significant
contribution to tropical cyclone, boundary layer, and general turbulence
dynamics. The evolution of upscale energy cascade into dominant coherent
structure could be explained in better detail by the proposed vorticity tracking
methods.

Broader Impacts This research has the potential to further improve tornado
forecasts and warning procedures, through improved lead-times for warnings and
reduced false alarm rates. Moving beyond simple correlations between various
environmental parameters to more a process-oriented conceptual model of
supercell thunderstorm dynamics has broader impact across a full range of
scientific fields of study. The investigators will use conference presentations
and peer-reviewed publications as their primary means of disseminating results
to the weather forecasting community. This study includes a plan to engage
undergraduate students through an ongoing Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program at Texas A&M University. The study also includes
plans to disseminate educational materials through the UCAR Spark program. The
Spark Program is the education and outreach program for the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and its managing organization, the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR). Spark is a service organization
that assists NCAR and UCAR translate their research and operations activities
into scientifically accurate, pedagogically effective, and broadly disseminated
educational experiences and resources. In addition, Spark works to broaden the
diversity within the STEM workforce.