* 1446157
* EAGER: Wireless Power Quality Management System for Residential Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Sung Yeul Park, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 194,120.00

Increasing use of energy efficient home appliances contributes to the reduction
of energy usage by residential consumers. The combination of home appliances and
energy management systems has been proposed as an energy efficient solution for
smart homes. However, the need of reactive power not only reduces overall energy
efficiency due to losses incurred in transmission and distribution power lines,
but also poor regulation of reactive power degrades the lifespan of consumer
appliances; both quantifiable in billions of dollars in losses per year. In this
project, the available reactive power capacities in various home appliances will
be evaluated. The reactive power demand will be met by the reactive power
capacity of these appliances. Typically, home appliances such as laundry
machines and air conditioners have a front-end power factor correction (PFC)
converter to satisfy power factor conditions for Energy Star certification.
These PFC circuits are usually low-cost unidirectional boost converters. Even
though the power capacity in this PFC converter is small, multiple home
appliances can cooperate to meet the reactive power demand in distribution level
power networks. A wireless home power management system will also be developed
to 1) manage the reactive power compensation provided by each appliance, and 2)
cooperate with smart home energy management networks or advanced metering
interface systems for peak demand response purposes. As a result, the power
losses due to the transmission lines and distribution lines, and voltage
fluctuations due to variations in reactive power will be significantly reduced.
The success of the proposed framework will result in significant enhancement of
power quality in residential applications at little to no extra cost to the
consumer. Furthermore, the life-cycle of the home appliances will be improved;
and lastly, CO2 emissions will be reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to construct, emulate, and investigate the effectiveness of a
wireless power quality management system that utilizes available power
capacities from home appliances, small solar power generators, and electric
vehicles which can all be found in residential and smart home applications. The
proposed method coordinates active and reactive power support and harmonic
control capabilities of both unidirectional converters and bidirectional
converters for power quality mitigation. A low-power real-time wireless network
will be employed as the communication infrastructure to exchange power quality
information between a power quality manager and the converters. Hybrid control
for active power, reactive power, and harmonic distortion compensations in these
aggregated converters will be the key enabler for this technology. This project
will conduct a technology survey, wireless network and supervisory controller
design, an experimental verification through proof-of-concept design, and an
implementation and feasibility test of reactive power support from home
appliances. The proposed research is transformative because it provides a
fundamental and highly scalable framework for monitoring, mitigating, and
enhancing power quality in residential applications ranging from a single
building power system to community-wide and city-wide power systems especially
in microgrids employing renewable energy sources, power quality monitoring
systems, and smart appliances.