* 1446402
* RAPID Collaborative Research:  Tracking coral reef impacts of the 2014/2015 El Nino event
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Ruth Gates, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2016
* USD 115,886.00

As anthropogenic climate change intensifies, coral reefs face growing threats
from associated decreases in ocean pH and increases in ocean temperature. While
such stressors increase steadily through time, coral reefs also experience
natural climate extremes, such as El Niño events, that rapidly reshape reef
structure and function over a period of months. The El Niño event forecast for
2014/2015 presents the opportunity to study how such events affect coral reef
ecosystems. This research will identify which species are most resilient to high
temperature stress, and determine whether the presence of specific types of
algal endosymbionts in the corals is predictive of the capacity of their coral
hosts to survive temperature stress. By studying the reefs at remote sites with
documented gradients in human use and pollution, the investigators will be able
to tease apart the influence of El-Nino induced temperature changes from local
impacts on the reef. This information will ultimately help to identify which
components of the coral reef ecosystem are most vulnerable and provide a
prognosis for the survival of different types of corals and endosymbionts in a
warming world.

This project focuses on reefs at Christmas Island (2N, 157W) - a site that is
predicted to be heavily affected by warming during El Niño. In September 2014,
roughly 3 months prior to peak El Niño warming, the investigators will install
an array of ocean monitoring equipment around Christmas Island. During that
field trip, they will also conduct extensive ecological surveys of the reef,
collect coral, water and sediment samples for the analysis of Symbiodinium
communities that will be analyzed at the University of Hawaii using high
throughput sequencing approaches, and characterize ocean geochemistry at both
windward and leeward sites on Christmas Island. These activities will be
repeated in subsequent trips during peak El Niño conditions, and post El Niño
conditions, to allow the investigators to monitor the acute responses of the
environment and ecosystem and their near-term recovery, respectively. During the
last trip, they will drill several coral colonies to assess how the corals
record such a large thermal stress in terms of skeletal morphological and
skeletal geochemistry changes.