* 1446601
* CPS: Synergy: TTP Option: Anytime Visual Scene Understanding for Heterogeneous and Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Christoph Mertz, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,413,793.00

Despite many advances in vehicle automation, much remains to be done: the best
autonomous vehicle today still lags behind human drivers, and connected vehicle
(V2V) and infrastructure (V2I) standards are only just emerging. In order for
such cyber-physical systems to fully realize their potential, they must be
capable of exploiting one of the richest and most complex abilities of humans,
which we take for granted: seeing and understanding the visual world. If
automated vehicles had this ability, they could drive more intelligently, and
share information about road and environment conditions, events, and anomalies
to improve situational awareness and safety for other automated vehicles as well
as human drivers. That is the goal of this project, to achieve a synergy between
computer vision, machine learning and cyber-physical systems that leads to a
safer, cheaper and smarter transportation sector, and which has potential
applications to other sectors including agriculture, food quality control and
environment monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, this project
brings together expertise in computer vision, sensing, embedded computing,
machine learning, big data analytics and sensor networks to develop an
integrated edge-cloud architecture for (1) "anytime scene understanding" to
unify diverse scene understanding methods in computer vision, and (2)
"cooperative scene understanding" that leverages vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-
to-infrastructure protocols to coordinate with multiple systems, while (3)
emphasizing how security and privacy should be managed at scale without
impacting overall quality-of-service. This architecture can be used for
autonomous driving and driver-assist systems, and can be embedded within
infrastructure (digital signs, traffic lights) to avoid traffic congestion,
reduce risk of pile-ups and improve situational awareness. Validation and
transition of the research to practice are through integration within City of
Pittsburgh public works department vehicles, Carnegie Mellon University NAVLAB
autonomous vehicles, and across the smart road infrastructure corridor under
development in Pittsburgh. The project also includes activities to foster
development of a new cyber-physical systems workforce, though involvement of
students in the research, co-taught multi-disciplinary courses, and co-organized
workshops.