* 1446286
* The Effect of Particle Phase State on Multiphase Hydroxyl Radical (OH) Oxidation Kinetics and Products of Biomass Burning Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Daniel Knopf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 12/31/2019
* USD 321,512.00

Biomass burning aerosols (BBA) are ubiquitous throughout the global atmosphere.
BBA source strength is believed to be of similar magnitude to the fossil fuel
burning aerosols. Biomass burning plumes can affect the atmosphere on local to
global scales, and BBAs can have a significant impact on visibility, and on the
radiative forcing due to the direct scattering and absorption of radiation. By
altering the properties of clouds, BBA also exert indirect effects on the
radiation balance. Organic aerosols, representing a major mass fraction of the
submicron size fraction, are implicated in human health effects. During
atmospheric transport, organic aerosol particles are chemically transformed due
to reactions with trace oxidizing species such as the hydroxyl radical (OH),
resulting in chemical aging and ultimately cleansing of the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical aging of BBA particles by reactive trace gas
species is not well understood, and so far investigations have been limited
mostly to room temperature and dry conditions, although most of the atmosphere
exhibits oxidizing conditions at lower temperatures and wider variations in
relative humidity. Ambient environmental parameters, which induce altered
viscosity or even phase changes, are responsible for altered chemical reactivity
in BBA, and may in turn be responsible for altering the kinetics of many of
these chemical transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of laboratory
based investigations, using proxy and surrogate compounds under controlled
conditions, are to be carried out in order to further describe the chemical
transformations taking place during the formation, dispersal and aging of
natural, biomass burning aerosols