* 1446250
* CAREER:  Fraction Activities and Assessments for Conceptual Teaching (FAACT) for Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 05/22/2014,01/31/2017
* Jessica Hunt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 01/31/2017
* USD 442,837.00

The goal of this project is to study and support the development of conceptual
understanding of fractions by students with learning disabilities (LD). The
researcher proposes that rather than focusing on whether LD students can or
cannot develop conceptual understanding of fractions, research should attempt to
uncover the understanding LD students have and examine how growth of conceptual
knowledge occurs in these students. This approach suggests a reconceptualization
of research and instructional practice in mathematics that focus on the
conceptual knowledge students with LD can in fact
develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a series of teaching experiments that
involve cycles of theorizing, design, implementation, and refinement, the
project develops instructional trajectories for LD students in the area of
fractions. The research question addressed are: What initial and developing key
developmental understandings of fractions do students with learning disabilities
evidence through employed strategies, language, and representations? How do
students with learning disabilities progress in developing and solidifying
conceptual understandings of fractions through their mathematical activity? And,
to what extent does an intervention reflective of a research based instructional
trajectory facilitate strategic development and increased fraction conceptual
knowledge in students with learning disabilities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
outcomes of the project include (a) a research-based instructional trajectory
for students with LD specific to conceptual understandings of fractions as
numeric quantities, (b) a set of 90 fraction tasks to be used for instruction
and/or formative assessment in fraction concepts, (c) scoring/coding frameworks
and checklists for use with key tasks as formative assessments, (d) decision-
making frameworks, task sequencing guides, and suggestions to aid teachers in
designing individualized, student-centered instruction, all available via the
Internet. Most important, the project has the potential to offer a
transformative approach to mathematics instruction for students with LD,
bringing together expertise on learning disabilities and mathematics education
to address a area in which there is very little research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will incorporate finding from the study into
methods courses for both mathematics education and special education students.
She will also develop a graduate course entitled Diagnosis and Remediation.