* 1446801
* CPS: Breakthrough: Programming and Execution Environment for Geo-Distributed Latency-Sensitive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 472,754.00

The confluence of new networked sensing technologies (e.g., cameras),
distributed computational resources (e.g., cloud computing), and algorithmic
advances (e.g., computer vision) are offering new and exciting opportunities for
solving a variety of new problems that are of societal importance including
emergency response, disaster recovery, surveillance, and transportation.
Solutions to this new class of problems, referred to as "situation awareness"
applications, include surveillance via large-scale distributed camera networks
and personalized traffic alerts in vehicular networks using road and traffic
sensing. A breakthrough in system software technology is needed to meet the
challenges posed by these applications since they are latency-sensitive, data
intensive, involve heavy-duty processing, and must run 24x7 while dealing with
the vagaries of the physical world. This project aims to make such a
breakthrough, through new distributed programming idioms and resource allocation
strategies. To better identify the challenges posed by situation awareness
applications, the project includes experimental deployment of the new
technologies in partnership with the City of Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central activity is to develop appropriate system
abstractions for design of situation awareness applications and encapsulate them
in distributed programming idioms for domain experts (e.g., vision researchers).
The resulting programming framework allows association of critical attributes
such as location, time, and mobility with sensed data to reason about causal
events along these axes. To meet the latency constraints of these applications,
the project develops geospatial resource allocation mechanisms that complement
and support the distributed programming idioms, extending the utility-computing
model of cloud computing to the edge of the network. Since the applications
often have to work with inexact knowledge of what is happening in the physical
environment, owing to limitations of the distributed sensing sources, the
project also investigates system support for application-specific information
fusion and spatio-temporal analyses to increase the quality of results. Efforts
toward development of a future cyber-physical systems workforce include creation
of a new multidisciplinary curriculum around situation awareness, exploration of
new immersive learning pedagogical styles, and mentoring and providing research
experience to undergraduate students through research experiences and
internships aimed at increasing participation of women and minorities.