* 1446946
* Elasticity and Spin Transitions of Iron in the Earth's Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Jung-Fu Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 408,093.00

Earth's mantle is a silicate rocky shell about 2900 km thick that constitutes
approximately 84% of the planet's volume. It is further separated into three
layers, upper mantle, transition zone, and lower mantle, as a result of the
structural phase transitions of the olivine polymorphs. The lower mantle ranging
from 670 km to 2900 km in depth is mainly made of bridgmanite (silicate
perovskite) and ferropericlase in which iron is the most abundant transition
metal. Deep-Earth scientists have recently discovered that the spin transitions
of iron in these lower-mantle minerals can have a series of effects on physical,
chemical, and transport properties of the host minerals. Studying the sound
velocity profiles of the lower-mantle minerals across the spin transition of
iron can thus help us understand the chemistry and physics of the region. With
an emphasis on the effects of the spin transitions, this project aims broadly to
understand thermal elasticity of the lower-mantle minerals at relevant pressure-
temperature-composition conditions, providing direct mineral physics results and
thermodynamic database to be integrated with seismic tomographic images,
geochemical analyses, and geodynamic models of the mantle. The geophysical and
geochemical consequences of the spin transition in the lower mantle will be
examined through modelling the thermal elasticity and the partitioning
coefficient of iron in ferropericlase and bridgmanite along an expected lower-
mantle geotherm. These results will help test hypotheses on seismic wave
profiles, elucidate the chemistry of iron and its compositional model, and
determine the dynamic behavior of the Earth's deep
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed mineral physics research uses
synchrotron X-ray and in-house laser spectroscopies in a diamond anvil cell
designed to probe structural and elastic properties of the mantle minerals at
pressure-temperature conditions of the Earth's mantle. Under the initiatives of
the project, students and postdoctoral researchers will have unique research
opportunities to use advanced synchrotron X-ray facilities at the Advanced
Photon Source and laser spectroscopies at the University of Texas at Austin to
obtain laboratory results needed to decipher seismic and geochemical
observations of the planet's lower mantle. These activities will contribute to
the education of the next generation of independent researchers with a thorough
knowledge of the Earth's deep interior. Outreach activities in this project
focus on exposing underrepresented K-12th graders to deep-Earth research by
involving them in the outreach summer programs. Research results from this award
will be disseminated broadly through teaching, seminars, conferences, and peer-
reviewed publications. The proposed work enhances infrastructure for research
and education by using shared facilities and the development of new
collaborations among researchers in different fields. The project will provide
students and postdoc researchers with a great opportunity to collaborate with
scientists in the multidisciplinary fields of seismology, geodynamics, and
geochemistry.