* 1446285
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Dependable Multi-Robot Cooperative Tasking in Uncertain and Dynamic Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Kimon Valavanis, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,994.00

Driven by both civilian and military applications, such as coordinated
surveillance, search and rescue, underwater or space exploration, manipulation
in hazardous environments, and rapid emergency response, cooperative actions by
teams of robots has emerged as an important research area. However, the
coordination strategies for such robot teams are still developed to a great
extent by trial-and-error processes. Hence, the strategies cannot guarantee
mission success. This award supports fundamental research to provide a provably
correct formal design theory of multi-robot systems that guarantees mission
success. Furthermore, results from the research can be extended to the design of
more general cyber-physical systems (CPSs) consisting of distributed and
coordinated subsystems, such as the national power grid, ground/air traffic
networks, and manufacturing systems. These CPSs are critical components of the
national civil infrastructure that must operate reliably to ensure public
safety. The multidisciplinary approach taken will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering education.
Focusing on multi-robot teams, the goal of the research is to build foundations
for a provably correct formal design theory for CPSs. This design theory will
guarantee a given global performance of multi-robot teams through designing
local coordination rules and control laws. The basic idea is to decompose the
team mission into individual subtasks such that the design can be reduced to a
local synthesis problem for individual robots. Multidisciplinary approaches
combining hybrid systems, supervisory control, regular inference and model
checking will be utilized to achieve this goal. The developed theory will enable
robots in the team to cooperatively learn their individual roles in a mission,
and then automatically synthesize local supervisors to fulfill their subtasks. A
salient feature of this method lies on its ability to handle environmental
uncertainties and unmodeled dynamics, as there is no need for an explicit model
of the transition dynamics of each agent/robot and their interactions with the
environment. In addition, the design is online and reactive, enabling the robot
team to adapt to changing environments and dynamic tasking. The derived theory
will be implemented as software tools and will be demonstrated through real
robotic systems consisting of unmanned ground and aerial vehicles in
unstructured urban/rural areas.