* 1446018
* Strengthening Research Experiences for Undergraduate STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 984,136.00

There is a growing body of evidence in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education that research experiences, as well as similar
authentic applied professional experiences, provide significant benefits to
undergraduate students. These potential benefits for students include enhanced
interest in and understanding of the nature of STEM fields, retention in STEM
majors, and clarification of career goals. As attempts to provide research
experiences for undergraduate students are becoming more widespread, so are
questions about their value added, and the associated costs and effort that
would be required to expand them to more students. In this Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project, an expert committee of the National
Research Council (NRC) will assess and synthesize the current state of the
evidence regarding undergraduate research experiences and develop a conceptual
framework for improving current practice. The committee will study a variety of
implementation strategies, including apprenticeship-style research experiences
in academic and industrial laboratories, research integrated into undergraduate
laboratory courses, and other classroom formats that incorporate research.
Ultimately, the committee will report on the strength of the evidence supporting
the benefits of a variety of types undergraduate research experiences, enabling
stakeholders to weigh the benefits and costs of implementation in their
institutional contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 14-member, interdisciplinary
NRC committee will assess and synthesize the current evidence on STEM
undergraduate research and practice experiences for students in 2- and 4-year
institutions of higher learning. The committee will define what qualifies as
"authentic undergraduate research experiences", assess the quality of research
on these experiences, compare the effectiveness of different implementation
mechanisms and programs, provide best-practice examples, and consider the costs
and benefits of different approaches. The committee will also discuss the needs
of faculty and administrators to successfully implement, or improve and expand,
undergraduate research opportunities. Based on their review of the evidence, the
committee will develop a set of conclusions and recommendations that include a
future research agenda. The committee will produce a report summarizing its
findings that will be reviewed by other experts identified by the NRC and
subsequently released to the public.