* 1446308
* Investigations of the Long Term Sustainability of Human Ecodynamic Systems in Northern Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Astrid Ogilvie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2016
* USD 224,998.00

This award supports an interdisciplinary team of researchers investigating the
long term sustainability of rural farming in the far northern regions of
Iceland, Myvatn. The project will use social documentary, archaeological, and
natural science data to investigate the unique and detailed record of grass
growth and hay yield during the period AD ca. 1700 to 1950 in the Myvatn
district. One of the of the key questions for the research team is what were the
varying social and environmental factors that influenced the success or failure
of the hay crop and grazing? In addition, the project will analyze the
sustainability of the production and use of these resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team has chosen the Myvatn area, named for
the ever-present midges (Tanytarsus gracilentus) that are a key element in the
local ecology. The midges provide food for numerous water birds, fish, and are
in such large numbers that their corpses add nutrients to the soil. Myvatn
region has been farmed continuously for many centuries and this farming is
hypothesized to have been supported by a complex, interlinked system of
biological (midges, fish, waterfowl) and geological (volcanism) processes
coupled with the social, cultural, and economic systems. These numerous
interlinked factors represent a unique record of a human ecodynamic system in
the North. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iceland has a long and diverse written record
of farming and the project will draw on numerous published and unpublished
historical documents, which have previously been unexamined. These documents
including farmer's diaries, local governmental tax and yield records and hay
inspection reports, parish records, and a unique farmers' "newspaper" dating to
the 19th century. These records are the legacy documents of one Myvatn farming
family and will form the backbone of the archival research. This unique written
record, complemented by data from the archaeological record, will add critical
social and economic data to the rich environmental data of the Myvan ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reason the research team is so interested in grass and
hay production is that until very recently grass was Iceland's only viable crop.
As such, the early Icelandic economy focused primarily on animal husbandry. The
successful harvesting of hay was the most important annual task of rural
Icelanders, a task that can be traced to the time of Viking settlement both in
form and function. Hay was critical to the economy and the long-term
sustainability of Icelandic social systems because quite literally if there was
not enough hay to sustain the winter feeding of the livestock they could die and
this would lead to famine, migration, and even death among the rural population.
By examining the sustainable harvest and use of grass crops in Myvatn the
research team will be able to better understand the complex human ecodynamic
systems in the north as they undergoes both environmental and social change.