* 1446362
* Supporting US-Based Students to Attend the 2014 ACM UbiComp International Workshop on Smart Health Systems and Applications (SmartHealthSys 2014)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Hassan Zadeh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 10,151.00

This grant provides travel support for U.S. based graduate student participants
to attend the 2014 ACM UbiComp International Workshop on Smart Health Systems
and Applications (SmartHealthSys 2014), which will be held in Seattle,
Washington, on September 14, 2014. The SmartHealthSys workshop is a forum for
researchers and developers from academia and industry in the area of smart
health to present results and discuss ways to advance the field. The workshop
focuses on wireless, connected, and mobile health research as a
multidisciplinary area spanning computer science and engineering, electrical
engineering, biomedical engineering, nursing, medicine, and public health. The
workshop includes presentations of theoretical and experimental research,
prototyping efforts, case studies and advances in technology related to smart
health systems, applications, and services. In addition to traditional topics in
this area, the workshop features a special focus on scalable smart health. This
topic area aims tdiscuss and present innovations that address challenges
associated with large-scale adoption of smart health technologies in end-user
settings and uncontrolled environments. Papers accepted to the SmartHealthSys
workshop will be published in the UbiComp 2014 Adjunct Proceedings and included
in the ACM Digital Library. A strong representation of U.S. researchers at the
conference is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important and
emerging area and represents an investment by NSF in the integration of research
and education.