* 1446489
* EAGER: Robotized Plasmonic Nanosensors for High-Throughput Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Donglei Emma Fan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 12/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Title: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Robotized Plasmonic Nanosensors for High-
Throughput Biochemical Detection &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposal is to explore an innovative
paradigm for robotizing Plasmonic Nanosensors for high-throughput detection of
ultralow-concentration molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nanosensors with ultra-sensitivity and high throughput are
pivotal for early-stage disease diagnosis. Significant efforts have advanced
nanosensors with single-molecule sensitivity owing to the unique physical
properties of nanoscale materials. However, the high sensitivity of nanosensors
comes at the expense of an adversely long detection time for low-concentration
biomolecules. It is due to the low probability of dilute molecules to attach to
nano-sized objects. Therefore, both the effects of the high-sensitivity and low-
detection speed result from the miniaturized dimensions of nanosensors. This
pressing issue has greatly hindered the practical application of nano-
biosensors. In this work, the PI proposes to explore an innovative concept of
robotized plasmonic nanosensors for enhancing the detection throughput via
active mechanical rotation while retaining the high sensitivity. If successful,
this work can accelerate the reality of point-of-care diagnosis and early cancer
detection that improve people's healthcare. It will also benefit our next-
generation from undergraduate to graduate levels with special promotions to the
underrepresented female students in engineering. Organization of a symposium at
the Materials Research Society Meeting by the PI will gather leading researchers
from both academia and industry in this fast developing field for accelerating
technological discovery and transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to explore an innovative
paradigm for robotizing plasmonic nanosensors for high-throughput detection of
ultralow-concentration molecules. Significant efforts have advanced nanoscale
sensors with single-molecule sensitivity. However, the nanoscale features of
sensors, which enable ultrasensitive detection, also result in a low detection
speed due to the intrinsic low-attachment probability of molecules to the small
available sensing areas. The difficulties are compounded further by the complex
fabrication and integration of the nanosensors to existing systems, such as
microfluidics, for practical applications. In this proof-of-concept project, an
attempt will be made to robotize plasmonic nanosensors into highly controllable
nanomotors to address the aforementioned challenges. The sensors will be
assembled and actuated into motorized sensors by utilizing the electric tweezers
an efficient nanomanipulation technique, based on the combined AC and DC
electric fields, developed by the PI recently. The greatly enhanced detection
speed for ultralow-concentration molecules is expected owing to the effective
fluidic convection as a result of the controlled mechanical rotation of the
nanosensors, which could accelerate the affiliation equilibrium of analyte
molecules with the surfaces of nanosensors. Since no such kind of systems has
been investigated previously and the mechanisms have not been tested or proved,
this proposal will present high risk, while potentially transformative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed research will innovatively
integrate and actuate plasmonic-active nanoparticles into functional
nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) devices for enhanced biochemical detection,
representing a new advance of optical nanosensors from a passive/static fashion
to a dynamic/actuatable fashion. The concept and advantages of the robotized
optical sensors, if approved, should be applicable and transformative to all
types of nanosensors.