* 1446106
* NUE: Development of a Computational Curriculum for Undergraduates in NanoTechnology and NanoEngineering (NanoCompute)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this proposal, NUE: Development of a Computational Curriculum
for Undergraduates in NanoTechnology and NanoEngineering (NanoCompute)at the
University of California San Diego (UCSD), under the direction of Dr. Andrea
Tao, will be to develop a new focus within the nanoengineering curriculum that
emphasizes computation, simulation, and modeling. Computation-based learning
methods will be integrated into new and existing undergraduate courses in the
NanoEngineering (NE) Department, starting with first-year engineering courses
and culminating in a two-quarter capstone senior design course. The proposed
NanoCompute curriculum is a novel approach to undergraduate education in
nanotechnology because it will provide formal hands-on training in computation
approaches that is fully integrated with the NE Department's four-year Bachelor
of Science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum for NanoCompute is
expected to impact all undergraduates majoring in nanoengineering and chemical
engineering at UCSD, which is estimated at 1000+ students over the next two
years. NanoCompute will be implemented to meet the Engineering Science Program
requirements as laid out by the Accreditation Board for Engineering Technology,
and this proposal will develop new pedagogy in computational nanoengineering
that we expect to impact all future degree programs in this area. There are
currently no established criteria for accredited degree programs in
nanoengineering or nanotechnology. To enable impact on a national level, the
project team will develop a modular course format that is readily implemented by
other academic institutions. As part of NanoCompute, there will be a focus on
recruiting and retaining undergraduate students in the NE Department from
underrepresented and underprivileged groups. The educational efforts of this
proposal will seek to develop human resources in advanced technology, which is
vital to economic growth in California and the U.S. as a whole.