* 1446374
* CAREER: Novel Approaches for Reasoning about Local Communities from Social Awareness Streams Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Mor Naaman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2015
* USD 348,914.00

This project will examine temporal, social, and geographic patterns in large-
scale social awareness streams (SAS) data for local communities. SASs, such as
Twitter and Facebook, are radically altering our society's information fabric.
These new communication platforms are used by millions of people to share brief
status messages in socially connected public forums. These messages expose vast
amounts of data from, and about, local geographic communities -- data that
reflect people's activities, interests, and attention, in thousands of
localities worldwide. Using this vast and still emerging sources of data, this
research program will make SAS into a viable and significant source of
information with capacity to transform our understanding of local communities.
As a first activity, the research will adapt algorithms from other fields to
identify temporal patterns in SAS data that are stable across multiple
communities. Importantly, the work will reason about how and when these patterns
break. For example, SAS data may expose sleeping patterns in a community, and
help identify mass anxiety when these patterns break. Further, the project will
develop methods to identify differences in SAS patterns between local
communities, and connect these findings to other sources of data. Next, the
research will develop methods to compare how different groups (e.g., by age or
ethnicity) use specific neighborhoods and cities. Finally, the work will examine
the relations between local communities and network ties as reflected in SAS
data. The findings will form the basis for developing novel models of
computation for SAS systems, and inform the creation of tools and applications
geared to re-imagine SAS as reliable information systems for local communities.
The project is rooted in social computing and in human-centered approaches to
development of new technology. As such, the work entails interdisciplinary
investigation using methods and research questions drawing on fields as diverse
as information and computer science, sociology, and communication. The project
will tackle significant information challenges that these SAS and other social
computing platforms present, such as the scale, bias, and the increasing amount
of noise and spam, as well as the brevity and lack of context of posted
messages. The research will develop novel methods and approaches to using these
new information sources to extract knowledge about, and for, local communities.
The research focus on social media and local communities lends itself well to
outreach and education activities. The outreach efforts will enhance the
connection of public libraries to the communities they serve, and relate the
social media experiences of people?s everyday lives to scientific challenges.
Participatory design workshops and visits to select educational institutions
will engage individuals currently underrepresented in the sciences. An
interdisciplinary education program will prepare a diverse set of students at
all levels to lead the next generation of innovation, research, and education in
socio-technical systems. Finally, this project will have a significant impact on
our society. By leveraging SAS as novel sources of information, the research
will lay the foundation for new studies about local communities. The resulting
technologies and insights will inform and transform the work of local
governments, news organizations, planners, and researchers, as well as local
residents and activists, allowing them to take full advantage of these new
repositories of human expression and thought with relevance to such diverse
social challenges as emergency response, resource planning, and public health.