* 1446712
* CPS: Breakthrough: Knowledge-Aware Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Andre Platzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2019
* USD 499,731.00

This project addresses the foundational problem of knowledge within cyber-
physical systems (CPS), i.e., systems that combine aspects such as
communication, computation, and physics. A single system observes its
environment through sensors and interacts through actuators. Neither is perfect.
Thus, the CPS's internal view of the world is blurry and its actions are
imprecise. CPS are still analyzed with methods that do not distinguish between
truth in the world and an internal view thereof, resulting in a mismatch between
the behavior of theoretical models and their real-world counterparts. How could
they be trusted to perform safety-critical tasks? This project addresses this
critical insufficiency by developing methods to reason about knowledge and
learning in CPS. The project pursues the development of new logical principles
for verifying knowledge-aware CPS. This project investigates how to make the
mismatch between the world and the partial perception through sensors explicit
and how to achieve provably correct control in theory as well as practice
despite this mismatch. By investigating changing knowledge in a changing world,
this project contributes to a fundamental feature without which CPS can never be
truly safe and efficient at the same time. The project's broader significance
and importance are a result of the widespread attention that CPS gain in many
safety-critical areas, such as in aviation and automotive industries. One reason
for safety gaps in such CPS is that formal verification techniques are still
largely knowledge-agnostic, and verifiable solutions overly pessimistic. This
project addresses these issues and provides tools that allow for incorporating
knowledge about the environment's intentions into the models to derive provably
correct, but justifiably optimistic, and thus efficient, behavior. By their
logical nature, these techniques are applicable to a wide range of CPS and,
thus, contribute significantly to numerous applications. Results obtained within
this project will be demonstrated in CPS models and laboratory robot scenarios,
and will be shared in courses and with industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach that this project pursues
develops a new modeling language, logic, and proof calculus for verifying
knowledge-aware CPS. The knowledge paradigm used allows CPS controllers to
seamlessly acquire knowledge about the world but also about other agents in the
system, i.e., other controllers. Knowledge is the key to interactions between
different agents. This project investigates how an explicit model of world
perception and agent intentions - and knowledge of these perceptions and
intentions - allows CPS agents to act, based on more efficient, but still
provably safe control in multi-agent scenarios. The methods will be implemented
in the verification tool KeYmaera and demonstrated in formal verification on
different case study applications such as car scenarios.