* 1446464
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Human-Machine Interaction with Mobility Enhancing Soft Exosuits
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,411,482.00

Stroke is the leading cause of long-term disability in the US with approximately
7 million stroke survivors living in the US today and for patients with
neurological disorders, it has been shown that limited gait velocity commonly
results in walking that is predominantly restricted to the household. Unlike
traditional exoskeletons which contain rigid linkage elements, the vision for
this work is for exosuits that use soft materials such as textiles to provide a
more conformal, unobtrusive and compliant means to interface to the human body.
This represents a fundamental change in the paradigm of how people have viewed
and designed wearable robots for the last half a century. Such a solution would
have broad impact beyond the stroke patient population and could provide benefit
to children with Cerebral Palsy or elderly individuals with muscle weakness. In
addition there are plans to create a set of novel instructional educational
toolkits for patient-in-the-loop cyber-physical systems that will be shared via
an online portal and the CPS Virtual Organization (CPS-VO).

With a patient-in-the-loop CPS, the patient, the physical suit, the
computational control algorithms and the task/environment form a system in which
all of the elements need to seamlessly interact. Through a modeling and
experimental approach involving extensive human subjects studies, the team aims
to create a unified engineering, biomechanical and physiological framework for
designing and evaluating patient-in-the-loop CPS that include co-operative
controllers that adapt in real-time to the patient to ensure safety and
reliability an integrated system. Specifically the project will seek to gain a
fundamental understanding of how to (1) analytically and experimentally
characterize how forces are transmitted from these soft systems to the patient
through the underlying soft tissue so as to generate assistance, (2) apply the
optimal magnitude and timing of assistance to the patient to promote a more
symmetric and natural gait by monitoring biomechanical, physiological and suit
sensor data and (3) fuse information from different sensors monitoring patient
motion and interaction forces to create an integrated CPS with a co-operative
controller than can adapt to non-periodic movements of the patient.