* 1446793
* CPS: Synergy: Tracking Fish Movement with a School of Gliding Robotic Fish
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

Tracking Fish Movement with a School of Gliding Robotic Fish &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on developing the technology for continuously
tracking the movement of live fish implanted with acoustic tags, using a network
of relatively inexpensive underwater robots called gliding robotic fish. The
research addresses two fundamental challenges in the system design: (1)
accommodating significant uncertainties due to environmental disturbances,
communication delays, and apparent randomness in fish movement, and (2)
balancing competing objectives (for example, accurate tracking versus long
lifetime for the robotic network) while meeting multiple constraints on onboard
computing, communication, and power resources. Fish movement data provide
insight into choice of habitats, migratory routes, and spawning behavior. By
advancing the state of the art in fish tracking technology, this project enables
better-informed decisions for fishery management and conservation, including
control of invasive species, restoration of native species, and stock assessment
for high-valued species, and ultimately contributes to the sustainability of
fisheries and aquatic ecosystems. By advancing the coordination and control of
gliding robotic fish networks and enabling their operation in challenging
environments such as the Great Lakes, the project also facilitates the practical
adoption of these robotic systems for a myriad of other applications in
environmental monitoring, port surveillance, and underwater structure
inspection. The project enhances several graduate courses at Michigan State
University, and provides unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for
students including those from underrepresented groups. Outreach activities,
including robotic fish demos, museum exhibits, teacher training, and "Follow
That Fish" smartphone App, are specifically designed to pique the interest of
pre-college students in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to create an integrative framework for the design of coupled
robotic and biological systems that accommodates system uncertainties and
competing objectives in a rigorous and holistic manner. This goal is realized
through the pursuit of five tightly coupled research objectives associated with
the application of tracking and modeling fish movement: (1) developing new
robotic platforms to enable underwater communication and acoustic tag detection,
(2) developing robust algorithms with analytical performance assurance to
localize tagged fish based on time-of-arrival differences among multiple robots,
(3) designing hidden Markov models and online model adaptation algorithms to
capture fish movement effectively and efficiently, (4) exploring a two-tier
decision architecture for the robots to accomplish fish tracking, which
incorporates model-predictions of fish movement, energy consumption, and
mobility constraints, and (5) experimentally evaluating the design framework,
first in an inland lake for localizing or tracking stationary and moving tags,
and then in Thunder Bay, Lake Huron, for tracking and modeling the movement of
lake trout during spawning. This project offers fundamental insight into the
design of robust robotic-physical-biological systems that addresses the
challenges of system uncertainties and competing objectives. First, a feedback
paradigm is presented for tight interactions between the robotic and biological
components, to facilitate the refinement of biological knowledge and robotic
strategies in the presence of uncertainties. Second, tools from estimation and
control theory (e.g., Cramer-Rao bounds) are exploited in novel ways to analyze
the performance limits of fish tracking algorithms, and to guide the design of
optimal or near-optimal tradeoffs to meet multiple competing objectives while
accommodating onboard resource constraints. On the biology side, continuous,
dynamic tracking of tagged fish with robotic networks represents a significant
step forward in acoustic telemetry, and results in novel datasets and models for
advancing fish movement ecology.