* 1446424
* SAVI/Collaborative Research: Pacific Rim Earthquake Engineering Mitigation Protective Technologies International Virtual Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Erik Johnson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 222,711.00

Seismic protective systems, such as base isolation, passive energy dissipation,
and semi-active and active control, can be applied to new and existing buildings
to provide significant reductions in building motion and damage during
earthquakes. The objective of this award is to build a community of researchers
from Chile, Japan, New Zealand, and the United States, through a virtual
institute, to accelerate research on seismic protective systems. This institute
will enable U.S. researchers to proactively learn from their foreign
counterparts from Pacific Rim countries about the performance of buildings with
seismic protective systems during recent major earthquakes in Chile in 2010 and
in New Zealand and Japan in 2011, to ensure that seismic protective systems
research is directed to better prepare for future hazards. This award will
enable the U.S. seismic protective systems community to better anticipate
structural damage from future large earthquakes, and avert risk to these events
by conducting research now to address the challenges that will facilitate
seismic protective systems implementation in buildings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual institute will incorporate the following face-
to-face and virtual activities: (a) one workshop per year, hosted sequentially
in the countries of the foreign partners, to provide direct opportunities for
U.S. participants to share research and data and chart future research
directions with international collaborators, (b) pairings of early career U.S.
faculty participants with foreign counterparts to develop case studies about the
effectiveness of seismic protective systems in past earthquakes, thereby
building long-term research collaborations, (c) lectures by the foreign
counterparts and U.S. senior participants about research on seismic protective
systems in their country, (d) an on-line, directed-study seismic protective
systems course that will be used to teach graduate students in the United States
and around the world about the state-of-the-art and the state-of-the-research in
seismic protective systems, and (e) regular quarterly virtual meetings using
online collaboration tools. The virtual institute will bring together
researchers on 13 active NSF awards in the areas of seismic protective systems,
as well as 20-30 early career participants, to form long-term global research
relationships with their international collaborators, who share common research
interests and are supported by their respective government research agencies.
This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and
is co-funded by NSF's Directorate for Engineering and NSF's Office of
Integrative and International Activities.