* 1446304
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Cyber-Physical Approaches to Advanced Manufacturing Security
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Christopher White, Vanderbilt University
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Corman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 262,862.00

The evolution of manufacturing systems from loose collections of cyber and
physical components into true cyber-physical systems has expanded the
opportunities for cyber-attacks against manufacturing. To ensure the continued
production of high-quality parts in this new environment requires the
development of novel security tools that transcend both the cyber and physical
worlds. Potential cyber-attacks can cause undetectable changes in a
manufacturing system that can adversely affect the product's design intent,
performance, quality, or perceived quality. The result of this could be
financially devastating by delaying a product's launch, ruining equipment,
increasing warranty costs, or losing customer trust. More importantly, these
attacks pose a risk to human safety, as operators and consumers could be using
faulty equipment/products. New methods for detecting and diagnosing cyber-
physical attacks will be studied and evaluated through our established
industrial partners. The expected results of this project will contribute
significantly in further securing our nation's manufacturing
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a new vision for
manufacturing cyber-security based upon modeling and understanding the
correlation between cyber events that occur in a product/process development-
cycle and the physical data generated during manufacturing. Specifically, the
proposed research will take advantage of this correlation to characterize the
relationships between cyber-attacks, process data, product quality observations,
and side-channel impacts for the purpose of attack detection and diagnosis.
These process characterizations will be coupled with new manufacturing specific
cyber-attack taxonomies to provide a comprehensive understanding of attack
surfaces for advanced manufacturing systems and their cyber-physical
manifestations in manufacturing processes. This is a fundamental missing element
in the manufacturing cyber-security body of knowledge. Finally, new forensic
techniques, based on constraint optimization and machine learning, will be
researched to differentiate process changes indicative of cyber-attacks from
common variations in manufacturing due to inherent system variability.