* 1446151
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Efficient Traffic Management: A Formal Methods Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 301,547.00

Title: Efficient Traffic Management: A Formal Methods Approach

The objective of this project is to develop a formal methods approach to traffic
management. Formal methods is an area of computer science that develops
efficient techniques for proving the correct operation of systems, such as
computer programs and digital circuits, and for designing systems that are
correct by construction. This project extends this formalism to traffic networks
where correctness specifications include eliminating congestion, ensuring that
the freeway throughput remains over a minimum threshold, that queues are always
eventually emptied, etc. The task is then to design signal timing and ramp
metering strategies to meet such specifications. To accomplish this task, the
project takes advantage of the inherent structure of existing, validated
mathematical models of traffic flow and develops computationally efficient
design techniques. The results are tested with real traffic data from the
Interstate 210 travel corridor in Southern California. The educational component
of the project includes course development on modeling and control of traffic
networks, featuring in particular the formal methods approach of this project,
and organizing workshops to train traffic engineers and operation practitioners
on the use of software tools and methodologies of the project.

To meet rich control objectives expressed using temporal logic, the project
exploits the piecewise affine nature of existing, validated traffic models, and
derives efficient finite state abstractions that form the basis of correct-by-
construction control synthesis. To ensure scalability, the project further takes
advantage of inherent monotonicity properties and decomposibility into sparsely
connected subsystems. The first research task is to develop a design framework
for signal timing and ramp metering strategies for signalized intersections and
freeway traffic control. The second task is the coordinated control of freeway
onramps and nearby signalized intersections to address situations such as a
freeway demand surge after a sporting event, or an accident on the freeway when
signal settings must be adjusted to favor a detour route. The third task is to
pursue designs that exploit the statistics of demand for probabilistic
correctness guarantees, as well as designs that incorporate optimality
requirements, such as minimizing travel time. Validation of the results is
pursued with high-fidelity simulation models calibrated using traffic data from
the Interstate 210 travel corridor.