* 1446117
* CPS: Synergy: Adaptive Management of Large Energy Storage Systems for Vehicle Electrification
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 994,211.00

Large battery systems with 100s/1000s cells are being used to power various
physical platforms. For example, automobiles are transitioning from conventional
powertrains to (plug-in) hybrid and electric vehicles (EVs). To achieve the
desired efficiency of EVs, significant improvements are needed in the
architecture and algorithms of battery management. This project will develop a
new comprehensive battery management architecture, called Smart Battery
Management System (SBMS). The research is expected to bridge the wide gap
existing between cyber-physical system (CPS) research and electrification
industry communities, provide environment-friendly solutions, increase the
awareness of CPS, and develop skilled human resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will incorporate and enhance a battery
management system (BMS) by including battery state-of-charge (SoC) and state-of-
health (SoH) algorithms as well as power management strategies on both pack and
cell levels. Specifically, it consists of five main research tasks: (i) design a
dynamically reconfigurable energy storage system to tolerate harsh internal and
external stresses; (ii) develop cell-level thermal management algorithms; (iii)
develop efficient, dependable charge and discharge scheduling algorithms in
hybrid energy storage systems; (iv) develop a comprehensive,
diagnostic/prognostic (P/D) algorithm with system parameters adjusted for making
optimal decisions; and (v) build a testbed and evaluate the proposed
architecture and algorithms on the testbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will advance the state-of-the-art in the management of large-scale energy
storage systems, extending their life and operation-time significantly, which is
key to a wide range of battery-powered physical platforms. That is, SBMS will
enable batteries to withstand excessive stresses and power physical platforms
for a much longer time, all at low costs. SBMS will also serve as a basic
framework for various aspects of CPS research, integrating (cyber) dynamic
control and P/D mechanisms, and (physical) energy storage system dynamics.