* 1446461
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Towards Effective and Efficient Sensing-Motion Co-Design of Swarming Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Wencen Wu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2018
* USD 258,161.00

The project focuses on swarming cyber-physical systems (swarming CPS) consisting
of a collection of mobile networked agents, each of which has sensing,
computing, communication, and locomotion capabilities, and that have a wide
range of civilian and military applications. Different from conventional static
CPS, swarming CPS rely on mobile computing entities, e.g., robots, which
collaboratively interact with phenomena of interest at different physical
locations. This unique feature calls for novel sensing-motion co-design
solutions to accomplish a variety of increasingly complex missions. Towards
this, the overall research objective of this project is to establish and
demonstrate a generic motion-sensing co-design procedure that will significantly
reduce the complexity of the mission design for swarming CPS, and greatly
facilitate the development of effective, efficient and adaptive control and
sensing strategies under various environment uncertainties. This project aims to
offer comprehensive scientific understanding of the dynamic nature of swarming
CPS, contribute to generic engineering principles for designing collaborative
control and sensing algorithms, and advance the enabling technologies of
practically applying CPS in the challenging environment. The research solutions
of this project aim to bring significant advance in the environmental
sustainability, homeland security, and human well-being. The project provides
unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students through both research work and related courses that the PIs will
develop and offer.

The project significantly advances the state of the art in cooperative control
and sensing and provide an enabling technology for swarming CPS through highly
interrelated thrusts: (1) a generic sensing and motion co-design procedure,
which reveals the fundamental interplay between the sensing dynamics and motion
dynamics of swarming CPS, will be proposed to facilitate the development of
effective and efficient control and sensing strategies; (2) by following such
co-design procedure, provable correct, computation efficient, and communication
light control and sensing strategies will be developed for swarming CPS with
constrained resources to accomplish specific missions, e.g., locating
pollutants, in an unknown field, while navigating through uncertain spaces; (3)
to provide an enabling mobile platform to verify the proposed strategies,
innovative small, highly 3D maneuverable, noiseless, energy-efficient, and
robust robotic fish fully actuated by smart material will be designed to meet
the maneuvering requirements of the proposed algorithms; (4) novel Magnetic
Induction (MI)-based underwater communication and localization solutions will be
developed, which allows robotic fish to timely and reliably exchange messages,
while simultaneously providing accurate inter-fish localization in the harsh 3D
underwater environment; and (5) the proposed sensing-motion co-design strategies
will be verified and demonstrated using a school of wirelessly interconnected
robotic fish in both lab-based experiments and field experiments.