* 1446310
* EAGER:  Reactive Sulfide Species: Ubiquitous and Primordial Signaling Molecules
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kenneth Olson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 359,933.00

Reactive oxygen species (ROS), superoxide and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) have long
been associated with oxidative stress, intracellular signaling, and deleterious
effects in biological systems. However, a large part of the evolution that led
to life as we know it and the conservation of mechanisms across species occurred
in anoxic and sulfidic environments. Evidence suggests that 'antioxidant
pathways' were developed long before the appearance of atmospheric oxygen.
Furthermore, many methods for measuring ROS are more sensitive to reactive
sulfide species (RSS), which are chemically more reactive and biologically more
versatile signaling molecules than ROS. The proposed research examines a novel
hypothesis that RSS, hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and polysulfides (H2Sn, n=2-7) are
involved in intracellular signaling, and in many instances RSS not ROS are the
true endogenous signals and may contribute to oxidative stress. It is also
proposed reactive nitrogen species (RNS), nitric oxide (NO-) and nitrite (NO2-)
were primordial oxygen acceptors and they interact with RSS in intracellular
signaling. This research will offer an alternative to the long-standing and
entrenched paradigm that ROS mediate intracellular signaling and oxidative
stress. It will show that RSS are highly reactive and versatile signaling
molecules in their own right and that many of the well-studied physiological and
pathological effects of ROS can be attributed to RSS. The research could open up
new fields of intracellular signaling and redox homeostasis, many of which will
be applicable in across biology disciplines and could even have considerable
therapeutic value. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will: examine
the redox chemistry of RSS; determine the contribution of RSS to redox signaling
in cells; and test whether H2S2 may be mistaken for H2O2 by some analytical
procedures. Aim 1 will use roGFP to monitor redox activity of RSS and how this
is affected by free metals, antioxidant enzymes (e.g., superoxide dismutase,
catalase, etc) and heme proteins (hemin, hemoglobin, myoglobin). These studies
will be done in normoxia, hypoxia and physiological pO2's, over a range of
physiological pH, and in the presence and absence of primordial electron
acceptors RNS. Sensitive H2S, O2 and NO amperometric electrodes will be employed
to monitor specific RSS reactions and reactions between ROS, RSS and RNS to
establish stoichiometric relationships. Aim 2 will examine the specific roles
enzymes associated with RSS biosynthesis by inhibition with competitive
inhibitors and siRNA. Aim 2 will also examine the effects of exogenous RSS and
mitochondrial-targeted H2S releasing drugs on cellular compartmental redox
state. Aim 3 will test whether 'specific' ROS assays can distinguish between ROS
and RSS. The PI's laboratory has long supported high school, undergraduate, and
graduate training and has especially fostered a learning environment for
minorities and under-represented groups. This project will provide the resources
for this training to continue. Results from the studies will be distributed
through presentations at scientific meetings and through peer-reviewed journal
publications.