* 1446619
* CPS: Breakthrough: A Mathematical Theory of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Edward Lee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,300.00

Title: CPS: Breakthrough: A Mathematical Theory of Cyber-Physical Systems

The fundamental challenge in cyber-physical systems is the confluence of
distinct scientific and engineering models, methods, and tools for cyber and
physical systems. Cyber systems are primarily about processing information.
Physical systems are primarily about structure and dynamics, the evolution of
state in time. This project develops a mathematical theory of cyber-physical
systems that provides a formal interface between the cyber and the physical. The
intellectual merits of the project are a solid basis for the modeling and design
as well as the implementation and verification of cyber-physical systems, and a
fruitful connection of the nascent discipline of cyber-physical-systems
engineering with standard mathematical practice. The project's broader
significance and importance are providing a sound foundation by which cyber-
physical system technologies can be assessed, and enabling the discipline of
cyber-physical-system engineering to evolve into a mature and durable field of
study.

The project builds on the theory of generalized ultrametric semilattices and the
fixed-point theory of strictly contracting functions on generalized ultrametric
semilattices to develop a cyber-physical domain theory, providing a firm
mathematical footing for arbitrary composition and higher-order behavior,
formulating the right notion of convergence and continuity for cyber-physical
computation, and developing a notion of approximation and effectiveness that
allows for a two-way connection between the abstractions of the theory and the
realizations of practice. It further applies the theory to a wide range of
classic problems of modeling and simulating mixed discrete and continuous
phenomena, and extends it to embrace the discrete interventions of a cyber
subsystem on its physical counterpart in a cyber-physical system. It also
investigates the practical implications of the theory for the implementation and
verification of cyber-physical systems by reexamining currently used timed
models of computation through the prism of the theory, exploring the extension
of programming languages with temporal constructs that are complete over the
theoretical abstractions, and integrating the theory in automated and
interactive theorem provers to supplement existing model-checking methods that
might succumb to the scale of cyber-physical systems.