* 1446641
* Collaborative Research: Personalizing Recommendations in a Large-scale Education Analytics Pipeline
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Zachary Pardos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 01/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

This pilot project aims to begin to organize the world's digital learning
resources to make personalized recommendations to learners that are engaging and
effective in increasing mathematics learning outcomes. The project accomplishes
this goal by developing crowdsourcing techniques to organize learning resources
and by analyzing the online learning activities of the student. Teachers are an
integral part of this project. The target audience for this pilot is 7th grade
mathematics students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon
the Gooru platform that serves a community of over 500,000 in 140 countries and
all 50 US states. The platform uses crowdsourcing by its community to curate
over 70,000 collections of free web resources consisting of over 16,000,000
education resources. This project builds upon the Gooru resources by using
learning analytics on the user interactions within Gooru to discover the
resources that most benefit students. Thus, student resources can be tailored to
the individual student to maximally engage the student and improve the students
learning. Since the Gooru user owns his or her data, explicit opt-in is required
for the sharing of data thus protecting the privacy of students who wish not to
share their data. Gooru is open source and free so there are no economic
barriers (besides internet access) to using the platform.