* 1446870
* Threshold hydrologic change across the intermittent-persistent snow transition
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Stephanie Kampf, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 268,080.00

This project will develop a geographic synthesis of snow, streamflow, and soil
moisture data across the western U.S. and the analyses will provide key
information that can be used to identify areas most vulnerable to large
hydrologic changes due to smaller snowpack accumulation. Datasets produced will
be publicly available and this information can be incorporated into land and
aquatic resource management, particularly in locations that lack hydrologic
data. The project will train a PhD student and undergraduate research
assistants, develop an interactive digital display for education outreach and
student recruitment, and develop a hydrology class activity using soil moisture
simulations. Loss of persistent winter snowpack impacts water resources in
mountain and high latitude regions throughout the world, and the need to
understand water resource vulnerability to snow loss is pressing. The central
hypothesis guiding this research is that loss of a persistent snowpack triggers
changes in both stream flow and soil moisture, but the magnitude of this change
is greater in more arid climates. This project will document the geographic
distribution of intermittent-persistent snow transitions in the western U.S. and
examine how streamflow and soil moisture are affected by these transitions. Snow
transitions will be mapped using both MODIS snow cover imagery and snow water
equivalent data from SNOTEL sites. Indices of snow transitions will then be
compared to streamflow and soil moisture data at both annual-decadal time scales
and event-seasonal time scales. HYDRUS-1D simulations of soil moisture changes
in response to varying scenarios of snow persistence will be developed for
SNOTEL sites in two different climate regions to examine how process
interactions between snow loss and hydrologic response vary with climate. The
study synthesizes a top-down approach examining runoff and soil moisture changes
across geographic gradients of snow persistence with a bottom-up process
modeling approach examining how soil moisture responds to a transition from
persistent to intermittent snow. The multi-scale approach will help in
understanding how regional long-term patterns link with local conditions in
individual seasons.