* 1446993
* EAGER Proposal: Preliminary Studies for a Dark Photon Search
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Peter Wittich, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2016
* USD 32,913.00

Particle Physics is the science of discovery of the fundamental constituents of
matter and energy and is involved in the exploration of the Universe from the
smallest to the largest scales. A remarkable achievement of Twentieth Century
Particle Physics was the development of the Standard Model that describes
impressively well a broad spectrum of fundamental particles such as quarks and
leptons and the interactions (the forces) among them. But the Standard Model is
incomplete and we know there is important physics that lies beyond it. What is
the evidence? As an example, astronomical observations indicate that the known
particles of the Standard Model make up only 1/6 of the total matter in the
Universe. The remainder is called "Dark Matter" because we don't see it
directly. A number of experiments are underway or in the planning stage to look
for the Dark Matter, which might be one type of particle or possibly many or
perhaps something else entirely. One hypothesized Dark Matter particle is called
the Dark Photon (labeled the A') and it is expected to interact with the photon
of the Standard Model (known to most of us as a gamma
ray).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This EArly concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) supports preliminary studies by a Cornell group led
by Professor Peter Wittich to assess the technical feasibility, optimal design,
physics reach, and approximate cost of a "high risk-high payoff" dark photon
(A') search experiment at the Cornell Wilson Synchrotron Laboratory. The
intended goal is to produce the A' in the reaction: (e+) + (e-) -&gt; photon +
A'. A positron (e+) beam is to be extracted from the synchrotron and directed
onto a liquid hydrogen target that will provide the source of target electrons
(which are constituents within the hydrogen atoms). The outgoing photon is
detected in a crystal electromagnetic calorimeter and the A' itself is not
detected directly, but rather is "observed" via its potential signature in the
measured missing mass distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy of this
dark photon search will differ from existing and planned experiments in several
respects: (a) the dark photon is identified by a missing-mass technique, so the
search does not depend on a specific decay mode, as most competing experiments
do; (b) there is no assumption about dark photon lifetime, as is built into many
experiments that use long beam dumps or electron-positron vertexing; and (c)
there is no requirement that the dark photon decay at all. The only critical
assumption needed for this search is that the dark photon should interact with
ordinary photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses two of the
science drivers of the recently released Report of the Particle Physics Project
Prioritization Panel (called P5): Dark Matter and the Search for New Particles
and Interactions. The unique facility provided by the Cornell storage ring's
positron beam would allow this group to probe a new regime in Dark Matter
physics, and also to possibly help explain the so-called "g-2 anomaly", a
potentially related and highly interesting topic of current experimental
research. Searching for this kind of physics beyond the Standard Model confronts
fundamental symmetries, the nature of mass, the dimensionality of space, and the
cosmological origins of our universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposal includes training of undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-
edge research techniques associated with this EAGER project. Additionally the
principal investigators on the proposal all contribute to an extensive program
of outreach at Cornell: to local K-12 schools, including both in-school programs
and out-of-school workshops for teachers, educators, and high school students;
to the general public; and to undergraduates.