* 1446518
* Scarcity and Enabling Adoption and Sustained Use of New Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Ayelet Gneezy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

Adoption of new technologies that would be beneficial to developing and rural
communities is not just a matter of improved materials and technology. Benefits
cannot be realized without sufficiently-wide adoption and sustained use.
However, successful introduction and continued use remain a significant
challenge in development efforts across all kinds of interventions. Our project
addresses the problems of introducing beneficial new technologies; in
particular, our goal is to determine the effect of a "hard to get" strategy on
adoption and usage. We will compare novel allocation procedures for introducing
improved technologies. Our comparison will include laboratory experiments in
advance to inform the design of our randomized controlled trial (RCT). We expect
that our laboratory experiments will help in designing the RCT that will be
conducted in a set of villages--with an introduction of new technology via
limited availability (i.e., scarce supply)--will have increased desirability,
uptake rates, adoption, and sustained use. This project assessing methods of
scale-up to sustainability will serve as a pilot for a larger-scale
implementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current proposal is for conducting a
proof of concept laboratory experiments for a 'hard to get design.' We will be
comparing methods of scale-up to sustainability: traditional all-at-once
distribution versus slow rollout based on need, thereby creating scarcity and
presumably increasing interest and demand for a new technology. Before rolling
out the large field experiments, we will pilot some of the behavioral mechanisms
in lab experiments. The goal of the laboratory experiments is to pilot with
different variations of the basic idea of scarcity, trying to better understand
the psychology and refine the method before implementing it in the field.