* 1446148
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Development Of Hierarchical Status Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Researchers seek understanding of the processes that led to the very complex,
large-scale societies in which most of the world's population now lives, and of
the factors that bound their members together and fostered continued
development. Archaeology is uniquely able to study the origins of complex
societies because their beginnings occurred far back in time, well beyond the
reach of written history. The pathways followed in the development of the
earliest complex societies were diverse, and they led to forms of complex social
organization with highly varied characteristics. In many instances there is
conspicuous archaeological evidence of the emergence of permanent institutions
of leadership, forged by ambitious individuals pursuing their own aims and
objectives. As these aspiring leaders marshaled resources to further their
interests, they increasingly comprised an elite group set off from the majority
of the population in one or more ways, including the accumulation of wealth,
higher standards of living, prestige, power, military authority, ritual roles,
and other social characteristics. The economic foundations of these elite groups
could be constructed with resources obtained in a variety of ways. Agricultural
production could be intensified by constructing systems to regulate water
supplies and protect crops from drought or flooding. Control of the importation
of materials not available locally could reinforce a privileged elite position.
Fostering local craft production and exchange could also provide elites with a
source of income with which to pursue their political ambitions. If conflict
with neighboring societies were prevalent, elites could solidify their positions
of leadership by organizing either offensive or defensive military
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to document the
strategies pursued by emerging elites in the Casanare region of the Orinoco
drainage in the Llanos zone at the foot of the Andes of Colombia. The overall
environmental setting, as well as initial archaeological information, suggest
that intensive agriculture in raised field systems was a major source of
resources for these elites, as it was elsewhere in the Llanos. The presence of
nearby highly developed Muisca chiefdoms, however, provided Casanare elites with
particular opportunities for focusing on specialized production and medium-
distance exchange--opportunities that were not available to emerging elites in
other parts of the Llanos. Warfare appears, initially, to have been less
prevalent in Casanare than it was elsewhere. The researchers will verify or
correct these initial impressions and determine what impact these different
opportunities for emerging elites had on the nature and timing of the
development of initial complex social organization in the Casanare region. Local
cultural and educational groups will be important collaborators, facilitating
access to essential environmental information; the project will in turn
contribute data on the archaeological remains of early societies in the region
to aid in heritage preservation efforts. Local students will also participate in
the field and laboratory work, gaining first-hand experience of scientific
research. It will also further the academic and intellectual development of Mr.
Juan Carlos Vargas Ruiz the co-Principal Investigator who will conduct the
project as part of his doctoral dissertation work.