* 1446219
* APS DFD Participant Travel Support - 67th Annual DFD Meeting 2014 in San Francisco, CA, November 23-25, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Ken Cole, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

The proposal seeks funds to partially cover travel expenses of invited speakers
and student participants and organizing expenses related to the conference
entitled, "American Physical Society, Division of Fluid Dynamics, 67th Annual
DFD Meeting 2014" in San Francisco, CA, November 23-25, 2014. This is the
largest international annual meeting of fluid dynamicists in the world, with
2,500 anticipated attendees. The meeting has been successfully run for over
sixty five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The priorities of the travel grant
program are to partially fund students, young scientists, and, in general,
scientists from under-represented groups. The APS DFD Executive Committee plans
to contribute $20,000 and the American Institute for Physics plans to contribute
$10,000 to the overall budget for travel awards. This total amount expected is
$55,000 to facilitate travel subsidies and registration fee coverage for about
65 participants. The chief intellectual merit of this conference lies in the
exchange of scientific ideas, presentations of cutting edge research, and
exposure to a richly diverse array of topics in virtually every sub-discipline
of fluid dynamics. The broader impact will be to increase participation of
students and young scientists who would not otherwise be able to afford to
travel to the meeting and pay associated costs. Preference is given: (i) to
those presenting talks at the meeting, (ii) to students, (iii) to those who have
not received such an award in the past, and (iv) to no more than one applicant
from a given research adviser. Since the awards are meant to supplement
participant travel funds, not to cover these entirely, the committee takes into
account the travel budget entered on the application. Special effort is made to
achieve diverse participation from underrepresented groups in engineering,
including women and members of minority groups. Even though the conference is
attended by worldwide attendees, the NSF support will fund individuals from the
US.