* 1446543
* Characterizing fault zones at Kilauea &amp; Mauna Loa volcanoes by large-scale mapping of earthquake stress drops and focal mechanisms
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Robin Matoza, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 220,000.00

The analysis and interpretation of seismic sources from within Earth's mantle up
to the surface plays a key role in understanding how volcanoes work. Hawaii
Island is one of the most tectonically, volcanically, and seismically active
regions on Earth. The USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO) operates a seismic
network that has recorded over 260,000 earthquakes since 1986, but this rich
dataset has not been fully exploited. This project supports collaboration
between HVO, U.C. Santa Barbara, and U.C. San Diego to apply a number of new
large-dataset processing methods to learn more about seismic activity on Hawaii
and its relationship to faults and volcanoes. It also supports the educational
program at U.C. Santa Barbara by providing funds for graduate student support.
The results from this study are expected to yield a sharper and more
comprehensive view of fault zone characteristics as well as generate public
databases of high-resolution information on seismicity characteristics, suitable
for other researchers in their studies of Hawaiian geology, tectonics, and
volcanism. This research will lead to improved descriptions of seismicity and
tectonics for Hawaii, which will improve our ability to monitor and characterize
volcanic and earthquake hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By performing systematic
and comprehensive analyses of seismicity recorded by HVO, this work will improve
earthquake location precision, provide robust estimates of the patterns of
earthquake stress drops, and compute more reliable earthquake focal mechanisms
on Hawaii. Integrating these results will better characterize crustal and mantle
fault zones and magma conduits in and around Kilauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes,
and will help to resolve the relationships between seismicity, volcanic
activity, and strain transients. Our results will address the following
questions: (1) Relocated microearthquakes in Hawaii align along resolvable fault
and conduit structures?what do these structures reveal about tectonic and
volcanic processes? (2) What is the origin of recently discovered seismicity
rings in Hawaii? (3) How do the stress drops of Hawaiian earthquakes compare to
other regions? Are there variations in earthquake stress drops that can be used
to characterize stress field heterogeneity and identify regions of stress
concentration? (4) Can focal mechanisms be improved for small earthquakes in
Hawaii and what do they reveal about the faulting process and stress state? (5)
Can repeating earthquakes with nearly identical waveforms be used to resolve
temporal variations in seismic velocity associated with tectonic and volcanic
activity? (6) How do the characteristics of long-period (LP, 0.5-5 Hz)
seismicity at Kilauea volcano relate to redistributions of magma and stress
within its magma supply system?