* 1446275
* Nano Risk Analysis (II): A Workshop to Explore How a Multiple Models Approach can Advance Risk Analysis of Nanoscale Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* JoAnne Shatkin, Society For Risk Analysis
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,200.00

PI: JoAnne Shatkin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET -
1446275&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano Risk Analysis (II): A
Workshop to Explore How a Multiple Models Approach can Advance Risk Analysis of
Nanoscale Materials, September 15-16, 2014, George Washington University,
Washington, DC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for support of the Society
for Risk Analysis (SRA) to convene a public, multi-stakeholder workshop
exploring the integration of a multiple-methods approach into screening level
risk-assessment of ENM, to be held September 15-16, 2014 at George Washington
University in Washington, DC. Despite a decade of effort to use toxicology and
exposure research to aid the assessment of health and environmental risks of
nanomaterials, major gaps remain in our ability to understand and quantify such
risks from engineered nanoscale materials (ENM). One pressing gap is the need is
to develop reliable approaches for evaluating and classifying novel ENM
substances through screening techniques. Alternative Testing Strategies (ATS),
which can include high throughput screening methods (HTS), and other methods,
have the potential for rapid screening of large numbers and types of materials.
However, existing and emerging ATS are not yet reliable enough for quantitative
estimation of ENM risk. This workshop is to explore ways in which the different
ATS may be combined to create a multiple models approach that can increase the
confidence in vitro tests so that they can be relied upon for deciding whether
more extensive testing of novel ENM are needed in specific cases. In addition to
technical experts and representatives from research and industry, diverse
environmental, consumer, labor, and animal rights groups, as well as other
professional societies and their members are also invited to participate. The
participation of such broad, horizontal sectors associated with ENM risk
assessments will assure the rapid dissemination of results of the discussions,
results that can inform and aid the progress of assessment of health and
environmental risks of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives
of the workshop are to: (i) assess the state of the science on HTS and ATS from
a "multiple models" perspective; (ii) evaluate the ability to use data from
ATS/HTS methods for screening purposes; (iii) assess the ability to use a suite
of ATS methods to amplify the Weight of Evidence; (iv) characterize and address
uncertainty associated with predictive relationships; (v) elicit the
perspectives of diverse stakeholders about the use of HTS/ATS for screening
purposes in risk analysis of ENM; and (vi) develop a set of recommendations for
these alternative approaches to become more widely adopted for environmental,
health and safety decision making about ENM across the product life cycle. The
unique contribution of this workshop is the translation of research into a
Weight of Evidence (WoE) approach using ATS for screening-level decisions in
risk analysis. The output of the workshop will be a set of recommendations
reported to the OECD WPMN and via peer reviewed publications about ways in which
these approaches may be practically applied in the near term to improve
environmental decision making by governmental and industrial organizations. Such
an output holds potential for transformation through risk screening approaches
that promote safer and more sustainable substance and technology development.