* 1446236
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling Transport in Porous Media through the Integration of Isotopic Tracers, Geophysical Data, and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 04/30/2019
* USD 144,093.00

Various estimates suggest that economic liabilities associated with contaminated
groundwater sites in the U.S. run into the hundreds of billions of dollars. Each
of these sites poses a potential threat to the environment and human health;
nearly 90% of the conventional court-mandated strategies fail to remediate
polluted sites adequately. In many cases, these failures can be attributed to
remediation strategies that rely on classical conceptual models of contaminant
transport, which neither represent subsurface heterogeneity sufficiently nor
capture preferential flow and low permeability solute traps. As a result, the
application of models to practical problems retains significant uncertainty.
While many different models for transport exist, understanding which is "most
correct" for a given problem is fundamental to the prediction of contaminant
transport and reaction and site clean-up. This project will utilize methods from
the fields of contaminant transport, geophysics, elemental and isotope
geochemistry, and mixing-driven reactions to address this need. The research
will ultimately enable significantly improved remediation design strategies and
improved assessment of human health risk from contaminated groundwater sites. As
part of this research, new high school chemistry labs will be developed
following the Colorado high school curriculum focusing on acid-base chemistry,
pH buffers, and metal geochemistry in collaboration with a Denver public high
school. These labs will be disseminated beyond local development via the
National Earth Science Teachers Association's "The Earth Scientist" Journal.

The reliability of contaminant transport predictions depends on the
appropriateness of the numerical/conceptual model to site geology. The primary
questions are: (1) which physically measureable parameters control solute mass
transfer and geochemical reactions, (2) which parameters can be predicted a
priori, and (3) which mathematical formulations accurately describe site
specific transport under varying flow rates and heterogeneity. The main
limitation of many existing transport models is the poor connection between
fitting parameters governing solute transport in models and the physical system.
The objective of the work is to explore controls on the poor predictive ability
of existing physical transport models, especially those that include chemical
reaction. Diffusion-induced elemental fractionation, diffusion-induced lithium
isotopic fractionation, and geophysical characterization will be integrated to
explore the controls on solute transport and reaction. While conservative tracer
concentrations have been used to constrain advective-dispersive transport
parameters in the past, isotopic tracers fractionate during diffusion and can
therefore provide information on immobile pore space in cases where diffusion
dominates ion transport. The power of this project will be to add significant
constraints to the controls of known parameters in solute transport modeling,
determine their controls on transport processes, and quantify the distribution
of transport length scales active in a porous medium and the subsequent impact
on reaction kinetics. The experimental data produced will be used to validate
existing theories commonly used by the hydrology community (i.e., "local" versus
"non-local" transport), and explore new theories as motivated by emerging data,
if needed, to develop new insight into transport and reaction behavior.