* 1446899
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy:  Collaborative Research: Calibration of Personal Air Quality Sensors in the Field - Coping with Noise and Extending Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Michael Hannigan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 290,007.00

All cyber-physical systems (CPS) depend on properly calibrated sensors to sense
the surrounding environment. Unfortunately, the current state of the art is that
calibration is often a manual and expensive operation; moreover, many types of
sensors, especially economical ones, must be recalibrated often. This is
typically costly, performed in a lab environment, requiring that sensors be
removed from service. MetaSense will reduce the cost and management burden of
calibrating sensors. The basic idea is that if two sensors are co-located, then
they should report similar values; if they do not, the least-recently-calibrated
sensor is suspect. Building on this idea, this project will provide an
autonomous system and a set of algorithms that will automate the detection of
calibration issues and preform recalibration of sensors in the field, removing
the need to take sensors offline and send them to a laboratory for calibration.
The outcome of this project will transform the way sensors are engineered and
deployed, increasing the scale of sensor network deployment. This in turn will
increase the availability of environmental data for research, medical, personal,
and business use. MetaSense researchers will leverage this new data to provide
early warning for factors that could negatively affect health. In addition,
graduate student engagement in the research will help to maintain the STEM
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage large networks of
mobile sensors connected to the cloud. The cloud will enable using large data
repositories and computational power to cross-reference data from different
sensors and detect loss of calibration. The theory of calibration will go beyond
classical models for computation and physics of CPS. The project will combine
big data, machine learning, and analysis of the physics of sensors to calculate
two factors that will be used in the calibration. First, MetaSense researchers
will identify measurement transformations that, applied in software after the
data collection, will generate calibrated results. Second, the researchers will
compute the input for an on-board signal-conditioning circuit that will enable
improving the sensitivity of the physical measurement. The project will
contribute research results in multiple disciplines. In the field of software
engineering, the project will contribute a new theory of service reconfiguration
that will support new architecture and workflow languages. New technologies are
needed because the recalibration will happen when the machine learning
algorithms discover calibration errors, after the data has already been
collected and processed. These technologies will support modifying not only the
raw data in the database by applying new calibration corrections, but also the
results of calculations that used the data. In the field of machine learning,
the project will provide new algorithms for dealing with spatiotemporal maps of
noisy sensor readings. In particular, the algorithms will work with Gaussian
processes and the results of the research will provide more meaningful
confidence intervals for these processes, substantially increasing the
effectiveness of MetaSense models compared to the current state of the art. In
the field of pervasive computing, the project will build on the existing
techniques for context-aware sensing to increase the amount of information
available to the machine learning algorithms for inferring calibration
parameters. Adding information about the sensing context is paramount to achieve
correct calibration results. For example, a sensor that measures air pollution
inside a car on a highway will get very different readings if the car window is
open or closed. Finally, the project will contribute innovations in sensor
calibration hardware. Here, the project will contribute innovative signal-
conditioning circuits that will interact with the cloud system and receive
remote calibration parameters identified by the machine learning algorithms.
This will be a substantial advance over current circuits based on simple
feedback loops because it will have to account for the cloud and machine
learning algorithms in the loop and will have to perform this more complex
calibration with power and bandwidth constraints. Inclusion of graduate students
in the research helps to maintain the STEM pipeline.