* 1446319
* Collaborative Research: Systematic Review of Studies to Improve Success in STEM Degree Programs of Hispanic Students Matriculating through Two-year Institutions
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Jeffrey Froyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 71,381.00

This project is a comprehensive synthesis of existing primary studies of
transfer of Hispanic students from 2-year to 4-year institutions. Although
substantial research has identified cultural and socioeconomic challenges facing
Hispanic students in higher education, much less is known about Hispanic STEM
students, and virtually no large scale studies have studied Hispanic STEM
transfer students specifically. The study will identify patterns of successes
and failures of Hispanic STEM transfer students and identify factors related to
effectiveness of interventions to promote transfer, retention, and graduation of
Hispanic STEM undergraduates. This synthesis will contribute to achieving PCAST
recommendations for a million more STEM graduates by 2018, supporting efforts
within federal agencies to improve the success of under-represented students in
STEM, and increasing knowledge about what works based on a comprehensive
synthesis of published research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research question
guiding this systematic review is: What student and contextual characteristics
and interventions have prior studies identified as supporting successful
transfer and STEM bachelor's degree completion of Hispanic students who
matriculate at two-year institutions? A preliminary scoping review of several
databases yielded 1,328 potential sources to inform this systematic review to
develop a framework specific to Hispanic STEM transfer students. Most retention
and transfer work has been based on a framework of social integration. A good
example of this framework is: Vincent Tinto, "Leaving college: Rethinking the
causes and cures of student attrition," Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1993. This perspective has been found by some to be less relevant to Hispanic
students. An example is the work of Tatiana Melguizo, "Are community colleges an
alternative path for Hispanic students to attain a bachelor's degree?" Teachers
College Record, Volume 110, No. 12, 2008.