* 1446393
* Workshop on Leading Organizational Change: An Integrated, Multi-Level Perspective - April 17-18, 2015, University of Maryland College Park, MD
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* M Taylor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 46,674.00

This two day workshop will bring together an international group of scholars
from several disciplines -- communication, engineering, management, and
sociology, as well as a smaller number of senior, highly experienced,
organizational change leaders. The workshop will examine the central question of
how to lead change successfully in the future so that change success rates
consistently exceed the widely cited 30-50% range, when compared to objectives
set by organizations prior to change. Both global organizational surveys, as
well as academic studies, find that organizational change often yields a variety
of negative results affecting many segments of society including: budget over-
runs conservatively estimated at 134% of the original plan; greatly diminished
staff resources that include high stress levels, demanding workloads, and
negative emotional reactions; and loss of valuable time with little to no
organizational gain in competitiveness, goal achievement or business value.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the workshop are to identify, examine,
research, discuss, and begin to achieve consensus on:&lt;br/&gt;1) The
contextual factors, operating at multiple levels, and affecting the success
rates of organizational change, both episodic and continuous;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Different roles played by change leadership in initiating, facilitating,
implementing, and/or sustaining change&lt;br/&gt;3) Different methods,
processes, and styles of leadership making change success likely;&lt;br/&gt;4)
The multi-level effects within organizational change and the processes through
which these effects impact the success of leading organizational
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This workshop comes at a
critical point in research on organizational change. On one hand, a major type
of change, episodic change, is described as infrequent, discontinuous,
intentional and led from the top down in terms of the organizational hierarchy.
Although this change is occurring more and more frequently, many senior change
leaders report serious deficits in their organizations' knowledge and
capabilities to enact change successfully. On the other hand, a second major
type of change, continuous change, is believed by many change scholars to
possess high potential for improving the quality, innovation and success rate of
organizational change. Continuous change is characterized as ongoing, evolving,
cumulative, emergent rather than planned, and generally enacted from the bottom
up. Yet to date, there is limited conceptual research on continuous change and
virtually no empirical studies to strengthen our understanding of how it
develops, the current success rates, and the types of change leadership that are
likely to be more or less successful in shaping such change. Thus, this workshop
provides a valuable opportunity to enhance and extend our knowledge about
factors affecting the success of leading organizational change, both episodic
and continuous, and to decrease the negative effects of change that affect many
aspects of society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This workshop includes
expert participants of different academic disciplines, business functional
areas, genders, nationalities, and industries. We expect the research and ideas
discussed at the workshop to be presented and published in a variety of outlets
and media, making them generally available to academic scholars, senior leaders,
doctoral students, change managers, professional associations and the public at
large. As a result, the workshop will not only advance research but also inform
practice about leading organizational change successfully.