* 1446451
* Broadening Participation in the National Geoscience Workforce:  The National Association of Black Geoscientists Technical Conference 2014
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This award will provide support to defray expenses of student participants
attending the 33rd Annual Technical Conference of the National Association of
Black Geoscientists (NABG), September 17-20 2014, at the Washington State
University campus on the Hanford Nuclear Reservation, Richland, WA. The NABG
conference theme will be "Environmental Ideas for the Future", where
"Environmental Ideas" might refer to the ecological environment, the economic
environment, or the social environment, as well as traditional and non-
traditional energy resources, all of which are undergoing unprecedented changes
at this time. The primary goal of NABG is to mentor and advise students from
under-represented backgrounds pursuing BS, MS, and PhD degrees in scientific,
technical, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines, providing a
competent and diverse workforce fulfilling critical national needs for the 21st
Century. Professional members serve as role models to participating students,
and engage in a number of mentoring activities including constructive criticism
of student research projects, career counseling, guidance related to
professional behavior and academic advising. The meeting serves as an
opportunity for academic institutions, government agencies, and the
energy/environmental industry to recruit students from underrepresented groups
to STEM disciplines and employment in the national geosciences workforce.