* 1446959
* RAPID: Paleontological Reconnaissance of Threatened, Submerged Primate Fossils in a Flooded Cave
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Alfred Rosenberger, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 60,603.00

The effects of two major causes of habitat loss and community extinction - human
agency and climate change - can be difficult to distinguish for both scientists
and policy makers. Remedies, which can have major social and economic
consequences, must be based on sound science and ample data. The fossil record
represents one of the few ways heavily impacted or now-extinct habitats and
communities can be reconstructed to perform the before-and-after studies leading
to a better understanding of historical processes on an ecosystem scale. A rich
new source of this fossilized information, rare because it comes as a virtually
intact ecological community and time slice, has been discovered in a large
flooded cave in Madagascar. This fossil 'graveyard" contains abundant fossilized
material from extinct forms of the unique Malagasy primate taxa referred to as
lemurs, as well as remains of other animals that co-existed with them, and in a
geological context that exists in many parts of the world where comparably
valuable prehistoric information can be expected.

The ultimate goal of the project initiated through this immediate research will
test the hypothesis that fossiliferous submerged caves preserve a more
comprehensive taxonomic cross-section of a natural community, represented by
more complete, more interpretable remains than is typical of paleontological
sites reflecting the millennial timeframe of recent human occupation. The most
pressing goal is to pilot the methods needed to document the extent of these
scientific resources for the first time. The site is in need of immediate
attention because it is unknown to both local policy makers and the
international community, and it is not protected from human disturbance or loss
of the fossils. The environment is sensitive to climatic and geological factors
which can rapidly harm fragile specimens or destroy them entirely. The need is
exigent because global priorities recognize that understanding the causes of
ecological degradation is a precondition to finding solutions to the
humanitarian and wildlife consequences, especially in fragile island ecosystems
such as found on Madagascar.

The methods used to document the biodiversity, abundance and completeness of
this resource involve detailed mapping of the spatial distribution of fossils
within the more outwardly accessible and deeper parts of the cave, using a grid
system and high-resolution digital underwater videography and close-up
photography, which will make it possible to taxonomically identify fossils and
prioritize their extraction. The research team consists of six experienced,
fossil-collecting divers, including two videographers and two scientists
specializing in primate evolution.