* 1446001
* NUE: An lnterdisciplinary Practicum Approach to Nanotechnology Curricula lntegration
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Saniya LeBlanc, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2017
* USD 207,935.00

The objectives of this NUE project, An Interdisciplinary Practicum Approach to
Nanotechnology Curricula Integration, at George Washington University (GWU)
under the direction of Dr. Saniya LeBlanc are to develop cohorts of highly
trained students using a two-year Nanotechnology Fellows Program comprised of
undergraduate students who progress from trainees to experts on new nano-
fabrication and characterization tools. 2. Integrate nanotechnology research and
concepts into the curriculum across multiple disciplines and years through two
new courses, Nanotechnology Devices &amp; Systems: How They Are Made, Measured,
and Monetized and Connecting Nanotechnology to Your World. 3. Provide teaching
and learning resources and experiences for college and 6-12 grade teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program targets students early in their
undergraduate careers and brings together students from a wide range of
disciplines including science, engineering, business, and policy. It provides
these students with intense training on sophisticated equipment and engages them
with nanotechnology research and applications. Pulling from multiple
departments, it creates a community of students who undergo learning and
training together while contributing perspectives from diverse disciplinary and
personal backgrounds. The proposed courses would achieve integration of
nanotechnology into multiple departments curricula without requiring extensive
modification of core curriculum classes or adding significant credit
requirements. Projects will increase student interest in nanotechnology and core
curricula by providing real-world examples of how they are related. The proposed
program uses undergraduate students as nanotechnology ambassadors who
disseminate nanotechnology into the broader community through innovative,
interactive resources which are shared with college and middle and high school
teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These activities will create and
prepare a future workforce to invent and implement next-generation technologies.
Student-developed teaching and leaerning resources will be disseminated across
GWU, to other universities, and into the hands of teachers and students at all-
girls and multicultural schools in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.