* 1446430
* EAGER - Strengthening Student Commitment through an Engineering Abroad Program (SSC-EAP)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jo-Ann Panzardi, Cabrillo College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2017
* USD 289,839.00

This project by Cabrillo College is working to develop an effective approach in
undergraduate engineering education for students at this two-year Hispanic-
Serving Institution (HSI). This research focuses on developing strategies that
enhance interest and motivation of students and improve persistence and
graduation rates in undergraduate STEM programs at Hispanic-Serving
Institutions. This project will evaluate the impact that an engineering service-
learning abroad project has on Latino and low-income students' academic
commitment and persistence in completing engineering degrees. Engineering
service-learning abroad activities are effective motivators and career
development experiences for students. Such experiences instill an appreciation
for the world-changing potential that engineering offers. However, often the
high cost of participation in service-learning abroad makes these experiences
effectively out-of-reach for many engineering students attending two-year
colleges. This project will expand the existing engineering service-learning
abroad program at Cabrillo and make it possible for low income students to
participate. It is expected that engineering service-learning abroad will have a
positive influence on their commitment to engineering careers and persistence to
degree completion. This study will accumulate data to test this hypothesis. A
positive result will provide useful information regarding strategies that might
be used to increase the number of low-income and Latino students who persist in
engineering majors and complete degrees.

Cabrillo College Engineering Abroad Program conducts engineering service-
learning abroad activities. The out-of-county component to this program takes
place in Latin America. The existing program will be expanded in the course of
this study. Projects focus on areas of dire need and the recent engineering
abroad project was a rainwater catchment system to provide potable water to a
small village. Initial work at Cabrillo indicates the potential of this
engineering service learning abroad program to enhance the interest and
motivation of students and improve their persistence. Initial work shows Latino
student participants are integral to the project team because of their unique
understanding of Hispanic culture and their skill as translators. Many Latino
students have not traveled outside the United States. However their unique
background results in their serving as leaders of the group which is the reverse
of their experience in traditional classrooms. These experiences were found to
have a dramatic impact on Latino student feelings of self-efficacy and
empowerment. This project will more thoroughly investigate and document these
results.

The project will yield evaluation data regarding the extent to which these
activities have improved the skills of the participants. Established service-
learning assessment methods will be used to measure: civic engagement, industry-
relevant skills, global/cultural skills, personal growth, academic and career
growth, and engineering skills. Other quantitative measurements will compare the
academic performance and degree progress of students participating in the
engineering abroad experience to corresponding outcomes achieved by students in
a comparison group. Qualitative analyses will be employed to explore how the
experience abroad may have contributed to changes in students' confidence, plans
for the future, perception of themselves as leaders, and commitment to the field
of engineering.