* 1446231
* Collaborative Research:  From Roots to Rock - Linking Evapotranspiration and Groundwater Fluxes in the Critical Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kamini Singha, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,771.00

The water cycle describes the movement of water on, above, and below Earth's
surface and establishes where water exists. Fluxes quantify the rate of water
movement among reservoirs such as groundwater, surface water, and atmospheric
water vapor. Evapotranspiration is the primary mechanism supporting the surface-
to-atmosphere water flux; it is the combined effect of evaporation from surface-
water bodies and transpiration by plants drawing water from the soil and
evaporating it from leaf surfaces. The National Research Council has identified
understanding the interconnections between evapotranspiration and groundwater
fluxes to be one of the most important challenges facing hydrologists today.
This project addresses a critical knowledge gap in how subsurface water storage
mediates the connection between evapotranspiration and groundwater dynamics such
as water-table elevation and flow rates. Elucidating the connections between
evapotranspiration and groundwater recharge that may limit irrigation
agriculture and aquifer pumping is directly relevant to societal needs for food
and water. The study focuses on a long-term research site in Oregon. Based on
global climate models of the Pacific Northwest, stresses placed on groundwater
by prolonged evapotranspiration are likely to become increasingly important to
water availability for downstream communities. Results from this work will be
incorporated into undergraduate curriculums. Underrepresented undergraduates
will be engaged and mentored throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
conceptual models have been developed to explain evapotranspiration-baseflow
interactions - riparian interception and hydraulic pumping - but their
implications for critical zone models have yet to be explored. This project will
test these conceptual models through isotopic measurements and subsurface
imaging. The project will (1) use the temporal and spatial change in soil and
tree xylem water isotopes to examine subsurface connections between
transpiration, groundwater and streamflow; (2) image changes in moisture content
in the subsurface through the weathered saprolite and into the unweathered
critical zone; and (3) assess the importance of subsurface properties and
antecedent moisture on the transfer of the evapotranspiration signal to the
stream. The research will provide novel contributions by (1) identifying the
mechanisms by which subsurface hydrological responses are coupled to tree
physiological processes at the hillslope scale and (2) integrating real-time
observations, isotopic analysis, and geophysical approaches to identify how
evapotranspiration-groundwater interactions vary with space, time, and
antecedent moisture. These results can transform the understanding of the
interactions among surface water, groundwater, and soil moisture and the role of
vegetation dynamics controlling the multi-scale hydrological functioning of
terrestrial ecosystems.