* 1446891
* CPS: Synergy: Triggered Control of Cyber Physical Systems with Communication Channels Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

Cyber physical systems extend the range of human capabilities in an increasing
number of areas with high societal and economic impact, such as smart energy,
intelligent transportation, advanced manufacturing, health technology, and the
environment. Their successful operation requires the close integration of
communication, sensing, actuation, control, and computation. However, advances
in these fields have not always been well coordinated. Information theory, for
instance, studies how to compress and protect information communicating over
noisy channels, while in many control applications communication is abstracted
as being instantaneous and reliable. Information theory states that long codes
are desirable to protect data against channel noise, but for control
applications long delays are not acceptable. On the other hand, triggered
control takes an opportunistic approach to decide when actions should be taken
to make the system operate efficiently, but largely ignores the constraints
imposed by communication. This proposal contributes to the development of a
common theoretical framework for control and communication that merges
information theory and triggered control to design robust and efficient
protocols for the operation of cyber physical systems in real-world scenarios.
Such a synergy can have a tremendous impact in the societal settings mentioned
above, and at the same time will enable education of students and researchers to
prepare themselves in this emerging area of technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of the project is to develop a synergistic approach to solving the problem
of control under communication constraints and/or unreliable communication
channels. The approaches to state-triggered control and information-theoretic
control individually address different and somewhat complementary aspects of the
problem. Therefore, by leveraging the strengths of the two approaches superior
and more complete solutions to the problem may be designed. An information-
theoretic approach to providing data rate theorems can be used to enrich state-
triggered strategies to prescribe both when and what to transmit, as well as to
quantify the average usage of the communication channel. Similarly, existing
control strategies for unreliable and stochastic communication channels can be
enriched by considering triggering mechanisms as additional communication
constraints to be accounted for in the feedback loop while designing the
communication channel.