* 1446958
* EAGER: Single-step processing of self-assembled magneto-dielectric hybrid composites for microwave phased array sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Anatoliy Glushchenko, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

EAGER: Single-step processing of self-assembled magneto-dielectric hybrid
composites for microwave phased array sensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Colorado at Colorado Springs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing demand for
smaller, lighter and smarter electronic devices has detonated the development of
new active and passive components for microwave signal processing, with compact
designs and low power requirements. However, traditional materials are not the
best option for the new generation of microwave devices, since miniaturization
brings several critical challenges. Additionally, fabrication methods become
more complex and expensive as the device size gets smaller. Within this
exploratory research, scientists propose a very interesting approach: to take
advantage of the interactions of the electromagnetic radiation with ordered
functional nanostructures, designed and tailored for the specific frequency
range of the intended application. Even more, they intend to shift a paradigm
toward producing new microwave materials and devices in a single step by
directly printing the device structure either on a rigid or flexible substrate.
This revolutionary idea engages novel cross-disciplinary perspectives in terms
of microwave fundaments and electromagnetic interactions with soft matter to
radically transform the materials, prototyping, and manufacture of microwave
components. Scientists expect that this novel platform will provide a completely
new perspective for the well-established electronic industry to overcome the
rapidly approaching limits and costs of both, the current materials and
technologies. The results of the project will be shared with industrial partners
locally and nationally to spur further innovation and job creation, and will be
broadly disseminated through technical presentations and publications to
contribute to the advancement of the frontiers of knowledge. Additionally, the
project will bring new research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, scientists
offer a transformative approach to integrate self-assembled block copolymers as
building blocks for complex microwave devices based on magneto-dielectric hybrid
nanostructures and process by inkjet printing, opening a completely new path for
highly integrated, power efficient and cost-effective devices. The exploratory
research will focus on: (i) optimization of the phase separation in printed
block copolymers; (ii) printing functional ordered magneto-dielectric
nanostructures with optimized connectivity for microwave devices, specifically
phased array sensors; and (iii) device optimization and prototyping, all in a
single step, under a simple and low cost regime. They take advantage of the
uniqueness of block copolymers to undergo phase separation into nanodomains,
functionality of inorganic nanoparticles, tailoring properties of photonic band
gap materials, simplicity of inkjet printing, and the versatility of flexible
substrates. Their work will lead to the creation of a new paradigm - bottom-up
building of periodic photonic band gap materials based on magneto-dielectric
hybrid composites of self-assembled block copolymers filled with nanoparticles,
printed as a complete device in a single-step printing process. Thus, the
project will result in new, innovative, smaller, lighter and cheaper microwave
components. The developed platform will have utility not only in the specific
target of phased array sensors but in a variety of microwave reciprocal and
nonreciprocal devices, including phase shifters, circulators, stop/pass band
filters, and antennas.