* 1446631
* CPS: Synergy: Doing More With Less: Cost-Effective Infrastructure for Automotive Vision Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Sanjoy Baruah, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,046,850.00

Many safety-critical cyber-physical systems rely on advanced sensing
capabilities to react to changing environmental conditions. One such domain is
automotive systems. In this domain, a proliferation of advanced sensor
technology is being fueled by an expanding range of autonomous capabilities
(blind spot warnings, automatic lane-keeping, etc.). The limit of this expansion
is full autonomy, which has been demonstrated in various one-off prototypes, but
at the expensive of significant hardware over-provisioning that is not tenable
for a consumer product. To enable features approaching full autonomy in a
commercial vehicle, software infrastructure will be required that enables
multiple sensor-processing streams to be multiplexed onto a common hardware
platform at reasonable cost. This project is directed at the development of such
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desired infrastructure will be
developed by focusing on a particularly compelling challenge problem: enabling
cost-effective driver-assist and autonomous-control automotive features that
utilize vision-based sensing through cameras. This problem will be studied by
(i) examining numerous multicore-based hardware configurations at various fixed
price points based on realistic automotive use cases, and by (ii) characterizing
the range of vision-based workloads that can be feasibly supported using the
software infrastructure to be developed. The research to be conducted will be a
collaboration involving academic researchers at UNC and engineers at General
Motors Research. The collaborative nature of this effort increases the
likelihood that the results obtained will have real impact in the U.S.
automotive industry. Additionally, this project is expected to produce new open-
source software and tools, new course content, public outreach through
participation in UNC's demo program, and lectures and seminars by the
investigators at national and international forums.