* 1446810
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2014 ACM International Conference on Collaboration Across Boundaries (CABS 2014)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Scott Robertson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2015
* USD 23,408.00

This is funding to support participation by students and faculty based in U.S.
educational institutions in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) that will bring
together promising doctoral students and distinguished researchers from academia
and industry, to be held in conjunction with the 5th International ACM
Conference on Collaboration Across Boundaries: Culture, Distance and Technology
(CABS 2014), which will take place in Kyoto, Japan, on August 20-22. Sponsored
by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Computer-
Human Interaction (SIGCHI), the annual CABS conference is a growing
international forum for the presentation and discussion of research and practice
focused on understanding and supporting intercultural communication and global
teams. CABS serves as a gathering point for researchers who share a common
interest in understanding how technology can be used to bridge people from
multiple cultures. A fundamental premise of the conference is that the difficult
problems of language and culture that arise in cross-cultural communication and
collaboration can only be adequately addressed by multidisciplinary efforts.
Thus, attendees come from diverse academic disciplines including computer
science, engineering, management science, information science, communication,
psychology, sociology, and anthropology. Attendees also span the globe, with
participation from the United States, China, Japan, Korea, Israel, France,
Denmark, Germany, the UK, and other countries. The conference solicits
competitive paper, panel, demo and other submissions; peer-reviewed, archival
papers and notes appear in the ACM Digital Library. More information about the
conference may be found online at
http://cabs.acm.org/2014/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CABS Doctoral Consortium is
a research-focused meeting of a group of 10-12 selected PhD candidates and a
panel of 4-5 distinguished researchers from academia and industry. The event,
whose goal is to help launch the careers of outstanding researchers in the area
of intercultural collaboration, will take place on August 20, with follow-up
events during the conference's technical program on August 21-22. NSF funds will
support participation by one senior researcher from the United States (the PI)
and 8 students based in U.S. educational institutions. The full-day Doctoral
Consortium will provide students with exposure to their research community, with
an opportunity to present their work and receive constructive feedback from
peers and senior researchers in the field, and with ample time to start building
a professional support network of peers and mentors (e.g., during the
organizational and working dinners). The feedback is geared toward helping
student participants understand and articulate how their work is positioned
relative to other CABS research, whether their topics are adequately focused for
dissertation research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, whether their results are being appropriately analyzed and presented,
etc. The student participants will also present their work as posters, which
they have prepared before arrival, during the CABS technical program. During the
interactive poster session the students will be present to discuss their work
with interested attendees, but the posters will be available for viewing
throughout the entire three days of the conference. The students' work is thus
showcased for conference attendees, and the students have the opportunity to get
feedback from a larger audience. In addition, abstracts for all Doctoral
Consortium attendee presentations will be printed as a packet to be distributed
to all CABS attendees, and the full extended abstract for each presentation will
be made available on the CABS 2014 website. The event organizers will make
special efforts to promote participation from U.S. institutions and ethnic
groups that have been traditionally underrepresented at CABS. They will also
consider equitable gender balance in the mix of accepted students. To further
increase diversity among the student participants, the organizers have committed
to accepting no more than 1 student from any particular institution, except in
the case that 2 qualified students of different genders apply in which case both
may be accepted.