* 1446976
* Conference on the STEM Intrapreneurship and Entrepreneurship Education Spectrum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Stuart Schulman, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,999.00

The infusion of intrapreneurial and entrepreneurial skills into technician
education programs to prepare highly qualified entry level technicians who
understand the industry enterprise is an area of interest to the Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) program. This project will support a two-day
Conference on the STEM Intrapreneurship and Entrepreneurship Education Spectrum
leading to a formal report on conference outcomes. ATE Centers and projects have
developed a wide array of innovative responses to this focal area, including
Contract Research Organizations, incubators and Virtual Enterprises. This
conference will initiate a group discussion on best practices culminating in
recommended goals for technician education programs, faculty development
seminars and a network-based mentorship. This conference will build consensus on
how these practices can become a regular part of STEM technician education
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute for Virtual Enterprise (IVE) at
the City University of New York (CUNY) has had a successful track record of
developing STEM intrapreneurship and entrepreneurship curriculum, performing
faculty development and leading discussion in this area. IVE currently hosts an
annual summer conference at Baruch College in New York City on intrapreneurship
and entrepreneurship that focuses on the Virtual Enterprise pedagogy. The
current conference will be expanded in two primary ways: (1) providing support
for speakers with expertise in other portions of the STEM Intrapreneurship and
Entrepreneurship Education Spectrum beyond Virtual Enterprise; and, (2)
disseminating the practices beyond ATE grantees by providing travel stipends
with special emphasis on faculty at community colleges that do not currently
have ATE grants. This proposal will expand the reach of the practices to new
campuses and set an action research framework for future scholarly publications
on the topic. Conference participants will join a social network where further
campus-to-campus support, mentorship and interaction occur. Participants will be
encouraged to take back a platform for STEM intrapreneurship and
entrepreneurship, implement it on their campus and study its effects using an
action research methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the questions that
will be addressed during the conference and discussed in the conference report
are: &lt;br/&gt;What practices exist at other institutions?&lt;br/&gt;How
effective are these practices in students' education?&lt;br/&gt;What metrics
gauge a program's success? What other qualitative and quantitative data are
useful for measuring impact? How can faculty design a classroom research study
of practices?&lt;br/&gt;With whom can faculty network to learn about these
practices?&lt;br/&gt;How does one make the case for these practices to College
Senior Administrators and Governing Boards?&lt;br/&gt;What are the legal
precedents and complications around encouraging entrepreneurial activity at a
public, tax-supported institution?&lt;br/&gt;Are there outlets for scholarly
publications for work in STEM entrepreneurship education?&lt;br/&gt;Are there
common milestones in entrepreneurial activity for campuses to track successes?