* 1446530
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Agriculture, Pastoralism And Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Ryan Szymanski, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Ryan Szymanski, Ph.D. candidate at Washington State University, collaborating
with archaeologists and paleoecologists in the United States and Kenya, will
investigate the social and environmental conditions under which food production
emerged as a viable, specialized lifeway in East Africa by integrating multi-
proxy paleoecological and archaeological data sets. One important aspect of the
origins of food production is increased human impact on local ecologies. The
dynamic nature of relationships between humans and their physical and cultural
environments throughout prehistory has come under increasing scientific scrutiny
in recent years, and both archaeological and paleoecological studies are ideally
suited to provide nuanced information detailing these processes. A major
challenge in the reconstruction and interpretation of these contexts is having
confidence in attributing the causes of environmental change to climatic and/or
human activity. More detailed understanding of the ways in which human landscape
alteration and climatic change have impacted environments on both local and
regional scales over time will improve the ability of authorities, in both
private and public spheres, to better construct long-term land management
strategies in anticipation of future change. Primary project data will be
disseminated to local and regional management entities to facilitate future
resource stewardship, while a program of public presentations is designed to
educate local communities about the importance of resource stewardship..

Processes of domestication are now understood to include not only individual
plant and animal species, but entire ecological and geographic landscapes.
Viewed from this perspective, human activities leading ultimately to highly
specialized, "domesticated" plant and animal species are identifiable in
environmental and temporal contexts far earlier than when they become visible as
significant changes in physical form. Specifically, this project seeks to answer
questions of when, and in what contexts, specialized food production emerges, as
well as what strategies have been used to selectively modify floral and faunal
presence on given landscapes. The Central Rift Valley, Western Highlands, and
Coastal regions of modern Kenya, contexts where these processes are not well
documented, but which are reasonably well known archaeologically, will be the
regional foci for this research. The researchers will examine changes through
time in the pollen, fungal spore, and phytolith (diagnostic microscopic mineral
accretions found among the cells of many plant groups) record preserved in
wetland and lake catchments near known archaeological sites, and contextualize
both types of data in order to better understand environmental changes
associated with specific human activities.