* 1446677
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a simple device that eliminates bottlenecks in radiopharmaceutical production
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Artem Lebedev, Trace-Ability, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will enable a disruptive
technology that increases the efficiency and capacity of nuclear pharmacies that
supply imaging tracers for Positron Emission Tomography (PET). PET represents
the most powerful medical imaging modality, yet its availability is severely
limited by the nuclear pharmacy throughput capacity. The proposed effort will
remove this bottleneck and lead to a radical improvement in the availability of
medical imaging with PET to the patients who depend on it for accurate diagnosis
in oncology, cardiology and neurology. The number of PET scans is projected to
grow from 7 to 19 million between 2013 and 2018. However, the current state of
the nuclear pharmacy industry will not support such growth unless it switches
from current manual methods for compliance checking and quality control. The
goal of this project is to develop automated solutions for these cumbersome and
expensive tasks. The demand for this new product is already apparent and the
addressable market is estimated at $500 million. Once the proposed technology is
proven in the nuclear pharmacy industry, it is envisioned that the same platform
will find applications in other industries that require regular multi-parametric
testing (e.g. wastewater or food inspection). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is in the development of two innovative
analytical methods that can be implemented using a commercial plate reader. The
first one is a radioactivity measurement using Liquid Scintillation Counting
(LSC). This project will enable LSC in a plate reader operating in luminescence
reading mode. In this effort, the radioactive sample will be mixed with
scintillating material and is expected to produce a quantifiable luminescence
signal. The second test is quantification of a cryptand commonly used in the
synthesis of PET imaging tracers. The plan is to develop a colorimetric
indicator that allows quantification of this cryptand by measuring the
absorbance of color resulting from the binding of cryptand with indicator in a
plate reader. These tests are the two critical components that need to be proven
in order to demonstrate complete, automated quality control (QC) of a short-
lived radiopharmaceutical product with a single plate reader, and without any
contact between the reader and the sample. Currently, this same QC process
requires 10 to 14 manual tests done using multiple instruments, most of which
come in contact with the sample and need to be cleaned and equilibrated.