* 1446377
* High-resolution studies of visual attention in human superior colliculus
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* David Ress, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 12/31/2016
* USD 335,387.00

A complex brain system moves our eyes around in order for us to take up
information in our environment. This system is in coordination with our other
senses, such as hearing and touch. For example, we might move our eyes to search
a crowd for a familiar face when we hear a voice or search a scene in response
to a loud noise signaling potential danger. With support from the National
Science Foundation, David Ress, Ph.D., is investigating the superior colliculus
(SC), a structure in the brainstem that plays a critical role in eye movements
in relationship to multiple sensory inputs and human behaviors. Most of what is
known about the SC comes from animal experiments. In this project, the
investigators are using high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to gain understanding of the functions of the human SC. The project maps
the effects in SC of both visual inputs and eye movements, establishing a
reference frame for further studies. The outermost layers of the SC receive
inputs directly from the eye, and these inputs are organized across the surface
of SC as a map of the retinal image. Deeper SC layers contain a map of eye
movements, and they send outputs to brain structures that control eye muscles.
Using the reference frame established by the initial mappings, this project uses
fMRI to map and quantify the effects of visual attention in relationship to
visual inputs and eye movements. The deepest layers of SC are diversely
connected to the rest of the brain, and they appear to be involved in combining
and responding to multi-sensory information, such as from vision and hearing.
This research increases the understanding of how multiple sensory inputs are
mapped and processed in the human SC.

The ability to create detailed maps of the SC function opens up new frontiers
for basic research and clinical applications. First, these experiments enable
future research by validating and improving this laboratory's unique ensemble of
fMRI methods. The fMRI methods developed by this project are being made freely
available to other laboratories for general use. Second, studies of SC function
in animals, as are frequently done, have limited flexibility and scope. Studies
of human subjects can be broader and more flexible. The measurement of functions
such as attention and sensory integration can be better performed with humans,
because humans can follow verbal instructions and require much less training
than animals. Third, this project's unique combination of magnetic resonance
physics, image processing, and neurobiology, provides a particularly effective
context for educating and training undergraduate and graduate students in a
variety of disciplines, including neuroscience, physics, and engineering. This
project opens up new directions in clinical research related to diseases
associated with SC and other small brainstem regions, such as the abducens
nucleus. High-resolution fMRI is expected to be a tool for clinical research
into other critical deep brain regions such as the sub-thalamic nucleus, which
is often targeted for deep-brain stimulation procedures used to treat a variety
of diseases, such as Parkinson's disease. Safe and non-invasive high resolution
fMRI will enable disease diagnosis and evaluation of medical treatment.