* 1446085
* EAGER: The Genomic Landscape of Species Divergence in an Extraordinary Avian Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Sorenson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 149,902.00

Speciation, in which one ancestral population gives rise to two or more
descendant species with distinct characteristics, is the fundamental
evolutionary process generating the diversity of life on earth. This project
will harness recent advances in DNA sequencing technology to examine in
unprecedented detail the ways in which history, geography and natural selection
combine to produce the genetic changes responsible for the evolution of new
species. This is basic research that aims to advance the new field of speciation
genomics and increase fundamental knowledge of the natural world, while testing
the hypothesis that natural selection on a small number of genes is sufficient
to generate new species. The project will also generate important data for
setting conservation priorities, provide advanced training in molecular and
computational biology for a graduate student, and create opportunities for
engaging students and the general public in modern genomics research with an
accessible example involving birds.

This research focuses on twelve finch species (genus Lonchura) that represent
one of the most extraordinary cases of recent and rapid diversification in
birds. With a diversity of plumage patterns and replicate examples of closely
related species living in the same geographic regions, this group is ideally
suited for addressing fundamental questions about the genomics of speciation.
Whole genome sequencing combined with targeted re-sequencing will be used to
characterize patterns of genetic diversity and divergence among species and
populations in the Lonchura radiation and to: 1) assess the number, size and
location of genomic regions (i.e., genes) diverging early in the speciation
process; and 2) test alternative models for the origin and history of genetic
variants (i.e., alleles) in these regions. The general hypothesis that each
species' phenotype has evolved through the fixation of genetic variants at a
small number of genes and that the phylogenetic history of these genes is
largely decoupled from genome-wide patterns of genetic variation will be tested.
Of particular interest is the possibility that novel genetic variants have been
transferred between species via hybridization, resulting in novel phenotypes
generated by unique combinations of alleles across a small subset of genomic
loci.