* 1446471
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Distributed Just-Ahead-Of-Time Verification of Cyber-Physical Critical Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Saman Zonouz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 579,486.00

Trustworthy operation of next-generation complex power grid critical
infrastructures requires mathematical and practical verification solutions to
guarantee the correct infrastructural functionalities. This project develops the
foundations of theoretical modeling, synthesis and real-world deployment of a
formal and scalable controller code verifier for programmable logic controllers
(PLCs) in cyber-physical settings. PLCs are widely used for control automation
in industrial control systems. A PLC is typically connected to an engineering
workstation where engineers develop the control logic to process the input
values from sensors and issue control commands to actuators. The project focuses
on protecting infrastructures against malicious control injection attacks on
PLCs, such as Stuxnet, that inject malicious code on the device to drive the
underlying physical platform to an unsafe state. The broader impact of this
proposal is highly significant. It offers potential for real-time security for
critical infrastructure systems covering sectors such as energy and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit is in
providing a mathematical and practical verification framework for cyber-physical
systems through integration of offline formal methods, online monitoring
solutions, and power systems analysis. Offline formal methods do not scale for
large-scale platforms due to their exhaustive safety analysis of all possible
system states, while online monitoring often reports findings too late for
preventative action. This project takes a hybrid approach that dynamically
predicts the possible next security incidents and reports to operators before an
unsafe state is encountered, allowing time for response. The broader impact of
this project is in providing practical mathematical analysis capabilities for
general cyber-physical safety-critical infrastructure with potential direct
impact on our national security. The research outcomes are integrated into
education modules for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 classrooms.