* 1446665
* CPS: Breakthrough: Compositional Modeling of Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Steven Marcus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CPS: Breakthrough: Compositional Modeling of Cyberphysical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is devoted to the discovery of new
mathematical modeling techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems. In particular, the
research involves devising novel conceptual methods for assembling systems from
subsystems, and for reasoning about the behavior of systems in terms of the
behavior of their subsystems, which may be computational or physical. The
results enable scientists and engineers to develop more realistic models of the
systems they are designing, and to obtain greater insights into their eventual
behavior, without having to build costly prototypes. The intellectual merits are
the new notions of system behavior being developed that unify the computational
and the physical, and the mathematical operators and laws governing the
relationships between systems and subsystems. The project's broader significance
and importance lie in the increased pace of innovation within Cyber-Physical
System design that the new modeling techniques make possible, and the curricular
enhancements that the novel conceptual frameworks under development
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research program of this project
involves the development of a novel modeling paradigm, Generalized
Synchronization Trees (GSTs), into a rich framework for both describing Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPSs) and studying their behavior under interconnection. GSTs
are inspired by Milner's use of Synchronization Trees (STs) to model
interconnected computing processes, but GSTs generalize the mathematical
structure of their forebears in such a way as to encompass systems with discrete
("Cyber") as well as continuous ("Physical") dynamics. As Milner did with STs,
the PIs are developing an algebraic theory of composition for GSTs. Such
theories have a particular advantage over non-algebraic ones: because the
composition of two (or more) objects results in an object of the same type,
composition operators can be nested to build large structures out of smaller
ones. Thus, the theory of GSTs is inherently compositional. The development of
the theory involves five distinct but complementary endeavors. Standard models
for cyber-physical systems are being encoded as GSTs in a semantically robust
way; meaningful notions of composition and congruence for CPSs are being
described and studied algebraically; the interplay between behavioral
equivalence and the preservation of system properties is being investigated; a
notion of real-time (or clock time) is under consideration for GSTs; and GSTs
are being assessed as modeling tools for practical design scenarios.