* 1446765
* CPS: Synergy: Autonomous Vision-based Construction Progress Monitoring and Activity Analysis for Building and Infrastructure Projects
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Derek Hoiem, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2019
* USD 999,935.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) award supports research to enable the
automated monitoring of building and infrastructure construction projects. The
purpose of construction monitoring is to provide developers, contractors,
subcontractors, and tradesmen with the information they need to easily and
quickly make project control decisions. These decisions have a direct impact on
the overall efficiency of a construction project. Given that construction is a
$800 billion industry, gains in efficiency could lead to enormous cost savings,
benefiting both the U.S. economy and society. In particular, both construction
cost and delivery time could be significantly reduced by automated tools to
assess progress towards completion (progress monitoring) and how construction
resources are being utilized (activity monitoring). These tools will be provided
by advances in the disciplines of computer vision, robotics, and construction
management. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will create synergy
among these disciplines and will positively influence engineering education.
Partnerships with industry will also ensure that these advances have a positive
impact on construction practice.

The process of construction monitoring involves data collection, analysis, and
reporting. Research will address the existing scientific challenges to
automating these three activities. Data collection will be automated by
recording video with aerial robots and a network of cameras. Key research
objectives are to derive planning algorithms that guarantee complete coverage of
a construction site and to derive vision-based control algorithms that enable
robust placement and retrieval of cameras. Analysis will be automated with a
digital building information model with respect to which construction resources
can be tracked. Key research objectives are to improve the efficiency and
reliability of image-based reconstruction, to recognize material properties as
well as geometry, to establish a formal language for representing construction
activities, and to extend a parts-based approach for automated activity
recognition. Reporting will be automated with a ubiquitous display of the
digital building information model. Key research objectives are to formalize a
constraint construction ontology with associated classification mechanisms and
allow for systematic earned value analysis of construction progress.
Experimental validation will focus on monitoring construction of substructure
and superstructure skeletal elements in buildings and infrastructure systems as
well as the associated earth-moving, concrete placement, and steel erection
activities that are common in construction projects.