* 1446481
* IMPACT OF MACROPORES AND SOIL PIPES ON HYPORHEIC EXCHANGE IN STREAMS
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Erich Hester, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 252,411.00

Streams and rivers form a vital part of the water cycle, are 'downstream of
everything" and are most affected by most human actions. It is therefore
important to understand how stream and rivers work so we can account for these
benefits and anticipate how they may respond to trends like urbanization. The
hyporheic zone is the boundary between the water in a river or stream and the
water in sediment beneath or alongside the river. The hyporheic zone has unique
properties including enhanced chemical reactions (many of which are good for
reducing pollutant levels) and habitat for organisms that live nowhere else. The
hyporheic zone is particularly active when water levels fluctuate in the stream
or river, for instance due to storm events, because this forces water into or
out of the riverbanks. This project will use field surveys to determine how much
this storm-enhanced hyporheic exchange varies through a wide range of streams in
the eastern USA. The field data will be combined with computer models to predict
the presence and significance of this exchange in other streams. This will allow
better understanding of this exchange on aquatic organisms and the transport of
nutrients and pollutants. This project will also enhance several existing
classes at Virginia Tech and increase student interest in pursuing careers in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields which are
critical for preserving and enhancing America's dynamic economy and quality of
life. The project will reach out to under-represented undergraduates to improve
their participation in the career-enhancing research opportunities provided by
the project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Streams and rivers form a vital link among
compartments of the hydrosphere. The hyporheic zone is a key interface where
water exchanges between surface and subsurface, and is important for aquatic
organisms, biogeochemical reactions, and contaminant attenuation. "Lung model"
hyporheic exchange occurs where water enters and exits the subsurface during
transient phenomena such as storms, hydropeaking, and daily snowmelt. The effect
of lung model exchange on water quality has been recently shown to be
substantial, yet highly dependent on exchange rate. This project will use field
surveys of stream bank macropores to test whether macropores/soil pipes are
common in several provinces of the eastern USA and a range of stream sizes and
land uses. Field surveys will include detailed measurements of macropore
geometry, connectivity, sedimentation, and plugging. These data will be used to
compare the Darcy-based SUTRA model of reaction and transport to the
computational fluid dynamics code Ansys CFX. The modeling will determine the
relationships between controlling factors (e.g., macropore geometry, head
gradients, sediment hydraulic conductivity) and the degree that macropores
enhance lung model exchange. These results will then be upscaled to estimate the
degree to which the presence of macropores increases the percent of stream
length where lung model hyporheic exchange is significant.