* 1446622
* CPS: Breakthrough: Toward Revolutionary Algorithms for Cyber-Physical Systems Architecture Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Ossama Abdelkhalik, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 221,464.00

One of the challenges for the future cyber-physical systems is the exploration
of large design spaces. Evolutionary algorithms (EAs), which embody a simplified
computational model of the mutation and selection mechanisms of natural
evolution, are known to be effective for design optimization. However, the
traditional formulations are limited to choosing values for a predetermined set
of parameters within a given fixed architecture. This project explores
techniques, based on the idea of hidden genes, which enable EAs to select a
variable number of components, thereby expanding the explored design space to
include selection of a system's architecture. Hidden genetic optimization
algorithms have a broad range of potential applications in cyber-physical
systems, including automated construction systems, transportation systems,
micro-grid systems, and space systems. The project integrates education with
research by involving students ranging from high school through graduate school
in activities commensurate with their skills, and promotes dissemination of the
research results through open source distribution of algorithm implementation
code and participation in the worldwide Global Trajectory Optimization
Competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instead of using a single layer of coding to
represent the variables of the system in current EAs, this project investigates
adding a second layer of coding to enable hiding some of the variables, as
needed, during the search for the optimal system's architecture. This genetic
hiding concept is found in nature and provides a natural way of handling system
architectures covering a range of different sizes in the design space. In
addition, the standard mutation and selection operations in EAs will be replaced
by new operations that are intended to extract the full potential of the hidden
gene model. Specific applications include space mission design, microgrid
optimization, and traffic network signal coordinated planning.