* 1446324
* 2014 Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior GRC/GRS: Observations, Insights and Analyses: What's New in the World of Micro Mechanics; Waltham, Massachusetts; 13-18 July 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Thomas Balk, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is in partial support for
the Gordon Research conference on "Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical
Behavior" to be held July 13-18, 2014, at Bentley University in Waltham,
Massachusetts. The purpose is enhancing active participation by graduate
students and postdoctoral scientists. This proposal is for funding to support
GRC/GRS invited speakers and discussion leaders as well as graduate students,
postdocs and junior faculty members. The topic of the conference is mechanical
behavior at small scales. It is well established that the mechanical behavior of
materials changes when they are geometrically confined to a small scale in at
least one dimension. The approach is highly trans-disciplinary, involving
scientists with backgrounds in materials science and mechanics as well as
neighboring areas including condensed matter physics, electrical engineering and
even biology. A broad impact on knowledge dissemination, stimulation of new
research and cooperation is expected, particularly for young scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is in partial support of the Gordon
Research conference (GRC) on "Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior" to
be held July 13-18, 2014, at Bentley University in Waltham, Massachusetts. The
conference will concentrate on physical mechanisms of mechanical behavior at
small scales, as linked to basic deformation mechanisms, reaching towards modern
applications ranging from optical and microelectronic devices and nano- or
micro-electrical mechanical systems (NEMS/MEMS) to devices for energy production
and storage. This research area has taken advantage of recent progress in
atomistic and micromechanical modeling, as well as materials characterization
and in-situ measurements at small length scales. The conference will cover
topics of lasting significance to the field such as elasticity, plastic
deformation, and fracture in small structures. In addition, it will highlight
topics of growing importance. The approach is highly trans-disciplinary,
involving scientists with backgrounds in materials science and mechanics as well
as neighboring areas including condensed matter physics, electrical engineering
and even biology. A broad impact on knowledge dissemination, stimulation of new
research and cooperation is expected, particularly for young scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;