* 1446908
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: A Signal-Aware-Based Low-Power, Fully Human Implantable Brain-Computer Interface System to Restore Walking after Spinal Cord Injury
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Payam Heydari, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are cyber-physical systems (CPSs) that record
human brain waves and translate them into the control commands for external
devices such as computers and robots. They may allow individuals with spinal
cord injury (SCI) to assume direct brain control of a lower extremity prosthesis
to regain the ability to walk. Since the lower extremity paralysis due to SCI
leads to as much as $50 billion of health care cost each year in the US alone,
the use of a BCI-controlled lower extremity prosthesis to restore walking can
have a significant public health impact. Recent results have demonstrated that a
person with paraplegia due to SCI can use a non-invasive BCI to regain basic
walking. While encouraging, this BCI is unlikely to become a widely adopted
solution since the poor signal quality of non-invasively recorded brain waves
may lead to unreliable BCI operation. Moreover, lengthy and tedious mounting
procedures of the non-invasive BCI systems are impractical. A permanently
implantable BCI CPS can address these issues, but critical challenges must be
overcome to achieve this goal, including the elimination of protruding
electronics and reliance on an external computer for brain signal processing.
The goal of this study is to develop a benchtop version of a fully implantable
BCI CPS, capable of acquiring electrocorticogram signals, recorded directly from
the surface of the brain, and analyzing them internally to enable direct brain
control of a robotic gait exoskeleton (RGE) for
walking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BCI CPS will be designed as a low-power system
with revolutionary adaptive power management in order to meet stringent heat and
power consumption constraints for future human implantation. Comprehensive
measurements and benchtop tests will ensure proper function of BCI CPS. Finally,
the system will be integrated with an RGE, and its ability to facilitate brain-
controlled walking will be tested in a small group of human subjects. The
successful completion of this project will have broad bioengineering and
scientific impact. It will revolutionize medical device technology by minimizing
power consumption and heat production while enabling complex operations to be
performed. The study will also help deepen the understanding of how the human
brain controls walking, which has long been a mystery to neuroscientists.
Finally, this study?s broader impact is to promote education and lifelong
learning in engineering students and the community, broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering, and increase the scientific literacy of
persons with disabilities. Research opportunities will be provided to
(under-)graduate students. Their findings will be broadly disseminated and
integrated into teaching activities. To inspire underrepresented K-12 and
community college students to pursue higher education in STEM fields, and to
increase the scientific literacy of persons with disabilities, outreach
activities will be undertaken in the form of live scientific exhibits and actual
BCI demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent results have demonstrated that a
person with paraplegia due to SCI can use an electroencephalogram (EEG)-based
BCI to regain basic walking. While encouraging, this EEG-based BCI is unlikely
to become a widely adopted solution due to EEG?s inherent noise and
susceptibility to artifacts, which may lead to unreliable operation. Also,
lengthy and tedious EEG (un-)mounting procedures are impractical. A permanently
implantable BCI CPS can address these issues, but critical CPS challenges must
be overcome to achieve this goal, including the elimination of protruding
electronics and reliance on an external computer for neural signal processing.
The goal of this study is to implement a benchtop analogue of a fully
implantable BCI CPS, capable of acquiring high-density (HD) electrocorticogram
(ECoG) signals, and analyzing them internally to facilitate direct brain control
of a robotic gait exoskeleton (RGE) for walking. The BCI CPS will be designed as
a low-power modular system with revolutionary adaptive power management in order
to meet stringent heat dissipation and power consumption constraints for future
human implantation. The first module will be used for acquisition of HD-ECoG
signals. The second module will internally execute optimized BCI algorithms and
wirelessly transmit commands to an RGE for walking. System and circuit-level
characterizations will be conducted through comprehensive measurements. Benchtop
tests will ensure the proper system function and conformity to biomedical
constraints. Finally, the system will be integrated with an RGE, and its ability
to facilitate brain-controlled walking will be tested in a group of human
subjects.The successful completion of this project will have broad
bioengineering and scientific impact. It will revolutionize medical device
technology by minimizing power consumption and heat dissipation while enabling
complex algorithms to be executed in real time. The study will also help deepen
the physiological understanding of how the human brain controls walking. This
study will promote education and lifelong learning in engineering students and
the community, broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering, and increase the scientific literacy of persons with disabilities.
Research opportunities will be provided to under-graduate students. Their
findings will be broadly disseminated and integrated into teaching activities.
To inspire underrepresented K-12 and community college students to pursue higher
education in STEM fields, and to increase the scientific literacy of persons
with disabilities, outreach activities will be undertaken in the form of live
scientific exhibits and actual BCI demonstrations.