* 1446570
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Towards Secure Networked Cyber-Physical Systems: A Theoretic Framework with Bounded Rationality
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Arif Sarwat, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 316,000.00

Securing critical networked cyber-physical systems (NCPSs) such as the power
grid or transportation systems has emerged as a major national and global
priority. The networked nature of such systems renders them vulnerable to a
range of attacks both in cyber and physical domains as corroborated by recent
threats such as the Stuxnet worm. Developing security mechanisms for such NCPSs
significantly differs from traditional networked systems due to interdependence
between cyber and physical subsystems (with attacks originating from either
subsystem), possible cooperation between attackers or defenders, and the
presence of human decision makers in the loop. The main goal of this research is
to develop the necessary science and engineering tools for designing NCPS
security solutions that are applicable to a broad range of application domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a multidisciplinary framework
that weaves together principles from cybersecurity, control theory, networking
and criminology. The framework will include novel security mechanisms for NCPSs
founded on solid control-theoretic and related notions, analytical tools that
allow incorporation of bounded human rationality in NCPS security, and
experiments with real-world attack scenarios. A newly built cross-institutional
NCPS simulator will be used to evaluate the proposed mechanisms in realistic
environments. This research transcends specific cyber-physical systems domains
and provides the necessary tools to building secure and trustworthy NCPSs. The
broader impacts include a new infrastructure for NCPS research and education,
training of students, new courses, and outreach events focused on under-
represented student groups.