* 1446704
* NSF EAGER:   QCC Undergraduate Research Opportunity in Solar and Atmospheric Physics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Marie Chantale Damas, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 267,614.00

This award will support the design and implementation of an integrated research
and education program in solar, geospace and atmospheric physics at the
CUNY/Queensborough Community College (QCC), a Hispanic and minority serving
institution. The year-long research experience has two components: 1) during the
academic year, students will be enrolled in course-based research where they
will conduct research on real-world problems; and 2) during the summer, students
will be placed in research internships at partner institutions. Specific
objectives of this project include: 1) to provide QCC students with research
opportunities in solar and atmospheric physics as early as their first year; 2)
to develop educational materials in solar and atmospheric physics; 3) to
increase the number of students, especially underrepresented minorities, that
transfer to 4-year STEM programs; and 4) to increase the number of students that
obtain Bachelor's degrees in STEM, especially in geosciences related fields. The
educational materials will be developed using data from NASA and NOAA, and a
modular, interdisciplinary concept approach that will integrate educational
materials into the research experience. The project will also use evidence-based
best practices (i.e., research experience, mentoring, outreach, recruitment,
enrichment and partnership with 4-year colleges and institutions) that have
proven successful at increasing the retention, transfer and graduation rates of
community college students at Hispanic Serving Institutions. This project will
offer benefits to society by providing future researchers with an understanding
of space weather impacts on Earth's environment. Through a strong collaboration
with CUNY/City College of New York NOAA CREST, University of Colorado's Colorado
Center for Astrodynamics Research, and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Space
Weather Research Center, the project will train and retain underrepresented
community college students in geosciences related STEM fields. This project will
provide a service to the discipline, which is taught at relatively few colleges,
by increasing both its visibility and diversity.