* 1446998
* High Temperature Magnetic Imaging of Titanomagnetites
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Michael Jackson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 270,001.00

Naturally occurring magnetic iron oxides in the form of microscopic mineral
grains are common in trace amounts in rocks, sediments, and soils as well as in
archeological and extraterrestrial materials. Through various geological
processes and to varying degrees of reliability, iron-oxide particles can record
and store paleomagnetic information about the direction and strength of ancient
planetary fields. One such process is thermomagnetic recording, whereby magnetic
minerals in igneous rocks are magnetized by cooling from high temperatures to
ambient surface temperatures in the presence of the geomagnetic field.
Understanding the physical mechanisms for thermomagnetic recording is essential
for accurate recovery of paleomagnetic information from natural materials. Yet
our theoretical understanding is predicated on the simplest internal
micromagnetic configurations (single-domain), appropriate for just the smallest
grain sizes, and does not cover the more abundant larger grains exhibiting
complex configurations (multi-domain). This research will address thermomagnetic
recording in multi-domain grains by direct observations of their micromagnetic
configurations, and their changes with experimentally applied fields and
controlled temperatures. The research activity will improve our ability to study
the fundamental physics of magnetic behavior at elevated temperatures and will
improve our understanding of the magnetic behavior of common magnetic minerals.
This research will benefit geoscientists investigating the origins and evolution
of planetary magnetic fields on Earth and elsewhere in the solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural recording media, from which geoscientists
strive to retrieve information on the ancient history of geomagnetic field, most
commonly do not hold their data in well-behaved, high-fidelity magnetic mineral
grains, but rather in grains with more complex micromagnetic structures. Direct
high-resolution observation of the temperature-dependent micromagnetic
structures in common magnetic minerals has recently become possible with the
development of high-temperature magnetic force microscopes (MFM) capable of
imaging magnetic patterns up to approximately 400Â°C. This project will focus on
a detailed MFM study of the evolution of magnetization structures in grains of
natural and synthetic iron oxides as functions of temperature, applied weak
fields, grain size, and prior magnetic treatments. It will allow the team to
study the mechanisms of natural magnetic recording, to understand their
sensitivity to thermal or chemical overprinting over geologic time, and to
devise optimized laboratory methods for the recovery of paleomagnetic field data
from natural recording media. The research supported here will provide insight
into the micromagnetic mechanisms responsible for thermoremanent magnetization
and the fundamental processes that allow estimates of the paleointensity of the
ancient geomagnetic field to be determined experimentally in the laboratory.