* 1446732
* Strengthening the U.S. Voice in the International Union of Psychological Science (IUPsyS)
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,325.00

The U.S. National Committee for Psychology (USNC) represents the U.S.
psychological science community to the International Union of Psychological
Science (IUPsyS) on behalf of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS). The
USNC/IUPsyS provides a valuable network through which the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the NAS enhance their capacity to contribute to global
research in the psychological sciences. It is also a vehicle through which the
NAS can reach out to the U.S. scientific community through international
activities that are designed to enhance opportunities for psychological
scientists both nationally and internationally, thus helping to create a diverse
and globally-oriented U.S. scientific workforce and to position the United
States to benefit from global investment in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S participation in IUPsyS fulfills a unique role in the
national science infrastructure. It provides a forum for dialogue between U.S.
scientists and foreign colleagues, fosters research cooperation and
collaboration by sponsoring conferences and workshops on topics of interest,
initiates pilot/demonstration projects for bilateral or regional research
collaborations, and organizes travel grant programs for young scientists and
scientists from underrepresented backgrounds in the U.S. to participate in
international scientific congresses.