* 1446785
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Designing semi-autonomous networks of miniature robots for inspection of bridges and other large infrastructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Richard La, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2019
* USD 855,500.00

Designing semi-autonomous networks of miniature robots for inspection of bridges
and other large civil infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the U.S.
Department of Transportation, the United States has 605102 bridges of which 64%
are 30 years or older and 11% are structurally deficient. Visual inspection is a
standard procedure to identify structural flaws and possibly predict the
imminent collapse of a bridge and determine effective precautionary measures and
repairs. Experts who carry out this difficult task must travel to the location
of the bridge and spend many hours assessing the integrity of the structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is to establish (i) new design and
performance analysis principles and (ii) technologies for creating a self-
organizing network of small robots to aid visual inspection of bridges and other
large civilian infrastructure. The main idea is to use such a network to aid the
experts in remotely and routinely inspecting complex structures, such as the
typical girder assemblage that supports the decks of a suspension bridge. The
robots will use wireless information exchange to autonomously coordinate and
cooperate in the inspection of pre-specified portions of a bridge. At the end of
the task, or whenever possible, they will report images as well as other key
measurements back to the experts for further evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common systems to aid visual inspection rely either on
stationary cameras with restricted field of view, or tethered ground vehicles.
Unmanned aerial vehicles cannot access constricted spaces and must be tethered
due to power requirements and the need for uninterrupted communication to
support the continual safety critical supervision by one or more operators. In
contrast, the system proposed here would be able to access tight spaces, operate
under any weather, and execute tasks autonomously over long periods of time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fact that the proposed framework allows remote expert
supervision will reduce cost and time between inspections. The added flexibility
as well as the increased regularity and longevity of the deployments will
improve the detection and diagnosis of problems, which will increase safety and
support effective preventive maintenance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be carried out by a multidisciplinary team specialized in diverse areas of
cyber-physical systems and robotics, such as locomotion, network science,
modeling, control systems, hardware sensor design and optimization. It involves
collaboration between faculty from the University of Maryland (UMD) and
Resensys, which specializes in remote bridge monitoring. The proposed system
will be tested in collaboration with the Maryland State Highway Administration,
which will also provide feedback and expertise throughout the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes concrete plans to involve
undergraduate students throughout its duration. The investigators, who have an
established record of STEM outreach and education, will also leverage on exiting
programs and resources at the Maryland Robotics Center to support this
initiative and carry out outreach activities. In order to make student
participation more productive and educational, the structure of the proposed
system conforms to a hardware architecture adopted at UMD and many other schools
for the teaching of undergraduate courses relevant to cyber-physical systems and
robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support research on fundamental
principles and design of robotic and cyber-physical systems. It will focus on
algorithm design for control and coordination, network science, performance
evaluation, microfabrication and system integration to address the following
challenges: (i) Devise new locomotion and adhesion principles to support
mobility within steel and concrete girder structures. (ii) Investigate the
design of location estimators, omniscience and coordination algorithms that are
provably optimal, subject to power and computational constraints. (iii) Methods
to design and analyze the performance of energy-efficient communication
protocols to support robot coordination and localization in the presence of the
severe propagation barriers caused by metal and concrete structures of a bridge.