* 1446355
* Travel for 6th World Conference on Structural Control and Monitoring; Barcelona, Spain; July 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Alison Flatau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2015
* USD 14,000.00

The Sixth World Conference on Structural Control and Monitoring (6WCSCM) will be
held on the campus of Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona,
Spain, July 15-17, 2014. The WCSCM is recognized as the premier
interdisciplinary global gathering of experts working in the theoretical,
numerical, experimental and practical advancements of monitoring and control
technologies for dynamic structures in a wide range of civil, infrastructure,
mechanical, aerospace and energy systems. This international meeting occurs once
every four years, and brings the world's leading experts together with young
researchers and students. The previous editions of WCSCM were held in Pasadena,
CA (1994), Kyoto, Japan (1998), Como, Italy (2002), La Jolla, CA (2006) and
Tokyo, Japan (2010). This award will enable attendance by new faculty and
graduate students from US institutions, and will broaden participation by
underrepresented groups. US participants will receive a special invitation to
visit laboratories at UPC and meet with local researchers as a field trip from
the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference serves the disciplines of
Structural Control, Structural Health Monitoring, and Smart Structures and
Materials. Application areas of interest include control and monitoring of
bridges and buildings, earthquake engineering, damage detection and structural
control for aircraft, spacecraft, surface vessels and submarines, structural
engineering for robots and other mechanical systems, and structural monitoring
and control of large wind turbines. This award will be used to cover between
one-third and two-thirds of total travel costs, which will assist between 7 and
14 US participants. Eleven highly qualified individuals have been tentatively
identified, including four women.