* 1446607
* CPS: Frontier: Collaborative Research: BioCPS for Engineering Living Cells
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,882,852.00

Recent developments in nanotechnology and synthetic biology have enabled a new
direction in biological engineering: synthesis of collective behaviors and
spatio-temporal patterns in multi-cellular bacterial and mammalian systems. This
will have a dramatic impact in such areas as amorphous computing, nano-
fabrication, and, in particular, tissue engineering, where patterns can be used
to differentiate stem cells into tissues and organs. While recent technologies
such as tissue- and organoid on-a-chip have the potential to produce a paradigm
shift in tissue engineering and drug development, the synthesis of user-
specified, emergent behaviors in cell populations is a key step to unlock this
potential and remains a challenging, unsolved problem.

This project brings together synthetic biology and micron-scale mobile robotics
to define the basis of a next-generation cyber-physical system (CPS) called
biological CPS (bioCPS). Synthetic gene circuits for decision making and local
communication among the cells are automatically synthesized using a Bio-Design
Automation (BDA) workflow. A Robot Assistant for Communication, Sensing, and
Control in Cellular Networks (RA), which is designed and built as part of this
project, is used to generate desired patterns in networks of engineered cells.
In RA, the engineered cells interact with a set of micro-robots that implement
control, sensing, and long-range communication strategies needed to achieve the
desired global behavior. The micro-robots include both living and non-living
matter (engineered cells attached to inorganic substrates that can be controlled
using externally applied fields). This technology is applied to test the
formation of various patterns in living cells.

The project has a rich education and outreach plan, which includes nationwide
activities for CPS education of high-school students, lab tours and competitions
for high-school and undergraduate students, workshops, seminars, and courses for
graduate students, as well as specific initiatives for under-represented groups.
Central to the project is the development of theory and computational tools that
will significantly advance that state of the art in CPS at large. A novel,
formal methods approach is proposed for synthesis of emergent, global behaviors
in large collections of locally interacting agents. In particular, a new logic
whose formulas can be efficiently learned from quad-tree representations of
partitioned images is developed. The quantitative semantics of the logic maps
the synthesis of local control and communication protocols to an optimization
problem. The project contributes to the nascent area of temporal logic inference
by developing a machine learning method to learn temporal logic classifiers from
large amounts of data. Novel abstraction and verification techniques for
stochastic dynamical systems are defined and used to verify the correctness of
the gene circuits in the BDA workflow.