* 1446264
* A Comprehensive Multi-Scale Study of the Impact of Capillary-Held Water Films on Fluid Motion, Transport and Mass Transfer in the Unsaturated Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Tohren Kibbey, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 368,943.00

A Comprehensive Multi-Scale Study of the Impact of Capillary-Held Water Films on
Fluid Motion, Transport and Mass Transfer in the Unsaturated
Zone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge resulting from the project could
ultimately lead to improved models for a wide range of unsaturated phenomena
important to practical hydrologic, agricultural, and environmental applications,
including prediction of water infiltration into soils and flooding during heavy
rainfalls, remediating polluted soils and groundwaters, and movement of
fertilizers, pesticides, etc. When water drains out of a porous medium, films of
water remain behind on solid grain surfaces. For this reason, water films are
ubiquitous in the unsaturated zone under dry conditions, and they play a central
role in a wide range of phenomena. Although the magnitude of water film area is
substantial, sustained mass transfer at air-water interfaces depends on the
extent to which films on solid surfaces are hydraulically connected and mobile
enough to be replenished from bulk porewater. Recent information has shown that
water films on solid grain surfaces are likely orders of magnitude thicker than
previously thought, and that their configuration and thickness are dominated by
the roughness of solid grain surfaces. The implication of this finding is that
flow and transport in water films on solid grain surfaces are likely far greater
than previously thought. However, very little quantitative information is
available on how flow and transport occur in grain surface-associated water
films. This project is aimed at addressing this critical knowledge gap.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will combine experimental work spanning
a range of cutting-edge techniques with a modeling effort to arrive at a
quantitative, predictive understanding of the behavior of capillary-held water
films in the unsaturated zone. Experiments and simulations will be conducted at
scales ranging from the nanoscale to the grain cluster scale. Stereoscopic SEM
will be used to create highly detailed surface roughness maps of real grains and
grain clusters, and confocal microscopy techniques will be used to study the
impact of external inputs (capillary pressure, evaporation) on dynamic film
configuration, flow, and advective transport. Work will be focused around four
tightly-coupled tasks designed to test the hypotheses of the work, and then
explore the implications of the observed sub-pore-scale film phenomena on REV
and field scale behaviors.