* 1446722
* Representing the U.S. at the International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) while Advancing the Field in our Nation:  The Unique Role of the USNC for IUTAM
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2017
* USD 335,761.00

The U.S. National Committee for Theoretical and Applied Mechanics acts as a
focal point for research in the broad field of mechanics, both domestically and
internationally. The Committee involves fifteen different technical societies in
engineering and applied science, and provides a forum where their
representatives can discuss their respective goals and priorities in the field
of mechanics, as well as plan together reports and events that will further
research in those areas. Specifically, the Committee sponsors the National
Congress of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, and organizes the AmeriMech
Symposia, summer schools, and the reports on Recent Trends in Mechanics. All of
these focus on the latest trends, directions, and accomplishments in mechanics
in the United States, and help inform both researchers and policymakers. The
Committee also acts as a bridge with the international mechanics community
through its membership in international scientific union. At the international
level, the Committee provides leadership and assists in the organization of the
specialized symposia on subjects in which mechanics plays a pivotal role.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the Committee are to represent
the United States in the International Union of Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics, and to promote and advance all aspects of mechanics in the United
States. Operating under the auspices of the National Academy of Sciences, the
national member of the international union, the Committee plays an active and
visible role both in the leadership of the union and in the development and
organization of the union's scientific programs. The roles of the Committee and
its representatives in the international union include participation in
discussions of the strategic plan; statute changes; activities of committees,
commissions, and task groups; union initiatives and co-operative activities;
program priorities and tentative budget allocations; election of officers; and
selection of the union Symposia slate; as well as in discussions regarding union
involvement in interdisciplinary programs organized by the International Council
for Science (ICSU). The Committee meets annually to discuss national and
international priorities and plan appropriate action, and sends a delegation to
the union's General Assembly every two years. The main intellectual merits of
the project lie in the activities organized and supported by the Committee and
the union.