* 1446067
* NUE: EXPOSING ENGINEERING STUDENTS TO NANOSCIENCE AND NANOTECHNOLOGY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF NORTH DAKOTA
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Gaya Marasinghe, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal, NUE: Exposing Engineering Students to Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology at the University of North Dakota (UND), under the direction of
Dr. Naima Kaabouch, outlines a detailed project to establish and develop
nanoscience and nanotechnology (NSNT) undergraduate education in the state of
North Dakota. As a part of the leading comprehensive university in the state, a
UND faculty team will develop a sequence of NSNT courses in the College of
Engineering & Mines and the College of Arts & Sciences. These courses will
include (1)fundamental classroom sessions coupled with laboratory experiments
that focus on the structure and theory of nanomaterials and the fundamentals of
machines utilizing nanodevices; (2) advanced classroom sessions that focus on
the properties and development of nanomaterials and fabrication of nanodevices
as well as their applications in the engineering field. The ethical and societal
implications of NSNT and an assessment of the feasibility of nanotechnology
development will also be included. The multidisciplinary faculty team assembled
to develop these courses originates from the departments of Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Physics &
Astrophysics, and Educational Foundations & Research.

The development of NSNT is one of the main goals in the strategic plan of the
University of North Dakota. The proposed NUE courses will dramatically enhance
the university's effort, and thus will promote North Dakota nanoscience and
nanotechnology education to a new level. Therefore, the proposed effort will
benefit U.S. industry by providing the much needed training for our engineers.
Additionally, underrepresented minorities will be exposed to this emerging NSNT
field, which is crucial to satisfy the national need for developing a diverse
and internationally competitive workforce in this NSNT field. This will be done
by providing educational opportunities in this emerging field to Native
Americans in the state of North Dakota. North Dakota is one of the states with
the highest percentage of Native Americans. This way, more underrepresented
minority students can be encouraged to consider science and engineering as
career options.