* 1446181
* Analysis, Spectra, and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Shou-wu Zhang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The grant will support a conference "Analysis, Spectra and Number theory", to be
held to be held at Princeton University and the Institute for Advanced Study,
December 15 - 19, 2014. There will be approximately 20 speakers and an
anticipated 200 participants. The conference will focus on number theory, with
emphasis on its many relationships with analysis and spectral theory. Both
(Fourier) analysis and spectral theory have their origins in understanding
oscillating systems, interpreted broadly. It is very surprising, then, that they
have been found to play a basic role in number theory. In his 1859 study of
primes, Riemann observed that the number of primes up to a given integer could
be expressed simply as a sum of oscillating components. It was later observed
that that the "frequencies" occurring in Riemann's analysis show many
regularities, and behave as if they were the eigenvalues of a large unitary
matrix - i.e., an abstraction of the frequency spectrum of a drum. A further
link was the discovery, beginning in the work of Maass and Selberg, of highly
symmetric geometries (locally symmetric spaces) whose frequency spectrum appears
to control many problems in number theory. These themes have expanded in many
directions since, encompassing the field of analytic number theory as well as
much of automorphic forms. The conference will examine the latest developments
in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics to be highlighted include arithmetic
quantum chaos, analysis of families of L-functions, arithmetic statistics, and
connections with ergodic theory. These areas have seen a flurry of activity in
recent years, including: the resolution by Lindenstrauss of quantum unique
ergodicity for arithmetic surfaces; spectacular breakthroughs by Bhargava and
his colleagues concerning the statistics of number fields and elliptic curves;
detailed models and predictions for the zero and value distribution of
L-functions that were inspired via connections with random matrix theory;
construction and the analysis of highly efficient expander graphs; the
development of additive combinatorics based on the work of Green and Tao. The
conference will include a problem session to suggest future directions for the
field. The conference website can be found at
https://sites.google.com/site/asnt2014/.