* 1446060
* NUE: The Freshman Experience and Nanotechnology Solutions to Engineering Grand Challenges
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* P. Raju, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2017
* USD 196,195.00

The objective of this NUE project, The Fresman Experience and Nanotechnology
Solutions to Engineering Grand Challenges, at Auburn University (AU), under the
direction of Dr. Virginia Davis, is to develop six education modules that
utilize Engineering Grand Challenges as a framework for teaching nanotechnology
to freshmen engineering students. The goals of these modules will be to 1)
increase nanotechnology awareness and understanding as part of achieving ABET
student outcomes 2) to familiarize students with the current grand challenges in
engineering and potential nanotechnology enabled solutions, and 3) to increase
student understanding of the importance of grand challenges and nanotechnology
to the engineering profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A well trained diverse pool
of professional engineers is critical for the continued advancement of society.
Nanotechnology will be a critical factor in this advancement and engineers will
be increasingly expected to be knowledgeable in this field. Within the Auburn
University's College of Engineering (AU), the modules will be disseminated
through the ENGR 1110 courses offered by each department, a minority summer
bridge program (AEP), and six living learning communities (including two focused
on underrepresented groups). Beyond AU dissemination will occur through NanoHub,
the National Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education Digital
Library (NSDL), YouTube, and presentations and peer reviewed publications. It is
expected that these modules will not only result in knowledge gains, but
increase student engagement and retention. This will enhance the STEM diversity.
AU is ranked 7th in terms of the number of engineering degrees awarded to
African American students and has a growing number of Hispanic students. In
addition, module components may be used in the PIs ongoing outreach and
diversity activities.