* 1446008
* NUE: Development of a Minor in Nanotechnologies for Surface Engineering (Nano-SurfEng) - A Cross-Departmental Effort at Illinois Institute of Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Tongyan Pan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This NUE program at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) under the direction
of Dr. Tongyan Pan, aims to develop an engineering minor: Nano Surface
Engineering (Nano-SurfEng) to prepare undergraduate students for careers or
graduate studies in surface processing and characterization of materials using
modern nanotechnologies. The accomplishment of this objective entails
integrating the state-of-the-art surface nanotechnologies into IIT's existing
courses to develop a set of Nano-SurfEng curricula. Building on IIT?s core
engineering courses, the targeted Nano-SurfEng curricula will include six new or
redesigned lecture courses, one redesigned laboratory course, and one senior
design project, to be created collectively by the four PIs from three different
engineering disciplines in the Armour College of Engineering at IIT, i.e., Civil
Engineering, Material Engineering, and Chemical and Biological Engineering. The
Nano-SurfEng students will also have extensive research opportunities with the
PIs or through internships with the numerous institutions, research
laboratories, and companies in the Metro Chicago area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Nano-SurfEng Minor will support the development of the next generation of
nanotechnology scientists and engineers through early, advanced scientific
education at the undergraduate level. This minor will be the first
nanotechnology-focused engineering discipline on IIT campus that will complement
and strengthen the current well-established engineering disciplines at IIT. The
Nano-SurfEng Minor targets 20 undergraduate students per year and its core
courses will be open to the five engineering departments at IIT to benefit all
the engineering students. The Nano-SurfEng Minor will bring extensive research
opportunities in nanotechnologies with the four PIs and offer internship
opportunities to all Nano-SurfEng students. A successful institutionalization of
the Nano-SurfEng Minor will undoubtedly improve the education infrastructure at
IIT. The resources and outcomes from this NUE effort will be disseminated to the
public through the NSF nanoHUB, journal and conference publications, and a
digital library of modern nanotechnologies. Developed course materials will be
shared with the 23 members of the Association of Independent Technological
Universities and other peer universities, and extended to local K-12 teachers
and students via two outreach programs at IIT.