* 1446478
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Cognitive Green Building: A Holistic Cyber-Physical Analytic Paradigm for Energy Sustainability
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Wenjing Lou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 410,000.00

1446582 (Shroff) and 1446478 (Hou). Buildings in the U.S. contribute to 39% of
energy use, consume approximately 70% of the electricity, and account for 39% of
CO2 emissions. Hence, developing green building architectures is an extremely
critical component in energy sustainability. The investigators will develop a
unified analytical approach for green building design that comprehensively
manages energy sustainability by taking into account the complex interactions
between these systems of systems, providing a high degree of security, agility
and robust to extreme events. The project will serve to advance the general
science in CPS, help bridge the gap between the cyber and civil infrastructure
communities, educate students across different disciplines, include topics in
curriculum development, and actively recruit underrepresented minority and
undergraduate students. The main thesis of this research is that ad hoc green
energy designs are often myopic, not taking into account key interdependencies
between subsystems and users, and thus often lead to undesirable solutions. In
fact, studies have shown that 28%-35% of LEED-certified buildings consumed more
energy than their conventional counterparts, all of which calls for the
development of a comprehensive analytical foundation for designing green
buildings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the investigators will focus on
three interrelated thrust areas: (i) Integrated energy management for a single-
building, where the goal is to jointly consider the complex interactions among
building subsystems. The investigators will develop novel control schemes that
opportunistically exploit the energy demand elasticity of the building
subsystems and adapt to occupancy patterns, human comfort zones, and ambient
environments. (ii) Managing multi-building interactions to develop (near)
optimal distributed control and coordination schemes that provide performance
guarantees. (iii) Designing for anomalous conditions such as extreme weather and
malicious attacks, where power grid connections and/or cyber-networks are
disrupted. The research will provide directions at developing an analytical
foundation and cross-cutting principles that will shed insight on the design and
control of not only building systems, but also general CPS systems. An important
goal is to help bridge the gap between the networking, controls, and civil
infrastructure communities by giving talks and publishing works in all of these
forums. The investigators will disseminate the research findings to industry as
well as offer education and outreach programs to the K-12 students in STEM
disciplines. The investigators will also actively continue their already strong
existing efforts in recruiting women and underrepresented minorities, as well as
providing rich research experience to undergraduate REU students. This project
will provide fertile training for students spanning civil infrastructure
research, networking, controls, optimization, and algorithmic development. The
investigators will also actively include the outcomes of the research in
existing and new courses at both the Ohio State University and Virginia Tech.