* 1446521
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Enhanced Structural Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure Systems by Observing and Controlling Loads using Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Mingyan Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2018
* USD 587,136.00

Enhanced Structural Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure Systems by
Observing and Controlling Loads using a Cyber-Physical System Framework
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economic prosperity of the nation is dependent on vast
networks of civil infrastructure systems. Unfortunately, large fractions of
these infrastructure systems are rapidly approaching the end of their intended
design lives. The national network of highway bridges is especially vulnerable
to age-based deterioration as revealed by recent catastrophic bridge collapses
in the United States. Two major bottlenecks currently exist that severely limit
the effectiveness of existing bridge health management methods. First, the
causal relationship between repeated truck loading and long-term structural
deterioration is not well understood. Second, current management methods are
reliant on visual inspections which only provide qualitative information
regarding bridge health and introduce subjectivity in post-inspection decision
making. This project aims to resolve these major bottlenecks by advancing a
cyber-physical system (CPS) designed to monitor the health of highway bridges,
control the loads imposed on bridges by heavy trucks, and provide visual
inspectors with quantitative information for data-driven bridge health
assessments. The CPS framework created will have enormous impact on the national
economy by enhancing public safety while dramatically improving the cost-
effectiveness of infrastructure management methods. The project will also create
publically available graduate-level course curricula focused on CPS technology
and engages inner-city middle-school students from underrepresented groups to
prepare them to pursue careers in the science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
research project is to create a scalable and robust CPS framework for the
observation and control of mobile agents that asynchronously and transiently
interact with a stationary physical system. While this class of problem is found
throughout many engineering disciplines, the project focuses on the health
management of highway bridges. The mobile agents relevant to bridge health are
the trucks that load and introduce long-term damage in the bridge and inspectors
who visually inspect the bridge. The task of devising a robust CPS framework
will be challenged by the highly transient nature of the agents involved.
Specifically, the compressed time of interaction between the truck and bridge
results in tight time constraints on observation, quantification and control of
the truck's loading. The project will rely on ad-hoc wireless communications to
seamlessly integrate sensors embedded in the mobile agents (trucks and
inspectors) with wireless sensors installed on the bridge and with servers
dedicated to cloud-based analytics located on the Internet. The project will
design the CPS framework to quantify in real-time truck loads based on sensor
data streaming into the CPS framework. A distributed computing architecture will
be created for the CPS framework to automate the decomposition of computational
tasks in order to dramatically improve the speed and efficiency of the
framework's data processing capabilities. Finally, the CPS framework will
establish ad-hoc feedback control of the mobile agents in order to control
mobile agent-stationary system interactions. In particular, feedback control of
an instrumented truck allows the CPS framework to control the loads imposed on
the bridge for improved health assessments. The CPS framework will be further
extended to control visual inspection processes by providing inspectors with
recommend inspection actions based on rigorous analysis of collected sensor
data. The intellectual significance of the CPS framework is that it observes and
controls truck loads on highway bridges for the first time while creating an
entirely new data-driven paradigm for more accurate health assessment of
infrastructure systems.