* 1446363
* Understanding the intersection of student motivation and approaches to learning in an engineering Problem Solving Studio
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Joseph Le Doux, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2019
* USD 249,991.00

Engineers are valued for the way they solve problems where a strategy is
followed that uses simplified, idealized, diagrammatic and mathematical models,
and quantitative analyses. Students find this strategy very difficult to learn.
This project will investigate an innovative learning environment, called the
problem solving studio (PSS), that previous pilot studies have suggested help
students learn engineering ways of thinking. This project will build on these
pilot studies to answer the following questions: 1) How does PSS affect the
approaches students take to learning, as compared to more traditional lecture-
based courses? 2) How does PSS affect students' sense of empowerment? and 3)
What are the relationships among students' approaches to learning, their sense
of empowerment, and their learning?

The project will identify the key principles and design criteria that are needed
to create an effective flipped classroom, which is a new student-centered
approach to instruction that is rapidly gaining popularity in engineering
departments. Outcomes from this project will improve understanding of how to
effectively teach entry-level engineering courses, and will shed light on why
most, but not all, students thrive in flipped classroom learning environments.
The project has the potential to transform how engineering faculty configure
their gateway courses for greater student motivation, more effective approaches
to learning, and most importantly, greater gains in how well students learn to
think like engineers. The project holds promise for providing instructors a road
map to success for flipping their classrooms, thus increasing the number of STEM
faculty who are engaged in this effective pedagogy.