* 1447094
* Unearthing Aftershocks: Physical Simulations, Statistical Models, and New Observations
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Bruce Shaw, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Earthquakes occur not as single isolated events, but as clusters of events. In
the aftermath of an earthquake, many smaller ones happen, called aftershocks, at
a rate which decreases with the time following an event. Occasionally one of the
aftershocks is even larger than the mainshock that triggered it. These
aftershocks are important to understand, both for the insights they give us into
earthquake processes, but also as a practical measure for society, as
understanding them better aids in preparing for and recovery from the aftermath
of a large earthquake. One aim of this work is to develop scientific knowledge
which can contribute to a new effort to develop Operational Earthquake Forecast
capabilities, which will provide automated tools for emergency managers to
receive real-time updated forecasts using aftershock clustering properties to
better quantify hazards, for use in response and recovery and planning, as well
as outreach and communication to the broader public. The investigators on this
project are part of a team working to develop that system.

Aftershocks of earthquakes are particularly interesting phenomena in that they
have been shown to have a wide variety of statistical regularities, and yet
remain, at the core, not understood, in the sense that a physical model has yet
to be developed which can reproduce all the statistical regularities. In the
absence of a physical model, a number of statistical models have been built to
develop synthetic catalogs and forecasting methods, among other uses. But what
statistical ingredients to include remain uncertain. This proposal seeks to
develop a better physical understanding of aftershocks from a variety of
approaches, and apply this understanding in a number of useful ways. Three
specific elements are proposed. One is a new physical model, which treats a
fault as a multi-stranded rough set of surfaces, and is capable of reproducing
the spatio-temporal features and productivity statistics. The second one is a
new type of statistical measurement, which uses the abundance of aftershocks
close to the rupture area to better resolve the spatial relationships among
aftershocks and the mainshock. The third one is a new set of statistical models
to integrate with time dependent hazard models, enabling generalizations to
incorporate the new non-separable magnitude-spatial kernels indicated by the
observations. Success in any of these elements could further help in quantifying
earthquake hazards, through improved physical understandings of ingredients in
empirically based ground motion relations used to estimate and design for
engineering demands, and scaling and clustering behavior in operational
earthquake forecasting, a tool of significant societal use in response and
planning in the aftermath of a large earthquake. The project would aid in the
training and mentoring of an early career scientist. The project would also
support the participation of the PI in organizations developing operational
earthquake forecasting capability, WGCEP (Working Group on California Earthquake
Probabilities), and their application, NEPEC (National Earthquake Prediction
Evaluation Council).