* 1447291
* Ocean Acidification Category 1: Identifying Adaptive Responses of Polar Fishes in a Vulnerable Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 08/18/2014,04/30/2016
* Sean Place, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 85,127.00

The proposed research will investigate the interacting and potentially
synergistic influence of two oceanographic features - ocean acidification and
the projected rise in mean sea surface temperature - on the performance of
Notothenioids, the dominant fish of the Antarctic marine ecosystem.
Understanding the joint effects of acidification and temperature rise on these
fish is a vital component of predicting the resilience of coastal marine
ecosystems. Notothenioids have repeatedly displayed a narrow window of
physiological tolerances when subjected to abiotic stresses. Given that
evolutionary adaptation may have led to finely-tuned traits with narrow
physiological limits in these organisms, this system provides a unique
opportunity to examine physiological trade-offs associated with acclimation to
the multi-stressor environment expected from future atmospheric CO2 projections.
Understanding these trade-offs will provide valuable insight into the capacity
species have for responses to climate change via phenotypic plasticity. As an
extension to functional measurements, this study will use evolutionary
approaches to map variation in physiological responses onto the phylogeny of
these fishes and the genetic diversity within species. These approaches offer
insight into the historical constraints and future potential for evolutionary
optimization. The research will significantly expand the genomic resources
available to polar researchers and will support the training of graduate
students and a post doc at an EPSCoR institution. Research outcomes will be
incorporated into classroom curriculum.