* 1447091
* Spatio-temporal seismicity changes and high-resolution fault zone structures associated with recent large earthquakes in China
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Zhigang Peng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,076.00

Large earthquakes occur on major fault zones. Obtaining spatio-temporal changes
of seismic activities and detailed fault zone properties around the times of
large earthquakes are long-sought goals in earthquake seismology. Sometimes
large shallow earthquakes are preceded by increased seismic activity also known
as ?foreshocks?. However, the exact relationship among foreshocks, mainshock
nucleation and fault zone structures are still in debate. Recently several large
earthquakes occurred around the Tibetan Plateau in China, and produced
significant damages and casualties. These include the 2008 Ms7.3 Yutian, Ms8.0
Wenchuan, the 2010 Ms7.0 Yushu, the 2013 Ms7.0 Lushan, and the 2014 Ms7.3 Yutian
earthquakes. Among them, the Yushu and Yutian mainshocks had clear evidence of
M4-5 foreshocks, while the Wenchuan and Lushan mainshocks did not., a
comprehensive analysis could provide us a better understanding on whether
foreshocks exist and their physical mechanisms. This project will support a team
to conduct a systematic examination of seismicity changes around the times of
these large earthquakes in China, as well as high-resolution imaging of fault
zone structures. The study will employ continuous waveforms recorded by
permanent seismic stations around the region of each mainshock, as well as dense
aftershock deployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine evolutionary changes in
seismicity and fault zone processes, the researchers plan to conduct the
following tasks: (1) Use a recently developed waveform matched filter technique
to detect all earthquakes long before the occurrence of each mainshock; (2) Use
newly relocate catalogs to search for spatio-temporal evolutions before
mainshock, as well as performing Epidemic Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS)
modeling and deriving source properties; (3) Identify fault zone head waves
along the rupture zones of several recent events; and (4) Perform joint
inversion of P and FZHWs for high-resolution fault interface properties. With
multi-facet techniques and extensive waveform data, they look to obtain a more
complete picture on evolutions of seismic activities and their relationship with
fault zone processes around the epicenters of several large intra-plate
earthquakes in China. This project can provide important new evidence on the
existence (or lack of) precursory changes that precede large mainshocks. The
obtained results are essential for evaluating the use of foreshocks as
forecasting tools and seismic hazard mitigation in these regions. The project
will develop data products such as newly detected earthquake catalog and share
with other researchers via peer-reviewed publications. This project will support
both graduate students and undergraduate interns to conduct scientific research
in China, and promote international collaboration. The project is co-supported
by the ISE Global Venture Fund.