* 1447832
* Influence of Free Tropospheric Ozone and Particulate Matter on Surface Air Quality in the Western U.S.
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Daniel Jaffe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 923,449.00

Measurements of the atmospheric concentrations of many important air pollutants
have been ongoing for over 10 years at the Mt. Bachelor Observatory (MBO)
located at the summit of Mt. Bachelor in the Deschutes National Forest in
central Oregon. MBO is the only high elevation (2.8 km) atmospheric research
station on the west coast of the U.S. To date, measurements taken at this site
have been able to identify a significant trend in baseline ozone entering the
U.S. due to long-distant transport from Asia during spring, explain some of the
causes for variability in ozone production in wildfire plumes, and demonstrate
the first evidence for a significant pool of oxidized mercury in the free
troposphere.

This project continues to support the collection of these data at MBO and also
supports the collection of several new types of data. The new data will provide
information on aerosol optical properties and on the concentration of a chemical
that is predominantly produced by wildfires. The new measurements are designed
to help distinguish between the sources of ozone and particulate matter related
to biomass burning from those associated with urban and industrial activity and
from those transported from Asia.

The primary goals for the project are: (1) Examine the concentrations,
interannual variability and controlling factors for ozone (O3), particulate
matter (PM) and other key pollutants in the spring at MBO and throughout the
Western US. The purpose is to better understand the cause for the recent
positive trends in ozone at MBO and the contribution from long-range transport
and from upper troposphere/lower stratosphere (UTLS) events; and (2) Examine the
concentrations, interannual variability and controlling factors for O3, PM and
other key pollutants in summer at MBO and throughout the Western US. Emphasis
will be placed on understanding the relationship between carbon monoxide (CO),
O3, PM, peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), and acetonitrile (CH3CN) to improve the
understanding of the processes that control O3 and PM in wildfire plumes.
Several specific hypotheses about the sources and transformation of various
atmospheric compounds measured at MBO will be evaluated in this study. New
measurements at the site will facilitate this investigation. The new
measurements include: aerosol absorption using a Tricolor Absorption Photometer;
particle sizing using a scanning mobility particle size spectrometer; and
measurements of the concentrations of acetonitrile.