* 1447440
* EAGER: Characterizing Regime Shifts in Data Streams using Computational Topology - the Mathematics of Shape
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* James Meiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 61,490.00

Time-series data arise in a wide array of engineered systems, including network
traffic, vibration sensors on machine tools, acoustic sensors on reactor
containment vessels, and many other examples. The development of efficient and
effective methods to characterize the patterns in such data has widespread
utility in engineering, commerce and other fields. Methods for characterizing
patterns in these streams could be used to detect malware attacks on a network,
a lathe bearing that is degrading, or an impending containment failure in a
reactor. Common challenges include observability - situations when sensors are
expensive or difficult to deploy, or when they perturb the behavior under
examination - as well as high information content, noise, and rapid regime
shifts. The ultimate goal of this EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to use computational topology, the fundamental mathematics of shape,
to deal with these challenges. Shape is perhaps the roughest notion of structure
and can be particularly robust to contamination of the signal. The specific goal
of this study is to develop new methods for identifying and categorizing the
temporal patterns associated with the regime shifts a stream of data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A topological approach to time series analysis is distinct
from standard methods of the machine learning and stream-mining communities,
which typically use probabilistic approaches and often implicitly assume
linearity. This project seeks to extract nonlinear structure not necessarily
visible in a regresssion or spectral approach. Indeed, a regime shift need not
correspond to a change in the frequency content of a signal, but could
nevertheless be represented as a shift in the homology (e.g., Betti numbers) of
the embedded signal. A goal is to develop techniques useful to engineers and
scientists for the detection of incipient system failure or rapid evaluation of
state changes from hidden causes. Existing algorithms of computational topology
often require lengthy computations, especially for large data sets in many
dimensions. However, since not all of those variables may be observable, one may
have to reconstruct the full dynamics from partial measurements--e.g., using the
process called delay-coordinate embedding. This project seeks rapid evaluation
of Betti numbers based on incomplete, partial embeddings. A novel aspect is that
the dynamics gives rise to a multivalued map on a simplicial complex, a "witness
map." Selection of multiple parameters in the algorithms will be based on
persistent homology, previously developed only for the analysis of static data
sets and for a single parameter. The ultimate goal is robust and rapid regime
detection for a limited data stream from a "black-box" source.