* 1447397
* SBIR Phase I:  Monolithic CMOS-Integration of Electroplated Copper MEMS Inertial Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Noureddine Tayebi, InSense Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can lead to a revolution
in the consumer&lt;br/&gt;electronics market (mobile handsets, tablets, game
consoles and wearables), wherein high performance,&lt;br/&gt;low power, small
footprint multisensing (not limited to inertial sensing) platforms with timing
devices,&lt;br/&gt;are all directly microfabricated on a common ASIC substrate.
Sensor fusion can produce unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;user experiences by using data
collected from all sensors and processed using machine
learning&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. This can further boost the sensor and timing
markets that are expected to exceed $6 billion&lt;br/&gt;dollars by 2017.
Moreover, the emergent Internet of Things (IoTs) and wearable markets are
expected to&lt;br/&gt;reach $20 billion dollars by 2025, which can induce a
rapid growth of such intelligent sensor fusion&lt;br/&gt;market. This can have a
tremendous societal impact as wearable devices and IoT systems, interfaced
with&lt;br/&gt;mobile platforms, can be used to monitor people?s health, safety
and energy consumption. Making these&lt;br/&gt;solutions affordable will make it
amenable to low income households not only in the US but also
around&lt;br/&gt;the world. It will also enable researchers to attain new
frontiers of knowledge such as in digital sensory&lt;br/&gt;systems. The long-
term goals are to provide such intelligent sensor fusion
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to demonstrate wafer-scale&lt;br/&gt;microfabrication of
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) inertial sensors directly on
the&lt;br/&gt;application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) substrates, by
using electroplated copper (e-Cu) as a&lt;br/&gt;structural material. MEMS
inertial sensors, such as gyroscopes and accelerometers, are pervasively
used&lt;br/&gt;in consumer electronics and automotive industries. Current trends
are, however, requiring higher device&lt;br/&gt;performance with smaller
footprints, wherein multi-degree-of-freedom sensors are integrated on the
same&lt;br/&gt;package, to enable new capabilities and user experiences. These
requirements can be met by&lt;br/&gt;monolithically fabricating inertial sensors
on ASIC substrates, which is complex to achieve with silicon&lt;br/&gt;as a
structural material. Using e-Cu, which is currently used for ASIC metal
interconnects, as the&lt;br/&gt;structural material, can enable easier routing
to implement optimized mechanical structures, smaller&lt;br/&gt;dimensions given
the high density of copper, extremely low cost as no wafer bonding is required,
smaller&lt;br/&gt;form factors, multiple sensors on a single die, and much
smaller parasitics providing low noise and higher&lt;br/&gt;performance. Phase I
tasks will be to wafer-scale fabricate and characterize e-Cu gyroscopes
and&lt;br/&gt;accelerometers with optimal performance parameters and address any
drift problems that could emanate&lt;br/&gt;from structural reliability issues
associated with the MEMS elements.