* 1447239
* Collaborative Proposal: Gulf Coast ADVANCE: Cross Institutional Synergy for Women Scientists
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Julie Cwikla, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2017
* USD 480,312.00

The newly founded CISSTEM: Center for Integrative Studies in STEM at the
University of South Alabama is ideally situated to serve as home for the Gulf
Coast ADVANCE partnership. Scientists from the University of South Alabama
(USA), the University of Southern Mississippi Gulf Coast campuses (USM), Bishop
State Community College (BSCC), and the Dauphin Island Sea Lab (DISL) coalesce
under the CISSTEM umbrella to highlight, support, and develop women scientists
on the Gulf Coast of Alabama and Mississippi. These institutions serve a student
population that is at least 60% women and as high as 44% African American. The
five Project Directors span the fields of Psychology, Computer Science,
Mathematics, Marine Science, and Meteorology. The aim of this project is to help
shape a Psychologically Healthy Workplace (APA, 2012) that is both rigorous and
considerate of work-life balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gulf Coast ADVANCE
program has three major goals:(1) Highlight, promote, and encourage the
scientific research and accomplishments of our 77 STEM women faculty members;(2)
Curb the isolation women scientists experience in their work by gathering a
critical mass of STEM women in the region to serve as a professional support and
collaborative network; and (3) Transform the cultural and institutional
landscapes so that work-life balance issues are explicitly addressed in policy
and practice, shaping a healthier more productive environment for all
scientists. The project uses the rich body of literature on gender issues for
women in the sciences generated by previous ADVANCE grant recipients to guide
the mentoring and collaborative events for women as well as shape administrator
training and policy discussions. The project is designed to improve the
workplace for individual women scientists and create workplaces at all four
institutions that will promote healthy work-life balance and partnerships for
all STEM faculty.