* 1447237
* EAGER: US IGNITE: A gigabit network and Cyber-Physical framework for Advanced Manufacturing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2020
* USD 284,170.00

Manufacturing, and especially advanced manufacturing, is a key element of long-
term U.S. prosperity and national security. Advanced manufacturing is at the
threshold of the next major revolution catalyzed by advances in networking and
Internet technologies. A new generation of agile and 'information based
manufacturing' will involve collaborative use of cyber physical resources,
simulation and other design/manufacturing tools. In this project, the
manufacturing domain of interest is an emerging field called Micro Devices
Assembly (MDA). MDA is an emerging advanced manufacturing field involving the
manipulation and assembly of micron sized devices. Products in sensors, medical
devices (such as heart monitors), surveillance devices and semiconductor
manufacturing can be produced using such technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project an ultra-fast network links distributed cyber physical resources
which are used to accomplish the assembly of micron sized devices. The project
has two major categories of tools involving the life cycle of micro devices
assembly: cyber and physical. Cyber tools will be used to accomplish of assembly
planning alternatives, analysis of candidate assembly plans, and Virtual Reality
(VR) based simulation of assembly alternatives for target micro designs.
Physical tools (or resources) will include manufacturing equipment (to assemble
target micro designs), cameras and other related sensors (to guide in the
complex assembly as well as to provide feedback during assembly). Such a cyber
physical approach demonstrates the feasibility of using ultrafast networks and
advanced networking technologies such as Software Defined Networking to support
next generation collaborative frameworks for advanced manufacturing. In this
system the high-definition multimedia streaming interfaces associated with the
VR environment will enable partners to collaboratively propose, compare and
refine assembly planning alternatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
use the advanced manufacturing test bed outlined in this project to support
teaching of cyber physical concepts and manufacturing frameworks to engineering
students at Oklahoma State University; some of the cyber tools developed will
also be used subsequently as part of K-12 STEM learning activities involving
students in Stillwater, Oklahoma City and the Muscogee (Creek) Nation schools in
Oklahoma.