* 1447854
* SBIR Phase I:  Single Crystal Group III-Nitride Bulk Acoustic Resonators and Bulk Acoustic Wave Filter Components for Mobile Communications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Jeffrey Shealy, Akoustis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project improves miniaturization, signal quality and
battery life of consumer mobile wireless devices by commercialization of
innovative single crystal resonators and acoustic wave filter solutions. Beyond
consumer systems, the acoustic resonator technology has applications in
industrial, medical, networking and military systems. The global market for bulk
acoustic wave (BAW) filter components is expected to grow to over $3B by 2016
compared to just $0.8B market in 2011. Such rapid market growth, driven by
signal convergence and proliferation of new allocated communications spectrum,
creates the opportunity for new market entrants.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses a critical
component need in today's radio frequency (RF) frontends for technologies such
as Mobile Wireless and The Internet of Things. Arguably, the acoustic wave
filter has evolved as the enabler of the RF frontend; it suffers, however, from
lossy performance. Current filters can dissipate, as heat, up to half of the RF
transmit power thus forcing significant overdesign of the RF power amp. This
increases the complexity of thermal management, and it reduces battery life.
Thus the inefficiency of current filter technologies increase the cost and size
of wireless devices. To address this critical need, the company proposes a more
efficient, lower loss acoustic filter technology. The research effort includes
design, simulation, materials synthesis and fabricated single crystal resonators
and bulk acoustic wave (BAW) filters using an experimental fabrication process
flow and novel circuit layout. The fabricated resonators will be characterized
for acoustic velocity, acoustic coupling and circuit quality factor.