* 1447083
* A Symposium and Workshop to Recommend Biodiversity Informatics Best Practices for Citizen Science Programs, October 27-31, 2014, Jonkoping, Sweden
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Robert Stevenson, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 35,098.00

The University of Massachussets Boston is awarded a grant to support a symposium
and workshop to bring together biodiversity scientists, citizen science project
leaders, and biodiversity information scientists to review case studies of
programs and propose best practices based on science and informatics standards.
The worshop will be held in Jönköping, Sweden together with the annual meeting
of Biodiversity Information Standards Taxonomic Databases Working Group (TDWG).
Citizen science projects, such as CitiSci.org, eBird, and REEF, provide unique
and valuable species occurrence records because they can mobilize citizens to
collect data in ways that scientists, alone, cannot. Citizen Science can be
thought of as a new kind of instrument that has demonstrated its ability to
provide important biodiversity data. However, the tradeoffs between engaging and
training people to participate and collecting useful scientific data are not
well understood. Some projects, developed in an education and outreach
framework, aim to simply engage and inform participants in science activities,
while others demand a much higher degree of skill and commitment to compile
scientifically sophisticated observations. The paper resulting from the
symposium/workshop provides guidance and best practice about the tensions
between recruiting, engaging, and training participants and ensuring a high
value of the data collected. In addition, the workshop provides guidance about
how to improve and quantify data quality, as there are no established procedures
for calibrating this new kind of instrument, we call Citizen Science.

The symposium/ workshop and resulting paper raises the prominence of Citizen
Science activities in biodiversity science and articulates the need for new
standards in biodiversity informatics. This effort drafts recommendations to
address unique needs to Citizen Science biodiversity data, such as the need to
incorporate common names standards, and metadata on survey methods and analysis
techniques to facilitate data re-use from Citizen Science programs. Citizen
Science programs are increasingly used in formal K-16 and informal science
education settings expanding opportunities of people to do authentic science and
increase science literacy and awareness of local environmental issues. The
resulting recommendation and best practices are shared with new Citizen Science
Alliance organization and their recently formed technology committee. This
information can guide designers and program managers of citizen science projects
who want to improve the scientific quality of the data they produce. Our
activities initiate a partnership between the Biodiversity Information Standards
(TWDG) and Citizen Science Alliance that can support biodiversity standards
development for Citizen Science.