* 1447730
* Contrasting Cenozoic Magmatism and Related Hydrothermal Systems, Western USA
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* John Dilles, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 02/29/2020
* USD 296,000.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;Water- and sulfur-rich andesite and dacite magmas in the
Andes, Cascades, Aleutians and other Circum-Pacific convergent-margin tectonic
settings are genetically related to magmatic-hydrothermal fluids that produce
numerous economic mineral deposits. Porphyry copper-molybdenum-gold mineral
deposits are the principal sources of mined copper and molybdenum, and together
with epithermal mineral deposits contribute much the world's gold and silver.
Annual raw metal production value is more than $25 billion (USA) and and
globally $100 billion (global). Many important deposits occur in the western
USA, and there remains potential to find more deposits with improved geologic
understanding. We plan to study volcanic and granitic rocks that are closely
associated with these deposits in the western USA, with the goal of a better
understanding of the magmatic processes that produce the hydrothermal fluids
(hot, water-rich, and metal-bearing solutions) that are responsible for these
mineral deposits. The study will investigate the petrology and geochemistry of
Eocene volcanic rocks related to the Carlin gold deposits (&gt;100 million
ounces of gold contained), Nevada, and Miocene volcanic rocks and granites
related to porphyry copper deposits of the western Cascades of the Pacific
Northwest. We plan to collect samples of these volcanic and igneous rocks and
analyze them for major and trace elements composition, the composition of
mineral constituents, the geochemical composition of the trace mineral zircon,
and isotopic composition (of strontium and neodymium) of the rock. These data
will allow characterization of the composition of the magmas and lead to a
better understanding of their origins and what magmatic processes are essential
to for large economic mineral deposits. Of particular interest is the
understanding of the water content, oxidation state, and the content of ore
components such as sulfur, copper, and gold, and how these contents may be
governed by contributions from basaltic magmas derived from the upper mantle or
from the upper crust. A potential economic outcome is increased understanding of
the magmatic processes that form economic hydrothermal mineral deposits. Such
knowledge will benefit the US minerals industry by broadening exploration tools.
The PI does geology coursework and training of students, many of whom seek
employment in exploration, exploitation, and environmental remediation of
mineral deposits. The PI annually co-teaches an 8-day field mapping of ore
deposits course that has enrolled in the past 10 years 250 professionals from 25
nations and 100 students. Since 2005, the PI has advised 17 graduate students (8
MS, 2 PhD completed) and 7 undergraduate theses, 2 international scholars, and
two postdocs (10 of 28 female). The PI has 30 years of success obtaining
industry sponsorship, which provides pathways for students to obtain practical
experience in the minerals industry and opening the way for future collaborative
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt; The planned research builds on and expands
our recent NSF-sponsored study that reported SHRIMP-RG ion microprobe analyses
of hafnium, titanium and rare earth element abundances of zircon, a nearly
ubiquitous and robust trace mineral in crustal magmas (Dilles et al., 2015).
Comparison of the compositions of zircons in ore-forming and barren granitic
plutons indicate that ore-forming granites crystallized at relatively low
temperature and have relatively small negative europium anomalies (Ballard et
al., 2001). This small Eu anomaly may result from water-rich silicic magmas that
suppress Eu-rich plagioclase crystallization and also lead to large magmatic
Sr/Y ratios characteristic of ore-forming intrusions. Second, the small zircon
europium anomaly may indicate oxidizing magmatic conditions, and we hypothesize
that this partly reflects oxidation due to SO2 degassing or ore fluids from
magmas with a relatively low Fe/S ratio. Oxidation of europium and iron in the
melt is produced by reduction of magmatic sulfate (S6+) to SO2 (S4+) upon
degassing. This interpretation reinforces the important role of oxidized sulfur-
rich fluids in porphyry and epithermal mineral deposit formation. Zircon
compositions thus may be used to identify ancient magmas that released
significant amounts of SO2-rich gases, and regional surveys of zircon
composition are potentially a valuable tool for mineral exploration. The new
research will extend understanding of zircon geochemistry and magmatic
compositions of the important Carlin gold district of northern Nevada, and
investigate the Cascade volcanoes of Oregon and Washington which contain
relatively few porphyry copper deposits relative to Arizona-New Mexico-Utah-
Montana and the Andes of Peru-Chile.