* 1447342
* Quantifying Geochemical Exchange at the Slab-Wedge Interface with Experiments and Natural Samples
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Christy Till, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 04/30/2020
* USD 275,216.00

Abstract for Proposal 1447342 Quantifying Geochemical Exchange at the Slab-Wedge
Interface with Experiments and Natural Samples&lt;br/&gt;PI: C.
Till&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to better understand the chemical
reactions that result when one tectonic plate sinks below another, bringing
water and other chemical constituents into the Earth's interior. The project
includes collaboration with Japanese colleagues and is partly supported by
International Science and Engineering. This type of plate-subduction produces
volcanic arcs like those in the Ring of Fire, as well as some of the largest
earthquakes on Earth every year. Understanding the chemical reactions that occur
as a result of subduction is ultimately important to understand why our planet
has a different type of crust than the other planets in our solar system, and
how the gases and magmas emitted from volcanic arcs affect the composition of
the Earth's atmosphere. Although we have long understood that subduction
contributes to these planet-wide processes, many questions remain about the
specific chemical reactions in which the plate-derived elements react with the
Earth's mantle. This lack of knowledge is largely due to the limitations of
studying subduction systems from the top down and can, in part, be resolved by
studying rare samples from the mantle in conjunction with high-pressure
experiments as proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses three specific questions about geochemical exchange at the
subducted plate- mantle interface: 1) Do hydrous minerals, in particular
chlorite, form at the base of the mantle wedge and play a key role in the
formation of arc magmas as hypothesized by high-pressure experiments and studies
of boron isotope fractionation?, 2) Does the composition of subducted sediment
melt resemble experimental predictions and subsequently react with the mantle to
produce andesitic arc magmas as predicted by geochemical models?, and 3) Do
subducted plate fluxes oxidize the mantle as debated by geochemical studies of
arc magmas and melt inclusions? To answer these questions we propose in-situ
analyses of the major and trace element, Fe3+/FeT, and boron isotopic
composition of rare peridotite and eclogite minerals from the Higashi-akaishi
ultramafic complex, Japan, which represent restites and trapped melts exhumed
from the base of the mantle wedge. The whole rock and mineral chemistry data
will also be used to constrain starting compositions for high-pressure
experiments on sediment melt-mantle wedge reactions in a complimentary effort to
the in-situ chemical and isotopic analyses.