* 1447107
* A new generation of earthquake source models- Past, present and future
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mark Simons, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,995.00

This project focuses on theoretical and computational developments needed for
the next generation of seismic models. This effort concentrates quantifying the
impact of uncertainties in models and to rigorously incorporate uncertainties
into the algorithms behind the models. The last decade has seen considerable
improvements in modeling capability and a substantial expansion of geophysical
observations including data from dense seismic networks, networks of permanent
GPS installations and spatially synoptic geodetic imaging data from orbiting
radar and optical satellites. Despite these efforts, perhaps the biggest
obstacle to significant progress in observational earthquake source modeling
arises from imperfect predictions of observations due to uncertainties in Earth
structure - the impact of which are generally overlooked. Indeed, for large
earthquakes, our ability to measure ground motions far exceeds our ability to
model them. The expected benefits of this approach include improving the
sharpness of our images of seismic and aseismic fault slip processes -- thereby
directly impacting both our models for fault mechanics and inferences of seismic
hazard. The algorithms developed here are directly applicable to other problems
such as models of volcano deformation. All tools developed here will be
documented and openly available to the geophysical community as open source.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the concept of the misfit covariance
as used in inversions for the distribution of slip on subsurface faults. The
misfit covariance is a combination of covariances in observations (often assumed
independent) and covariances associated with inaccurate model predictions (often
entirely ignored). Yet, this prediction error can dwarf the observation error
and can induce important covariances between observations. These covariances
dictate the relative weighting between disparate data types as well as the
information content found in observations from dense networks. The proposed
approach to estimating the full model prediction error relies on developing
computationally tractable methods for estimating the sensitivity of geodetic and
seismic observations to perturbations in assumed material properties. This
approach exploits recent advances in Bayesian earthquake source modeling and new
massively parallel computational approaches using GPUs.