* 1447893
* EAGER: Lab-in-a-Smartphone
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 1447893&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cunningham, Brian&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Lab-in-a-
Smartphone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance:&lt;br/&gt;The wide availability of
a low-cost, robust, and multimode biosensor detection capability will spur
accelerated development of sensing applications in myriad settings where
laboratory capabilities are lacking, or where current closed platforms are aimed
at only a very specific commercial market. Smartphone-based detection systems
are expected to find applications in situations where laboratory facilities are
not available such as point-of-care analysis in the home, clinic, farm, or
remote locations. The integrated approach to be developed in the proposed work
would enable mobile sensing applications that include diagnosis of disease
through sensing of specific biomarker proteins (cardiac, cancer, and others),
specific identification of infectious disease (viral or bacterial, as performed
by PCR), sensing of allergens in food, food/drug manufacturing quality control,
sensing of counterfeit drugs, breath analysis, and environmental monitoring of
air/water/soil resources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this EAGER proposal is to utilize integrated
semiconductor laser diodes and LEDs as illumination sources within the
smartphone, and a thin film waveguide/grating coupler to bring light to the
sample. The system will operate simply by placing the sample-under-test over the
analysis opening, while a custom software application controls all other aspects
of the measurement. The resulting system will be capable of performing
UV/Visible wavelength absorption spectroscopy, UV/Visible wavelength reflectance
spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and
label-free optical biosensor measurements. The platform will use custom
microfluidic cartridges designed to perform sample preparation, liquid mixing,
and other steps of cell/biomolecular assays that can be developed by the entire
ecosystem of mobile application developers.