* 1447900
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time Oxygen Monitoring Instrument for Aircraft Fuel Tanks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Charles Branham, MarqMetrix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,567.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a safe and
robust real-time O2 monitoring instrument for aircraft fuel tanks. This
instrument will benefit the commercial aircraft industry by dramatically
decreasing the probability of fuel tank explosions on planes and potentially
save lives. This technology could also be used to insure that military plane and
helicopter fuel tanks are adequately purged after they are pierced by
ballistics, protecting both the aircraft and military personnel onboard. In
addition, the technology developed by this project might be used to monitor the
ullage in oil tankers and reservoir to prevent explosions, greatly benefiting
oil industry and preventing oil spills. Finally, because this technology makes
measuring O2 in harsh chemical environments possible, it might be applied to
monitor O2 in the pharmaceutical and specialty chemical manufacturing process,
where reduced O2 is often critical to protect expensive catalyst from fouling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop a safe and robust real-time O2 monitoring
instrument for aircraft fuel tanks. Such an instrument is needed to address
mandates from federal transportation safety agencies, which require commercial
aircraft to eliminate the possibility of fuel tank explosions. The proposed
instrument advances the state-of-the-art by employing a multi-component optical
sensor based on the fusion of optical oxygen, temperature, and pressure sensors.
The combination of these three robust, stable and sensitive sensors allows us to
accurately and precisely measure O2 concentration in the range of temperatures,
pressures and concentrations found in aircraft fuel tanks without the risk of
spark hazards. The goal of Phase I will be to develop a prototype O2 monitoring
instrument for aircraft fuel tanks and demonstrate that our technology can make
safe, precise, and accurate O2 measurements in jet fuel vapors over an extend
period of time.