* 1447700
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Scalable, Private Algorithms for Continual Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sofya Raskhodnikova, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

For the very same reasons that big data is transforming modern life, it also
presents a profound threat to privacy and the control of personal information. A
major challenge associated with big data is to enable statistical analysis of
complex data sets, without compromising the privacy of the individuals whose
data they contain. Addressing this challenge is both necessary, since access to
many data sources is restricted due to privacy concerns, and difficult, as
numerous attacks on supposedly anonymized data demonstrate. This project will
investigate the design and limitations of algorithms for the private, continual
analysis of time-varying data sets. That is, it will study algorithms that
release information about a data set as it is collected (say, in the form of a
data stream from the web, or a long-term sociological study). The research will
advance the state of the art in the private analysis of "big" -- massive,
complex, time-varying -- data. If successful, the project will provide enabling
technologies that facilitate research in areas where access to sensitive data is
limited by confidentiality concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus
on the design of algorithms that satisfy differential privacy -- a rigorous
notion of privacy that is widely studied in computer science and related fields.
The privacy implications of sequential releases are still poorly understood, and
relatively few of the algorithms developed in the extensive recent literature on
private data analysis allow for sequential releases with high accuracy. The two
major thrusts of the project are (1) algorithms for the "continual release"
model, and (2) algorithms for the "local" model, which offers even stronger
privacy guarantees. The work will provide novel algorithmic design techniques
and understanding of complexity-theoretic limitations of algorithms for these
models. The research will entail advances in related areas such as learning
theory, statistical inference and streaming algorithms. The project will also
include educational, outreach and work-force training activities designed to
broaden the impact of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information
see the project web site at: http://www.cse.psu.edu/~asmith/projects/continual/