* 1447404
* Light Element Investigations of Natural and Experimental Zircon
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Dustin Trail, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2019
* USD 297,164.00

The geological events of Earth's past not only shaped the present-day planet,
but will also influence the evolution of Earth in the future. In geology, rocks
are the key to the past; in many cases they represent the only resource
available to study "deep time." However, no known whole rocks exists from before
4 billion years ago. The reservoir of known terrestrial material is limited to
very rare "grains of sand" found in only a handful of sediments throughout the
world. In the absence of the original rock that hosted these "grains of sand," -
or specifically the mineral zircon - there are numerous challenges. This
research will address these problems through two complementary approaches. The
first involves measurements to deduce the chemical composition of these very
rare minerals (zircons), while the second involves the synthesis of the mineral
in the controlled environment of a high pressure, high temperature experimental
geology laboratory. These experiments - where pressure, temperature, and magma
composition can be varied - will serve as a stepping stone to interpret the
chemistry of the most ancient known terrestrial samples. The application of
these experiments to natural samples will result in new knowledge about the
environments and conditions of the earliest Earth (including the composition of
magmas), and is therefore a key source of information to understand the
evolution of Earth through time. Broader impacts of this work also include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in novel high pressure / high
temperature crystal and glass synthesis techniques. Synthetic glasses and
crystals make up a component of many consumer products today. Students will also
conduct measurements of these materials using modern analytical technology such
as a laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer. And finally,
secondary school science teachers will benefit from laboratory demonstrations
that explain how geologists determine the ages of ancient rocks and minerals;
they will also participate in the development of simple diagrams that explain
key concepts of geology and geochemistry that they can then use for instruction
in their classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental work for this project
will be conducted using a piston cylinder apparatus at the University of
Rochester. Zircons will: (i) be synthesized in silicic melts; or (ii) approach
equilibrium elemental and isotopic compositions through time series experiments
in the presence of fluids. Partition coefficients/isotope compositions of run
products will be determined for light stable elements in zircon and co-existing
phases. The first goal is to robustly calibrate the incorporation light elements
into the zircon lattice as a function of melt composition, melt structure, and
temperature. Second, the developed calibrations will be applied to Archean and
Hadean zircons. These experiments and the application of the results will play a
fundamental role in the quest to link chemical signatures preserved in ancient
zircons with early crystal processes. This work will also extend knowledge of
the zircon parent rock composition long since gone.