* 1447402
* SBIR Phase I:  Simple and Effective Fouling Release Coatings To Make Industrial Heat Exchangers More Energy Efficient
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Timothy Rost, Nano Hydrophobics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project include saving energy, lowering industrial and
power generation-caused greenhouse gas emissions, improving the competitiveness
of U.S. industry, and reducing the quantity of chemicals introduced into the
nation?s water supplies. More than 1% of U.S. energy consumption is expended
overcoming the insulating effects of naturally occurring mineral fouling. This
technology has the potential to reduce U.S. energy consumption by 0.7 to 1.9% of
annual US carbon-based energy representing from .55 to 1.5 quads. The reductions
in energy consumption will also reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) on the
order of 54.1 to 125.8 million metric tons of GHGs. Recognizing climate change
is a worldwide problem, if fully deployed to other industrialized nations, this
technology has the potential to eliminate 0.7% to 1.7% of the world's GHGs which
equal 252.6 to 571.3 million metric tons of GHGs. The competitiveness of US
products will be improved by large reductions of energy-related manufacturing
costs without need of capital investment, and it will reduce chemical additives
to cooling tower water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks a
solution to "the major unresolved problem of heat transfer" which is naturally
occurring mineral fouling on heat transfer surfaces (HTS). This often overlooked
problem consumes 1% of the total energy consumed by the U.S. and other
industrialized nations, and represents 1% of our planet's greenhouse gas
emissions. The objective of the research is to develop long-lasting thin film
coatings, which can protect HTS from fouling, while not impeding thermal
efficiency. Using recently discovered nanomaterials, solution is applied as a
coating to transform the surface properties of HTS to ones having the lowest
surface energy values that have ever been created. With a low surface energy,
the coatings reduce fouling nucleation as well as reducing fouling adherence to
the HTS. The low adhesion of any fouling which nucleates, combined with the
action of water flowing over the HTS should cause the release of any remaining
fouling, effectively making the surfaces "self-cleaning." This self-cleaning
mechanism has been successfully demonstrated in laboratory experiments. This
research examines the fundamental chemistry and materials science of a new class
of low surface energy self-assembling ultra hydrophobic nanocoatings that could
spawn innovation across a range of disciplines.