* 1447795
* BIGDATA: F: DKM: Addressing the two V's of Veracity and Variety in Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Dong Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

Data of questionable quality have led to significantly negative economic and
social impacts on organizations, leading to overrun in costs, lost revenue, and
decreased efficiencies. The issues on data reliability, credibility, and
provenance have become even more daunting when dealing with the variety of data,
especially data that are not directly collected by an organization, but from the
third-party sources such as social media, data brokers, and crowdsourcing. To
address such issues, this project aims to develop a Data Valuation Engine (DVE)
that solves the critical problem of data reliability, credibility and
provenance, and provides accountability and quality processes right from data
acquisition. The DVE leverages and innovates techniques in estimation theory,
data fusion and machine learning to fill a critical gap in data accountability
and quality, thereby providing a transformative step in countering the
ubiquitous data quality issues found in almost every application domain from
business to environment to health to national security. The DVE will be
integrated in the Hadoop ecosystem and will be agnostic to the data source,
application or analytics, and provided as a hosted solution to the community.
The user will interact with DVE by providing the data sources and relevant data
necessary to solve a problem.

The DVE in this project will be developed in a largely application-independent
manner. The key challenges to develop this engine include: (i) How to generate
the data quality indication labels to score data sources and the content of data
based on various factors such as reliability, credibility, uncertainty and
confidence? (ii) How to integrate data from various sources with different
labeled scores? (iii) How to robustly evaluate the proposed engine in a broad
spectrum of applications that serve as a proxy of a variety of real-world
scenarios? The research plan has been designed to synergistically address the
above challenges with a robust evaluation plan. Given the generality of the
proposed methods, models and system, the project will potentially impact variety
of applications of science, engineering, and social science and have broad
environmental, economic, and health benefits. The PIs will release open source
software and applicable data. The PIs will also provide a hosted DVE platform
for a broad user and participant base. This project is also providing students
with greater exposure to the areas of big data analytics, cloud computing, data
fusion and data mining, both in courses and research experiences.