* 1447056
* Constraining the Role of Gas-Phase Organic Oxidation in New-Particle Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 470,302.00

Atmospheric new-particle formation, cluster growth leading to secondary aerosol
(SOA) formation, involves facile oxidation of organic compounds and is being
revealed as a complex and challenging topic in atmospheric chemistry. Aerosol-
climate interactions are a key source of uncertainty in climate forcing [IPCC],
affecting both planetary radiation balances, and climate through direct and
indirect changes in cloud formation and their properties. Uncertainty in aerosol
radiative forcing terms limits our ability to project climate sensitivity (the
global average temperature change caused by a given forcing) from currently
observed climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the range of chemical
mechanisms occurring in natural atmospheres, chemists may choose to study the
oxidation and condensation steps in the controllable environment of a chamber,
typically interfaced to a desired set of analytical instruments to enable the
progress of particle formation, condensation and growth to be optimally studied.
Work under this project is directed towards improving understanding of particle
formation steps involving interactions of low volatility hydrocarbons (e.g.
terpene - ozone adducts) with sulfuric acid clusters. Graduate students will
carry out a series of measurements, along with photochemical modelling, in
chambers both at Pittsburgh (CMU), and the European CLOUD (Cosmics Leaving
OUtdoor Droplets) atmospheric facility at CERN.