* 1447381
* SBIR Phase I:  Imaging Flow Cytometer for High-Throughput High-Content Screening
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Eric Diebold, Omega Biosystems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to improve the efficiency of discovering new drugs by
introducing a new type of instrument for fluorescent imaging of cells at high
throughput. This innovation will allow pharmaceutical researchers to image
individual cells at speeds more than an order of magnitude faster than the
state-of-the-art instrumentation, which will improve the rate at which
scientists run drug screening experiments. By taking high-resolution images of
individual cells during these screening experiments, far more detailed
information can be gleaned than using conventional high throughput methods,
leading to a deeper scientific understanding of drug-cell interactions. This
instrument will address the growing $15 billion drug discovery instrumentation
market by providing a new type of high throughput readout capability for the
drug discovery industry. Further, the ability to perform multiplexed multi-color
fluorescent imaging of cells will reduce the number of experiments required to
identify new pharmaceutical compounds, thereby improving the efficiency and
reducing the cost of drug discovery, ultimately reducing the time-to-market of
new drugs. This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop an imaging flow
cytometer instrument to improve the speed of single-cell analysis in the field
of drug discovery. While multi-parameter single-cell phenotypic analysis
provides great information about the cellular interactions of a pharmaceutical
compound, this type of experimental readout is too slow to perform on the large
numbers of samples common in a drug discovery laboratory. By performing parallel
fluorescent image analysis of cells in flow, this process can be accelerated
such that more than 100,000 compounds can be screened each day in an automated
laboratory setting. This project aims to develop an instrument capable of such
high throughput image analysis using fluorescence, combining techniques and
technologies adapted from the fields of flow cytometry and high-speed
fluorescence microscopy to accomplish this throughput goal. The successful
outcome of this project will yield an instrument capable of imaging cells
flowing at meter per second flow rates with diffraction-limited spatial
resolution using multiple fluorescent colors.