* 1447172
* Collaborative Research: Development of Anti-fouling Electrochemical Membranes for Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Yossef Elabd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,991.00

1159764/115/8990&lt;br/&gt;Chaplin/Elabd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by
the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professors
Brian Chaplin and Yossef Elabd to develop and test reactive electrochemical
membranes (REMs) for water treatment applications. The novel REM acts to both
filter and destroy contaminants on its service. These self-cleaning properties
will allow the REM to have a long operational life without membrane fouling, and
have the potential to greatly enhance the application space of membrane
technologies. Work will focus on understanding the mechanisms of operation of
the REMs at the fundamental level by using advanced characterization techniques.
This work seeks to lay the groundwork for a new generation of reactive electrode
materials that will have utility in a vast number of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a successful REM would be a monumental
step in overcoming the primary downfall of membrane separation systems (Membrane
Fouling). The work proposed here has the potential to lay the groundwork for the
development of REMs that can operate with minimal fouling which will result in
more efficient aqueous separations. Such an accomplishment would radically
change the fields of Environmental and Chemical Engineering and has broad
applications in water treatment and other fields. Specifically, the proposed
research is expected to contribute significantly to two main areas in water
treatment: 1) membrane filtration and 2) water disinfection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also result in the training and
development of one graduate and several undergraduate students and will seek to
increase participation of students from underrepresented groups in engineering
research. The proposed work will also seek to initiate the development of a
Villanova-Drexel joint NSF-REU/RET program focused on: Water-Energy Nexus:
Sustainable Solutions through Materials, Engineering, and Design. This joint
effort will utilize the Universities? focus on undergraduate education and will
be the most efficient means of achieving community outreach in the greater
Philadelphia area.