* 1447109
* Collaborative Research: Improved Ionospheric Source Models for Imaging Upper Mantle/Transition Zone Resistivity
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Gary Egbert, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2019
* USD 229,993.00

Daily variations of Earth's magnetic field result primarily from electric
currents flowing above us in the ionosphere, at heights of about 100-150 km,
with a secondary component due to currents induced below us in the deep interior
of the electrically conducting Earth. This is a collaborative project, bringing
solid Earth and ionospheric scientists together in an effort to better
understand and separate the two current sources. A primary motivation for this
effort is to improve understanding of the smaller and subtler internal
component, and thence improve the ability to image electrical conductivity
variations deep (200-700 km) in the Earth. Conductivity of rocks at these depths
is highly sensitive to even small amounts of water, so these images will
ultimately allow estimates the amount and distribution of water in the deep
Earth, and improve understanding of deep Earth water cycles. These results will
have important implications to a number of scientific fields, including the
dynamics and evolution of the Earth and evolution of the oceans. The crucial
step in this study is to significantly improve models of the external
ionospheric component of the magnetic field. Such magnetic field models have
many potentially important applications to basic and applied scientific research
in geomagnetism and space physics. Ultimately they will be useful in
applications of direct societal relevance where the knowledge of an accurate
magnetic field is required, including navigation, orientation of solar arrays,
and geophysical exploration for natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
conjunction with recent laboratory results on electrical conductivity of mantle
minerals, improved imaging of electrical conductivity in Earth's mantle will
provide valuable new information about water in the mantle, with potentially
profound implications for mantle rheology, and for the dynamics and geochemical
evolution of the Earth. Information about deep Earth resistivity comes almost
exclusively from observations of long-period geomagnetic variations observed on
Earth's surface--the sum of external fields due to ionospheric and
magnetospheric current systems, and internal fields due to currents induced in
the conducting Earth. Frequencies of 0.5-10 cycles per day (cpd) are most
relevant to imaging through the aesthenosphere and into the transition zone, and
these variations mostly have their origin in the ionospheric dynamo region at
100-150 km height. These ionospheric currents depend on the spatial and temporal
varying thermospheric neutral wind and the ionospheric conductivity
distribution. To reliably interpret the relatively subtle induced signals
indicative of Earth conductivity variations, these spatially complex ionospheric
magnetic field signals must be properly accounted. This project attacks this
challenging problem through collaboration between specialists in EM induction
imaging and experts in ionospheric physics and modeling. Spatial structure of
external source and internal conductivity variations will be estimated
simultaneously, using a large collection of ground-based geomagnetic array data
from both historical and modern eras. There are two novel components to the
proposed approach. First, a robust Principal Components Analysis (PCA) scheme is
used for initial data reduction. This PCA scheme massively reduces the number of
data (and thus the number of independent source parameters required), and allows
data from different eras to be merged, thus significantly increasing data
coverage. Second, the source modeling is tightly constrained through the use of
a mature physics based numerical model for ionospheric currents, the
Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere-Electrodynamics general Circulation Model
(TIME-GCM). In addition to the team's immediate application to improved EM
induction imaging, these efforts may provide significant benefits to the
ionospheric and broader geomagnetic communities. For example, the project
includes detailed comparison between TIME-GCM outputs and a large collection of
ground geomagnetic data, providing insight into strengths and weaknesses of this
numerical model. More broadly, approaches developed for incorporating ground-
based data into time dependent models of ionospheric magnetic fields will
benefit a range of basic and applied studies of Earth's magnetic field.