* 1447568
* Durations and Rates of High Temperature Metamorphism During Archean Orogenesis: Implications for Early Earth's Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Mark Caddick, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2018
* USD 385,730.00

The Archean represents a significant period in Earth's history during which
large volumes of continental crust were generated and modern plate tectonic
processes are thought to have initiated. Archean cratons contain stable blocks
of continental lithosphere that form the foundation from which Earth?s
continents have grown and evolved, and petrologic evidence suggests that their
earliest histories generally involved at least one period of extreme heat flow
(with crustal temperatures in excess of 900 °C). Metamorphism at such high to
ultrahigh temperature (HT/UHT) conditions helped to produce the dense, strong,
relatively anhydrous rocks comprising most of the Earth's cratonic crust, and
the mechanisms that lead to extreme heating may thus be required for craton
stabilization. Different mechanisms for crustal heating occur at diagnostic
depths, over various timescales, and are associated with distinguishable
geologic features. Metamorphic rocks formed by extreme crustal heating provide
an interpretable record of these characteristics and this project seeks to use
this information to elucidate the processes that resulted in the formation of
Earth's early, stable continents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We aim to quantify the
absolute depths, temperatures, and durations of metamorphism in two Archean
terranes with contrasting geological characteristics. Rocks from the Wyoming and
Superior cratons, exposed respectively in the Beartooth Range, MT, USA, and the
Pikwitonei Granulite Domain, MB, Canada, both record HT/UHT conditions at ~2.7
billion years ago, but metamorphism occurred over different length-scales, and
possibly at different depths and over different durations. This study will
combine several geochronological techniques (Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd in garnet and U-Pb
in monazite and zircon) with trace element characterization and diffusion
speedometry in order to constrain the timescales of crustal heating.
Thermodynamic modeling will determine the depths at which maximum temperatures
were attained and reveal segments of the paths that were followed upon cooling
and/or exhumation. Integration of the geochronology and thermodynamic modeling
will place constraints on the durations of these pressure (depth)-temperature
paths. These results will provide insights into the mechanisms responsible for
HT/UHT metamorphism in each terrane, and the style of plate tectonic processes
that operated in the Archean. This project will support one graduate student and
one undergraduate, and will initiate new research partnerships between the PIs,
both of whom are early career scientists, and premier NSF-funded laboratories.