* 1447203
* Collaborative Research:  Integrating Genetically Informed Models of Germination and Flowering to Predict Life History Responses to Changing Climate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Johanna Schmitt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2015
* USD 316,713.00

Phenology - the seasonal timing of biological events - is one of the most
important organismal responses to climate change. For annual plant species, the
seasonal timing of seed germination and flowering is crucial. Germination and
flowering time interact to determine patterns of growth, flowering and seed set.
Thus, an integrated life-cycle model that includes these events and their
interactions is necessary for predicting under natural conditions each
phenological transition, the overall life cycle, and the persistence of effects
of environmental perturbations. Using the abundant genetic information on the
molecular-genetic basis of flowering and germination in Arabidopsis thaliana,
this project will develop integrated life-history models to predict genotype-
specific performance across a geographic range with different climatic
scenarios. These predictions will be tested using unique genetic material of
different combinations of germination and flowering alleles in seasonally
contrasting field sites.

This work directly pertains to predicting plant responses to climate change. It
aims to predict germination timing and synchrony under various climatic
conditions, which is of direct interest in agricultural settings. The model will
also predict how changes in germination timing affect reproductive timing and
yield, which is important for predicting responses of crop species as well as
the weeds that grow with them. Finally, it uses genotypes containing candidate
genetic loci for dormancy manipulations to assess how those genes will respond
to altered climates.