* 1447100
* Investigating the Partitioning of Vertical Strength within the India-Eurasia Lithosphere using Surface Observations: A Numerical Modeling Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Lucy Flesch, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 190,000.00

The theory of plate tectonics was revolutionary in the field of geophysics and
explained the motion of plates and locations of earthquakes and volcanoes.
However, this theory breaks down at continental boundaries where earthquakes
extend 1000?s of km and significant topography is created. The ongoing collision
of the Indian and Eurasian plate provides a natural laboratory for studying such
regions and the factors controlling deformation patterns in continental
collisional zones. In the absence of direct sampling of the lithosphere with
depth, numerical modeling can provide bounds on physically allowable
lithospheric properties. Understanding the variation in strength within the
continental lithosphere is fundamental to assessing the forces that generate
earthquakes and build mountains. Results obtained within this proposal will have
important implications relating to forces generating deformation of the Tibetan
Plateau, stress transfer within the lithosphere, the depth to which surface
observations sample lithospheric properties, partitioning of strength between
upper crust, lower crust and lithospheric mantle, influence of the lower Indian
plate beneath southern Tibetan, and flow the base of the lithosphere resulting
from convection of the interior of the Earth.

This project will perform 3-D geodynamic modeling solving Stokes flow to
investigate the lateral and vertical strength variations within the Eurasian
lithosphere. Geophysical observations will be used to construct a physically
accurate model volume of the India-Eurasian collision zone, and numeric
simulations will be performed to determine the effects of variations in
lithospheric strength (both vertically and laterally) on predicted surface
deformation. Comparisons between predicted surface velocities and the observed
surface deformation field, constrained by GPS and quaternary fault slip data,
will differentiate between physically viable models. This work will seek to: (1)
Map out the allowable vertical strength contrasts within the Eurasian deforming
lithosphere; (2) Isolate the depth sensitivity of surface observations within
Eurasia; (3) Investigate the influence of variable lithospheric thickness and
mantle flow on the observed surface deformation field.