* 1447975
* SBIR Phase I:  A Thermal Barrier Coating with Low Thermal Conductivity for use in Turbine Engines
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* James Cassuto, Thermatin Industries LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need for
improved thermal barrier coating (TBC) technology. TBCs are advanced materials
applied as a thin layer to the surface of substrates, often metals, to protect
them from prolonged heat loads. The avionics industry (representing a TBC market
of $715 million) has set benchmark standards for the next generation of gas-
turbine engines to operate at higher temperatures (1500 C versus the current
1300 C) to achieve a 3.9% increase in overall efficiency and nearly $4 billion
in estimated savings to the US airline industry, per year, from fuel costs
alone. Thermal protection properties inherent to turbine engine TBCs include a
high melting temperature, low thermal conductivity, and high temperature phase
stability. Current industry-standard TBCs undergo structural changes at
temperatures below this new target operating temperature, necessitating the need
for new materials. This project seeks to test a novel material for use as a TBC
to meet the demands of next generation gas-turbine engines. Outside the avionics
industry, there is the potential for broader application of this material in
high-temperature ovens, diesel engines, and power plants.

The intellectual merit of this project is the identification of a novel material
for use as a superior TBC. The research objectives relate to the application of
the material in thin layer form using industry standard processes,
characterization of the structural properties of the material, determination of
the thermal protection properties of the material in thin layer form, and
determination of the response of the material to physical and thermal stresses.
The research will involve deposition of this material onto substrates using
electron beam vapor deposition, structural analysis of the coating using
electron microscopy and ultrasound spectroscopy, evaluation of thermal
protection properties including thermal conductivity, melting temperature, and
maximum use temperature testing, and physical stress evaluation using thermal
cycling and Young's modulus testing. Given the increase in porosity associated
with electron beam vapor deposition and the similarities in crystallinity with
other TBCs in use, it is anticipated that successful substrate binding with
reduced high-temperature thermal conductivity will be exhibited by the material
in thin layer form.