* 1447438
* Renewal: Petrology and Geochemistry of the Deep Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2019
* USD 370,000.00

Stretching from 670 kilometers depth below the Earth's surface to the core-
mantle boundary at 2,900 kilometers depth, the lower mantle comprises more than
half of our planet by volume. Information on its chemical composition and
petrological constituents is crucial for understanding the solid Earth, but is
very scarce, especially for the inaccessible deep lower mantle (DLM) underneath
1800 kilometers. The extremely high pressure and temperature conditions of the
DLM make it very difficult to simulate and investigate in the laboratory, and
numerous unresolvable mysteries remain. Ho-kwang Mao proposes to use his newly
developed high-pressure multigrain crystallographic (MGC) technology to
delineate the crystal structures of the mantle rock in-situ under the DLM
conditions, and use the focused ion beam technique combined with electron
microscope to probe the compositions of various mineral phases in the quenched
samples. The results will shed light on many key features of the DLM, including
the geochemical reservoir, the core-mantle exchange, the source of mantle
convection, the root of rising plumes and the graveyard of subducted plates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing theory was that the majority of the lower
mantle is made up of a ferromagnesian silicate, (Mg,Fe)SiO3, called bridgmanite.
It was thought that this mineral did not change structure over the enormous
range of pressures and temperatures found in the lower mantle except at the very
bottom D" layer beyond 110 gigapascals. Very recently, in simulating the
conditions of the lower mantle using laser-heated diamond anvil cells brought to
pressures between 95 and 101 gigapascals and temperatures between 2,200 and
2,400 Kelvin, Mao's team found that ferromagnesian bridgmanite is unstable. It
disassociates into two phases: one magnesium silicate bridgmanite without the
iron, which is represented by the Fe-free portion of the chemical formula, and
one iron-rich and hexagonal in structure, called the H-phase. Further tests
showed that this iron-rich H-phase is more stable than when the iron is
incorporated in the ferromagnesian bridgmanite, much to everyone's surprise.
There could be many more unidentified phases down there in the DLM as well,
waiting to be identified by the present project. Discoveries and
characterizations of these phases will lead to a fundamentally new paradigm of
the deep Earth.