* 1447270
* SBIR Phase I:  Use of Multimodal Interactive Storytelling to Create Interest in STEM in Prekindergarten and Kindergarten Children
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Jeremy Scheinberg, Skookoo LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I Project seeks to generate fundamental interest in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) at a young age. According to the 2007
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), U.S. fourth grade
students ranked eleventh in math and seventh in science out of 36 countries. A
continued decrease in STEM interest is leading to a decrease in the awarding of
STEM degrees. According to the 2008 National Math and Science Initiative, in 4%
of US bachelor's degrees were awarded in engineering compared to 31% in China.
Exacerbating the problem is a change in the fundamental nature of career
development toward more technical skills requirements. This project aims to
engage children at a younger age and create a foundation of interest in STEM
education. This engagement reinforces the National Science Foundation's
fundamental mission of education for all fields of science and engineering. On
the micro level, the project aims to create software and creative development
jobs in the US through the creation of the application and content. The project
also aims to create a new generation of engaged young people with enthusiasm to
pursue careers in STEM-related fields, thereby creating a more technical and
science-minded workforce.

This SBIR Phase I Project seeks to test the feasibility and commercialize a
multimodal storytelling toy and software application to generate fundamental
interest and augment learning in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) at a young age. Although there are a number of toys and educational
products on the market targeted toward children at an older age, a void exists
for educational toys that provide a dedicated focus on STEM education for
younger children. This project will involve the development of a curriculum
along with a prototype application to promote early adoption of STEM education
in a classroom environment. The application will feature academically sound
stories centered on scientific concepts featuring the child along with a
companion character to act as their guide through the stories. The toy character
and story personalization aim to create an emotional connection between the
child and the STEM concepts in the stories. In addition to the story itself,
interactive elements will promote repeat use and retention of STEM concepts. The
objective of this Phase I activity is to demonstrate that the platform can
augment existing STEM curriculum and generate interest in basic science and
engineering concepts in the prekindergarten and kindergarten classroom
environment.