* 1447266
* Life Cycles of Basaltic Magma Mushes: The Dynamic Controls on Unlocking and Mixing
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* George Bergantz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2019
* USD 325,142.00

The transport of heat and mass from the Earth's deep interior to the surface by
magmatism (volcanism) creates the Earth's crust and strongly conditions the
atmosphere and biosphere. However the processes are almost entirely unseen, and
the dynamics must be inferred from sparse observations. These observations have
converged on a picture for magma systems such that they exist in a mushy, or
crystal-rich and quasi-static, state for much of their thermal lifetime. This
has been documented in a variety of geological environments from ocean islands
and large igneous provinces, to convergent margin volcanic chains, to mid-ocean
ridge systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paradoxically, it has also been confirmed
that these mushes can be rapidly mobilized and complexly mixed, sometimes just
prior to eruption. And when the crystal mushes are preserved as large plutonic
bodies, they display evidence of complex fluid and granular rheological regimes
that co-existed simultaneously. Our aim is to identify the fundamental dynamic
templates that produce these reoccurring processes in Nature. We will do this by
employing the unification of crystal-chemical data and novel computational fluid
dynamics modeling tools to reveal the templates which control of emergence of
and character of distinct magmatic episodes. Our field area will be the 1868
lava flows of Mauna Loa, Hawaii, where we will identify distinct populations of
magmatic products, and by utilizing the discrete element method computational
fluid dynamics approach we can create synthetic populations and identify what
the dynamic controls are on their occurance.