* 1447943
* BIGDATA: F: DKM: Plato: A model-based database for compressed spatiotemporal sensor data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Yoav Freund, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,100,000.00

Sensor data of diverse types and large volumes need to be combined with the
current standard SQL databases, which provide context and metadata for the
sensor data. The combination will lead to a new generation of analytics in a
number of areas, such as smart buildings that are based on building and
environmental data collected by sensors. The project argues that this new
generation of analytics must be based on the same healthy database technology
cornerstones that the prior (non-sensor) business intelligence platforms were
based on: Declarative queries, automatic optimization, efficient storage
representations and multiple layers of abstraction lead to high productivity for
the developer and the analyst. Such productivity is currently absent from sensor
data analytics because database technology and sensor data processing currently
do not mix well. Productivity is especially low in cases involving (a) many
types of sensor data, (b) combinations of sensor data with conventional database
data that provide context and (c) many types of analyses. Besides low
productivity, the current (limited) state of the art poses very high expertise
requirements on the analysts: They must be simultaneously experts in signal
processing, statistics and big data management. The project will deliver a
database system for sensor data, where the analyst can rapidly develop
declarative queries that are automatically optimized. By doing so, the project
will deliver the envisioned productivity gains and will lower the technical
sophistication bar needed for acting in the space, therefore enabling many
scientists and domain specialists to engage in
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project argues that at the core of the
failure of SQL databases in the management and analytics of sensor
spatiotemporal data is the lack of a critical abstraction, which is the real
world models, which capture the stochastic processes that generate the
measurements. The proposed Plato database system will bring the real world model
concept into SQL databases by using models (spatiotemporal continuous functions)
as first class citizens. The delivery of Plato requires innovative solutions to
multiple problems: The project will design and &lt;br/&gt;implement (a) a model-
aware data model and respective query language features that allow seamless
combination of conventional SQL querying with statistical signal processing, (b)
learning algorithms that learn the model components of reduced-noise, additive
model representations, which are naturally compressions of the original, (c)
query processing algorithms that operate directly on the compressed
representations and utilize the the relatively few bits necessary for the
required confidence of the analytics, and (d) semiautomated algorithms that
further compress the model representations by considering the dependencies
(mutual entropy) between the models. Finally, the project will exercise the
resulting system on large scale statistical sensor data processing cases, such
as the ones presented by the UCSD Energy Dashboard. The exercise will measure
the lines-of-code as well as the runtime efficiency of the
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at http://www.db.ucsd.edu/NSF14Plato