* 1447431
* SBIR Phase I:  A new sustainable crustacean bait.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Anthony Dellinger, Kepley Biosystems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 168,634.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is a convenient, sustainable, cost effective, and
environmentally friendly crustacean bait for novice and professional fishermen
worldwide. The novel crustacean fishing bait is completely safe, synthetic, and
comprised of the chemical cues released from traditional rotting fish bait. The
scent cues release at a tunable rate to provide optimal fishing outcomes. Given
the rising cost of fish due to competition with omega-3 pill producers, the
labor costs associated with obtaining bait, and the space bait takes up on a
fishermen?s boat the new bait will save fishermen time, money, and
inconvenience. The societal benefit that stems from the proposed product is
likely the dramatic reduction in fish being removed from the ocean for use as
crustacean attractants. Currently amount of fish removed from the ocean for bait
is estimated to be over 18 million tons, and is significantly disruptive to the
oceanic food web. The proposed bait will also reduce unwanted capture and
killing of by-catch (e.g. sea turtles, dolphins, and seals) by lessening the
need for indiscriminate drift nets they get caught in. Commercially, the product
will save fishermen money estimated at over $1,000 per ton of crustaceans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase I research project are to
identify those molecules that are given off from current baits, incorporating
newly identified (and identified but not yet tested) compounds into a formulated
bait prototype product, optimizing the attractant release kinetics, and testing
the ability to catch target species. Bait formulations will be evaluated by
fishermen on several crustaceans to establish efficacy. It is anticipated that
this research will help address the ongoing ecological destruction associated
with over-fishing and ocean by-catch. Further, the crustacean industry is
struggling with questions about bait sustainability which driven by state and
federal regulatory pressures on fishing that could impact conventional bait
supply and resulting in higher prices of conventional crustacean bait. These
circumstances present an ecological and commercial opportunity for a new baiting
alternative. The proposed bait product being developed in this project will help
lessen the aforementioned problems by reducing the need to capture bait fish to
create crustacean bait, as well as saving fishermen money. The intellectual
merit of the proposed activity will be the identification of the chemical cues
given off from fish/mammals that most intensely attract all species of
crustaceans as well as developing a fine-tuned matrix for releasing these
attractants at a dissolution rate desired by fishermen under variable fishing
conditions.