* 1447035
* Evaluating the scatter of Detrital Remanent Magnetizations and its effects on relative paleointensity estimates.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Dario Bilardello, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Records of the geomagnetic field are derived from both igneous and sedimentary
rocks, together with certain archeological artifacts. Sedimentary rock sequences
are continuous through time, and provide a better picture of the magnetic
field's evolution, but bear the limiting disadvantage of only providing
relative, rather than absoltute, geomagnetic intensity records. Additionally,
sediments are subject to biases, which affect the final distributions of the
magnetic particles and the recorded magnetization. While valid correction
techniques exist to obviate for notable sediment magnetic-recording biases, to
date these are not used to further correct the relative paleointensity records.
Conducting a series of deposition experiments in laboratory-controlled magnetic
fields, and correcting for the known biases has the potential of improving
estimates of relative paleointensity. These improvements would significantly
contribute to our understanding of the evolution of the geomagnetic field, and
therefore the history of the geodynamo and the formation of the earths
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the vast amount of research, detrital
remanent magnetization (DRM) probably remains the most poorly understood type of
magnetic remanence. The importance of sedimentary records in paleomagnetism
warrants a sustained effort in fully understanding how sediments acquire their
magnetization and how accurately they record the geomagnetic field. The
efficiency of DRM is limiting in providing records of magnetic field intensity:
the variable scatter of individual magnetic particle directions results in a
mean vector that maintains the average orientation of the ambient field but
often not its inclination; importantly, the resultant vector length is dependent
on the scatter, greatly affecting relative paleointensity (RPI) estimates.
Magnetic anisotropy provides a useful measurement of the scatter of particle
distributions: through measurements of magnetic anisotropy obtained from
deposition experiments conducted in controlled magnetic fields, the effect of
the ambient field direction and intensity on particle scatter will be evaluated.
Magnetic anisotropy will be used to correct for misalignment biases by restoring
the distribution of directions and inclinations. In turn, this allows restoring
the intensity of magnetization, permitting a novel approach of investigating
RPI. Two approaches are proposed: the first utilizes the anisotropy-corrected
magnetizations to provide RPI estimates, while the second will instead utilize
the corrected mean resultant vector of each group of experiments as a proxy for
the magnetization intensity. The expectation is that the corrected
magnetizations and resultant vectors yield more consistent RPI estimates, owing
to the field-strength and field-inclination dependence on the inclination error.
The resultant vector approach, if successful, would provide a simplified, more
applicable means of providing RPI estimates.