* 1447793
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Collaborative Research: Dealing Efficiently with Big Social Network Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shanmugavelayu Muthukrishnan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The past decade has seen dramatic growth in systems that collect data from human
activities. Online social networks record not just friendships, but
interactions, messages, photos, and interests. Mobile devices track location via
GPS information. Online stores monitor millions of customers as they explore and
transact. Sensors, wearable and otherwise, produce detailed behavioral data.
Collectively, this provides ever-larger collections of human social-activity
information -- we refer to this as Big Social Data. While Big Social Data is
growing rapidly, the available processing resources -- CPU, memory,
communication -- are growing at a slower pace. To realize the promise of big
social data, we need algorithms that use only sublinear resources, that is,
resources growing much less than the growth of the data in suitable parameters.
Designing these algorithms will be the core activity of this research project.
This work will be in consultation with practitioners handling Big Social Data,
leading to many opportunities for technology transfer. The research program both
enables and benefits from an education and outreach program that will help
develop the new breed of algorithmically-trained data scientists for Big Social
Data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging systems -- MapReduce, Hadoop, Spark, Storm,
etc. -- use large scale distributed computation: clusters of machines not only
gathering and storing data in parallel, but also working together to perform
computations. Often, these systems and applications work via incremental
processing, storing and returning only approximate solutions, trading off
quality and certainty for efficiency. In addition, these systems take a data-
centric view, wherein the data is stored as &lt;Key, Value&gt; pairs. This
project will address fundamental problems with Big Social Data -- search,
ranking, and optimization, etc. in these modern computing and data models. For
these problems, this project will design algorithms that are sublinear in the
relevant parameter -- number of keys, size of values, computing time per key or
over all keys, and other variations that map to underlying storage, number of
machines, bandwidth and other computational
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, see the project web
site at http://www.stanford.edu/~ashishg/socialdata.html .