* 1447341
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Are Eastern Tropical Pacific reefs becoming more resilient to ENSO?
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Peggy Fong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2016
* USD 22,396.00

The predicted 2014-2015 El Ni침o Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event may develop
into one of the strongest in recent history, presenting a unique and urgent
opportunity to investigate the impact of this extreme thermal anomaly on the
resilience of coral reef ecosystems. Building on baseline data from >40 years of
research in the Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP), this team of researchers is
uniquely poised to test hypotheses about coral reef resilience to the third
strong event to hit this region. Ecological resilience is defined as both the
ability of an ecosystem to continue functioning while under stress as well as
the ability of a system to "bounce back" or restore structure and function
following a disturbance. This project is guided by the overarching hypothesis
that many ETP coral reefs are becoming more resilient in the face of multiple
major ENSO disturbances as a result of adaptive processes. If the investigators
are correct that reef systems can develop more tolerance and recover more
rapidly when subjected to sequential thermal disturbances, this will drastically
change predictions of the fate of global coral reef ecosystems over the next 100
years of climate change. The Broader Impacts of this proposal include mentoring,
outreach, and education. To engage a broad audience, all participants will
contribute to a project Facebook page, which will be linked to a blogging
website where the public can interact with the scientists.

This RAPID funding will provide an unprecedented opportunity to further our
understanding of the potential for increased resistance to, and accelerated
early recovery from, the third major ENSO to hit the ETP. The investigators have
developed hypotheses that can be tested by targeted sampling and experiments in
the critical stages before, during and after this ENSO on reefs in Panam치 (Uva,
Saboga) and Gal치pagos (Darwin Floreana). These reefs span a gradient in
aragonite saturation that provides a real-world model system for conditions
expected throughout the tropics in a high-CO2 world. Key mechanisms/hypotheses
that the investigators will evaluate that may increase resilience, and therefore
reduce mortality and limit the loss of ecosystem functioning following this
ENSO, include: (1) increases in the relative abundance of thermotolerant
symbionts will result in higher survival and faster recovery of multiple coral
species across all depths; (2) recovery will be inversely rated to pCO2 with a
threshold level beyond which recovery does not occur; (3) the maintenance of
strong top-down control by intact herbivore communities will limit algal
proliferation, and (4) the strengthening of nutrient-limitation in shallow
regions will limit algal competitive abilities and aid coral recovery. At each
site where there is a record of recovery the research team will make the
following ovservations: (1) in situ measurement of physical parameters
(temperature, conductivity, pH, dissolved oxygen, photosynthetically active
radiation, chlorophyll, turbidity, inorganic nutrients); (2) in situ measurement
of carbonate chemistry and net ecosystem metabolism (calcification, production);
(3) In situ measurements of coral and reef community responses including coral
bleaching and mortality and the population responses of corallivores,
bioeroders, herbivores, and benthic algal cover; (4) quantification of symbiont
communities in major coral species before, during and after the bleaching event
to compare with archived samples from the 1997-98 event; (5) bioassays of the
strength of top-down (herbivory) and bottom-up (nutrient limitation) effects
that may promote ecosystem resilience with critical limits. To further explore
these limits, in the southern Gal치pagos, where there is a lack of resilience,
the investigative team will deploy temperature loggers, conduct surveys of
bleaching and mortality of remnant coral communities, and conduct bioassays of
the strength of herbivory and nutrient limitation.