* 1447642
* STTR Phase I:  An Intelligent Infinitely Explorable Online Learning Environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Franco Capaldi, Sigma Learning Systems, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
intelligent infinitely explorable online learning environment. The use of online
learning has grown significantly in higher education and promises to reduce
program cost and improve educational outcomes. Current massively open online
courses (MOOCS) can deliver an online course to hundreds of thousands or
millions of students at minimal cost. These systems deliver content such as
video lectures, text, and audio recordings to students with student assessment
in the form of simple and directed questions. While in some fields, these
current online systems are adequate, online systems fail in Engineering where
students must be trained to think creatively about complex systems. Engineering
education is an area of vital national economic importance. Creating more
flexible systems, which are better suited for complex subjects requiring
integrated learning such as engineering, will benefit both students and the
nation.

This SBIR Phase I project will focus on developing a prototype system capable of
identifying specific student computational mistakes and conceptual errors while
solving complex problems. The system will quickly and automatically identify
these mistakes, then provide students with the resources they need to correct
their mistake and to improve their fundamental understanding of the topic. The
system will also provide a platform for skill-based credentialing, which is
being explored in many engineering programs across the country.