* 1447905
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of an affordable synthetic colostrum replacer in edible green algae
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Miller Tran, Triton Animal Products
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to develop an alternative to the use of
antibiotics in agricultural and companion animals. It has recently been
demonstrated that the practice of feeding antibiotics to livestock is correlated
with the emergence of antibiotic resistant strains of bacteria that infect
humans. For this reason, the FDA has recently introduced a voluntary plan to
phase out the use of antibiotics in animals. However, antibiotic use to protect
animal health and to promote weight gain is widespread in the livestock
industry, and a viable and non-harmful alternative is needed. The proposed
technology will allow livestock growers to protect their animals and promote
weight gain by feeding edible green algae that have been engineered to produce
colostrum proteins. Colostrum proteins are thought to have the same protective
effects as antibiotics without the negative side effect of producing antibiotic
resistant bacteria. Production of these colostrum proteins in green algae allows
for efficient bio-manufacturing, which will meet the scale required to supply
livestock producers with a cost effective source of colostrum. Sales of
antibiotics for animal health and weight gain are in the billions of dollars
each year, and this new approach has the potential to garner a significant share
of that market as the industry shifts away from the use of antibiotics.

This SBIR project proposes to develop genetically engineered strains of green
algae, Chlamydomomas reinhardtii, that produce colostrum proteins. Colostrum
proteins are normally ingested into the digestive tract where they exhibit anti-
microbial properties. C. reinhardtii has been shown to have the necessary
cellular machinery to produce a wide range of complex proteins including
monoclonal antibodies, hormones, and others. The goal is to produce several key
colostrum proteins in C. reinhardtii that will be fed to livestock as a
replacement for antibiotics, and be included in companion animal diets. The
proposed research will demonstrate that colostrum proteins produced in algae are
bioactive, and will function in the same manner as their natural counterparts.
Additionally, the research will produce a media in which to grow edible algae
that is safe for animal consumption and promotes the expression of the colostrum
protein of interest. Finally, the research will demonstrate that algal expressed
colostrum proteins have a beneficial effect on animal health and growth
promotion. Together, this research will help demonstrate the feasibility of
using algal-expressed colostrum proteins as a replacement for antibiotic use in
livestock feeds and promotion of pet health in pet food.