* 1447617
* Meeting: Keystone Symposia on "Plant Receptor Kinases" to be held in Taos, NM from February 8-13, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* David Woodland, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 8,400.00

Plants are under constant pressure to respond rapidly and accurately to changing
environmental and developmental conditions and must rapidly translate
extracellular signals into appropriate intracellular responses. Cell surface
receptor kinases (RKs) are one of the major components in this extracellular
sensing. Plants show a huge expansion of the RK family compared to animals.
However, only a very limited number of plant RKs have an assigned function, but
those characterized control critical aspects ranging from development to
responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. The 2015 Keystone Symposia meeting on
"Plant Receptor Kinases: From Molecules to Environment" will highlight recent
developments in our understanding of RKs, from their evolution and the pathways
they are involved in, to the molecular details underlying their function and
thereby provide the platform for discussions of emerging themes. The processes
controlled by plant RKs include gas exchange, innate immunity, establishment of
beneficial symbioses, and control of intrinsic growth/yield. Thus, there are
many direct implications for plant performance in the field and at the ecosystem
level, and the meeting will be of broad interest to scientists in academia,
government and the private sector. The diversity of topics presented at this
meeting is typically not covered within a single meeting. Other meetings, by
necessity, focus on specific areas while this Keystone Symposia meeting will
bring together world-leaders in their respective areas and, by sharing latest
research findings and new experimental approaches/methods, will facilitate
advances in other areas as well. As such, this meeting will enhance
infrastructure by fostering networking and initiation of collaborations that
will move this exciting field forward. The meeting will also further the
following educational benefits: acquaint trainees and investigators new to field
with the state-of-the-art; critical scientific feedback; and career development
for trainees and new investigators, including opportunities both to see
successful scientists presenting cutting-edge science and to network with
prospective mentors and others who might contribute to their scientific and
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Keystone Symposia scientific conference on
"Plant Receptor Kinases" has the following principal objectives: 1) to
facilitate enhanced development of plant RK research; and 2) to provide
opportunities for graduate students and postdocs to present results and interact
with authorities in the field. Thus, the organizers, Drs. Cyril Zipfel
(Sainsbury Laboratory, UK) and Steven C. Huber (USDA/ARS, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign), have designed the program to bring together world-leaders
that collectively cover a wide range of topics that are of fundamental
importance to plant RK research. Each session will also include one or more
talks selected from the contributed abstracts to give students and postdocs the
opportunity to participate in the program beyond a poster session and to capture
the widest range of exciting new developments. Because tyrosine phosphorylation
is an emerging theme in plant RK biology, the meeting will start with a key note
address by an expert (Dr. Mark Lemmon) in the area of animal receptor tyrosine
kinase signaling. The individual sessions that follow will then sequentially
present the status of RK research in fundamental aspects of growth with some
specific focus on the BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1 (BRI1) RK, which functions
in growth and is one of the most studied plant RKs. The function and composition
of RK complexes will then be developed along with the complementary topic of
trafficking through the secretory and endocytic pathways. The focus of Workshop
I on structural aspects of plant RKs will enhance efforts to understand
mechanisms at the molecular level. With this foundation, subsequent sessions
will explore the role of RKs in specific developmental programs (e.g., stomatal
development) and microbe interactions (both beneficial and pathogenic). The
second Workshop will highlight state-of-the-art proteomic approaches to study RK
activity and function, culminating in a final session of translational RK
science and evolutionary aspects. The time is right for this meeting as new
results are emerging relating to the importance of tyrosine phosphorylation in
RK function; the role of structure of extracellular and cytoplasmic domains of
plant RKs; the complexities of RK trafficking; and the importance of beneficial
microbial interactions in addition to pathogenic microbes. This diversity of
topics is typically not covered within a single meeting. Importantly, ample
discussion time is included in the program design to allow participants to
identify common interests and forge new collaborations spanning areas.