* 1447534
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Collaborative Research: Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra (RandNLA) for multi-linear and non-linear data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Mahoney, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Data are often modeled as matrices; and, as a result, linear algebraic
algorithms such as matrix decompositions have proven extremely successful in the
analysis of many data sets. Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra (RandNLA)
integrates the complementary perspectives that Theoretical Computer Science and
Numerical Linear Algebra bring to matrix computations, and it is a new paradigm
for the design and analysis of such algorithms and for using the resulting
insight to solve important scientific and societal problems. Current RandNLA
algorithms extract linear structure from data matrices. The proposed work will
extend RandNLA methods to multi-linear and other non-linear structure in data
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the proposed work will
investigate two important, non-linear, structural settings in order to start
making progress towards using RandNLA approaches in situations where the
underlying data exhibit non-linear structure: it will investigate how to design
the next generation of RandNLA algorithms that can handle data that exhibit
multi-linear structures captured by tensors; and it will investigate the
applicability of RandNLA approaches to data that exhibit non-linear structure,
as captured by non-linear dimensionality reduction techniques, local spectral
methods, and related semi-supervised eigenvector tools. In addition, it will
evaluate the proposed approaches on data applications where the PIs have
significant expertise, such as the statistical analysis of population genetics
data and astronomical data. Broader impacts of the project include graduate and
undergraduate training, workshops and code development for RandNLA. For further
information see the project web site
at:http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~mmahoney/projects/nsf-multilinear/