* 1447337
* Investigation of Ultra-18O Depleted "Slushball" Earth Rocks from Karelia, Russia and the Timing of Paleoproterozoic Glaciations and the Great Oxidation Event
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Ilya Bindeman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 02/28/2019
* USD 354,974.00

Investigation of Ultra-18-O Depleted "Slushball" Earth Rocks from Karelia,
Russia and the Timing of Paleoproterozoic Glaciations and the Great Oxidation
Event

This proposal seeks support to investigate and interpret the Paleoproterozoic
rocks from Karelia, Russia, which are extraordinarily depleted with respect to
oxygen 18 (these rocks have the world's lowest known values). Rocks with such
depleted 18O require derivation from interaction with glacial meltwaters during
panglobal glaciation. These depletions now characterize 11 localities along a
450 km long belt and are spatially associated with the 2.45-2.2 Ga mafic
intrusions formed in subglacial rifting environment zones. Since Karelia was
located near equatorial latitudes throughout the Paleoproterizoic, these rocks
provide isotopic evidence of ice at low latitudes, and a robust hydrologic
cycle, in which low latitude oceans remained unfrozen (a "Slushball" climate
state). As there were three panglobal glaciations between 2.45 and 2.2 Ga,
precise determination of age of the mafic intrusions with the subglacial ultra-
depleted meteoric hydrothermal features in Karelia will provide the most direct
constraints on the timing of these global glaciations. Furthermore, this
research may constrain which of the glaciations preceded the rise of atmospheric
oxygen and disappearance of mass-independent fractionation of sulfur isotopes.
The scope of this project will include mapping and sample collection in the
field at the anomalously depleted areas, subsequent isotope analysis to identify
the characteristic bulls-eyes meteoric hydrothermal features, dating the timing
of such depletion by in situ and solution geochronology, geochemical modeling of
these unique hydrothermal alteration trends, and investigation of the
unmetamorphosed coeval early Paleoproterozoic Sariolian, and Sumian volcanic and
sedimentary sequences of the Vetreny Belt in the context of the global oxidation
event.

The proposal will promote international collaboration, involve and support
students including those traditionally underrepresented in geosciences, continue
to involve large number of undergraduate and community college students into
geochemical, geochronologic, and stable isotope research and expose them to
science and international collaboration. The proposal will support the
analytical infrastructure of the recently established stable isotope lab through
work done by the PI and members of the research group and collaborators. PI will
continue his outreach activities, public lectures and articles to popular
journals.