* 1447861
* BIGDATA: F: DKM: Collaborative Research: Scalable Middleware for Managing and Processing Big Data on Next Generation HPC Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Amitava Majumdar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,999.00

Managing and processing large volumes of data and gaining meaningful insights is
a significant challenge facing the Big Data community. Thus, it is critical that
data-intensive computing middleware (such as Hadoop, HBase and Spark) to process
such data are diligently designed, with high performance and scalability, in
order to meet the growing demands of such Big Data applications. While Hadoop,
Spark and HBase are gaining popularity for processing Big Data applications,
these middleware and the associated Big Data applications are not able to take
advantage of the advanced features on modern High Performance Computing (HPC)
systems widely deployed all over the world, including many of of the multi-
Petaflop systems in the XSEDE environment. Modern HPC systems and the associated
middleware (such as MPI and Parallel File systems) have been exploiting the
advances in HPC technologies (multi/many-core architectures, RDMA-enabled
networking, NVRAMs and SSDs) during the last decade. However, Big Data
middleware (such as Hadoop, HBase and Spark) have not embraced such
technologies. These disparities are taking HPC and Big Data processing into
"divergent trajectories." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research,
undertaken by a team of computer and application scientists from OSU and SDSC,
aim to bring HPC and Big Data processing into a "convergent trajectory." The
investigators will specifically address the following challenges: 1) designing
novel communication and I/O runtime for Big Data processing while exploiting the
features of modern multi-/many-core, networking and storage technologies; 2)
redesigning Big Data middleware (such as Hadoop, HBase and Spark) to deliver
performance and scalability on modern and next-generation HPC systems; and 3)
demonstrating the benefits of the proposed approach for a set of driving Big
Data applications on HPC system. The proposed work targets four major workloads
and applications in the Big Data community (namely data analytics, query,
interactive, and iterative) using the popular Big Data middleware (Hadoop, HBase
and Spark). The proposed framework will be validated on a variety of Big Data
benchmarks and applications. The proposed middleware and runtimes will be made
publicly available to the community. The research enables curricular
advancements via research in pedagogy for key courses in the new data analytics
program at Ohio State and SDSC -- among the first of its kind nationwide.