* 1447468
* Inclusion Barometry and Overstepping Isograd Reactions: How Close is the Approach to Equilibrium During Metamorphism?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Frank Spear, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 451,000.00

The aim of the research outlined in this proposal is to examine and quantify the
extent to which metamorphic rocks approach equilibrium during transformation. It
is an accepted fact of all metamorphic transformations that some degree of
overstepping of a reaction boundary is required in order for reactions to
proceed in a forward direction. That is, rocks that are perfectly equilibrated
will experience no driving force for recrystallization and will thus remain
unchanged. Hence the mere existence of different degrees of metamorphic
recrystallization under different conditions of pressure and temperature in the
crust is evidence that transformations have, indeed, taken place and thus some
degree of overstepping of reactions is required. However, it is also generally
accepted that the degree of disequilibrium (overstepping) is minor such that a
close approach to equilibrium is maintained throughout a rock?s history. This is
the traditional justification for employing equilibrium phase diagrams for the
interpretation of metamorphic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II.&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks to evaluate the validity of the assumption of
a close approach to equilibrium during metamorphism. Preliminary data is
presented in the proposal that indicates a substantial deviation from
equilibrium for the nucleation of the common metamorphic mineral, garnet. The
amount of overstepping inferred from these preliminary studies varies in
different samples from a few degrees Celsius to over seventy degrees and 5000
bars of pressure. Even more significant, the inferred conditions of garnet
nucleation are very similar to the conditions inferred for the maximum
metamorphic temperature and pressure attained by the sample. The implication of
this result is that, rather than undergoing a continuum of small changes along a
trajectory of increasing pressure and temperature in the crust, the rock
remained virtually unchanged until reaching conditions near the maximum pressure
and temperature and then transformed through a cascade of reactions.&lt;br/&gt;
This distinction is not merely academic. The assumption of a close approach to
equilibrium during metamorphism has been the hallmark of metamorphic studies for
over a century and nearly all of our understanding of the evolution of rocks
during mountain building events and the inferred pressure and temperature
conditions in the crust are based on this assumption. The preliminary results
presented in this proposal imply that all of these previous inferences about
conditions of metamorphism will need to be revised in light of these new
findings. Furthermore, a cascade of metamorphic transformations occurring after
significant overstepping has the potential to release copious amounts of fluids
(e.g. H2O) into the crust, which has the potential for triggering substantial
deformation. It is even suggested that deep, large magnitude earthquakes that
are characteristic of subduction zones might be triggered by such a
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt; This study is made possible by a new technique by which
the pressure (and possibly temperature) at which a mineral such as garnet forms
can be determined by measuring the residual pressure of an inclusion of quartz,
epidote, or zircon in the garnet by Raman spectroscopy. The assumption required
by this new approach is that mechanical equilibrium is attained between the
garnet and the inclusion. Comparison of the results from this new method with
those that are obtained by assuming chemical equilibrium (the traditional
approach) provides a quantitative measure of the degree of overstepping. The
proposed study will evaluate the validity of this new technique through a series
of experiments, apply the approach to well-characterized samples from well-
studied mountain belts (e.g. in central New England), and develop new mineral
inclusion-host pairs to extend the method to additional rock types.