* 1447395
* SBIR Phase I:  Ecosystem for Learning and Team Design
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Baldur Steingrimsson, Imagars LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop an innovative software prototype that
uses pages out of electronic design (e-design) notebooks to automatically assess
design activities from all the five stages of the design process (requirements
modeling, functional modeling, concept design, embodiment design, and detailed
design). The e-design notebooks are generated using tablets, or convertible
laptops, which the designers receive, or bring, at the beginning of a design
project, to do all of their design work on. This software will impact the way
engineering design is taught, and thus contribute to the training of strong
engineering workforce, by allowing instructors, mentors or supervisors to assess
performance of students or design engineers with less subjectivity and on a
continual basis. In industry, the tool can be used to ensure efficient
compliance with internal design processes (minimize the chance of design
pitfalls), and teach effective design techniques, leading to productivity
enhancements that contribute to increased competiveness, higher quality, and
shorter time-to-market. The company expects to grow the annual revenues to at
least $11,000,000 in six years, by offering the design ecosystem stand-alone or
by licensing its assessment engine, the e-design process, to vendors of
electronic lab notebooks, and in the process create at least 50 jobs.

The project aim is to improve teaching, learning and practice of design
processes, by automating the seemingly impossible task of assessing the quality
of the design activities relative to a given design process through guiding,
real-time alerts. The project presents the only learning tool capable of
assessing design activities from all the five stages of the design process. The
research question is "Can a software application be used to assess the outcomes
of a design process?" To answer this question, three technical objectives have
been formulated. These are (1) Assessment of the information gathering
activities; (2) Assessment of the design process activities; and (3) Engineering
of the software objects extracted from the content of e-design notebooks.
Central to the ecosystem is the ability of designers to upload their documents
to a cloud environment, share selected designs with their teammates, and
correspond with their instructor, mentor or supervisor, subject to configurable
restrictions. The ecosystem also provides means for interfacing with established
tools for computer aided design (CAD) or data product management. The e-design
notebooks can tell a story that extends through the stages of the design
process, capturing drawings with different degree of sophistication, and can
even be extended to support complex CAD files.