* 1447274
* Rebound vs Gateway Effects of Pro-Environmental Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Amanda Carrico, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2017
* USD 491,500.00

Many resources have been invested in programs to promote the voluntary adoption
of pro-environmental behaviors (PEBs) through education, marketing, and economic
incentives. Such investments, however, are threatened by the potential for
rebound effects, by which the initial adoption of a PEB renders the adoption of
subsequent PEBs less likely because the individual feels licensed to behave in
environmentally counterproductive ways. On the other hand, an initial PEB may
actually motivate the adoption of subsequent PEBs by reinforcing a pro-
environmental identity, leading to gateway effects. The existence of gateway vs.
rebound effects has profound implications for the effectiveness of environmental
conservation programs and efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through
energy efficiency and conservation. Research to date has generated mixed results
and has been limited by a reliance on correlational designs and by an incomplete
investigation of the psychological and situational factors that facilitate and
underlie these effects. The interdisciplinary research team for this project
(cognitive and social psychology, decision theory, and law) draws on existing
theories related to identity, emotions, moral self-regulation, and multiple
modes of decision making to create and test a comprehensive theory of positive
and negative pro-environmental behavior spillover. Does the adoption of a PEB
affect the likelihood that an individual will adopt a subsequent PEB? What are
the psychological processes by which rebound and gateway effects occur? Under
what conditions are rebound and gateway effects most likely to occur? The
research employs a mixed-methods approach that combines experiments and surveys
conducted in both laboratory and field settings, using diverse populations.
Research findings are disseminated through journal articles, workshops, and
publications targeting policy makers and real-world decision makers. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The results from this research provides a foundation for evidence-
based environmental policy that reduces the likelihood of counterproductive
results or missed opportunities. By generating an understanding of the
situations that give rise to rebound effects, the project's results provide
insight to governments and private institutions about funding for initiatives
that may be better spent on other policies and programs. By identifying the
situations that give rise to gateway effects, the results will suggest when the
promotion of one easy PEB can be expected to be a gateway to more demanding
PEBs. The dissemination plan includes targeted publications and a dedicated
workshop. Decision and policy makers in the government, non-profit and business
sectors are also reached through a professionally designed communications guide
that summarizes research findings in accessible language. Partnerships with
corporate and community based organizations help transfer project findings into
real-world demonstration projects.