* 1447321
* The future of comparative biology in a phylogenetic age: Enabling the power and potential of the genealogy of life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Anne Arnold, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 650,259.00

The evolutionary relationships among species of animals, plants, fungi and
microbes is a large, complex, branching network that biologists call the Tree of
Life. Obtaining the complete Tree of Life for all living things is a grand
challenge in science, on the same intellectual scale as investigating the nature
of matter or the origin of the universe: it is fundamental to understanding our
world, central to human sustainability, and critical as a framework for future
discovery. Scientists have made major progress toward this challenge by
combining biology with computer science and successfully generating large
genealogies of thousands and even millions of species. These large phylogenetic
trees are now available to researchers in many branches of biology -- from
genomics to ecology -- and have great promise for applied science in medicine,
agriculture, industry, and climate-change mitigation. It is critical that
scientists develop a future vision for this area of scientific exploration and
make clear the central role of phylogenetics in the strategic integration of
biodiversity science across US academic, corporate and government institutions.
To achieve this vision, this project has developed a three-year program of
catalysis meetings and workshops to bring together and enlarge the Tree of Life
community. By uniting a wide range of biologists, computational experts, and
representatives from corporate entities, foundations, and government agencies,
the meeting series will generate a mechanism for scientific input into the
strategic vision of biodiversity science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops
series will impact many areas of research involving biodiversity and evolution
by addressing three over-arching goals: (1) identifying challenges and progress
in generating, storing and visualizing the genealogy of life, (2) integrating
large data layers with the tree of life, and (3) developing a clear plan and
compelling vision for the future of phylogenetic biology. The workshops and
catalysis meetings will include students and early-career scientists, as well as
educators and members of key corporate, government and non-profit organizations,
with the aim to create new, lasting partnerships that bridge across interest
groups. Tangible products of the meetings will include educational materials,
publications that highlight broader uses of Tree of Life as well as advances in
software that will be open source and available to a wide audience. At
completion of the workshop series the participants will produce a white paper
discussing ideas and challenges for long-term sustainability of biodiversity
data.