* 1447207
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of capsaicinoids from microorganisms.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Ewa Lis, Koliber Biosciences Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a novel production
technology for capsaicin, a high value plant natural product with applications
in the food, pharmaceutical, and deterrent industries. Most capsaicin today is
made near chili pepper farms with access to low cost labor, primarily in India
and China. The supply of capsaicin is impacted by weather variations resulting
in large fluctuations in both quality and quantity of capsaicin on the market.
The proposed microbial fermentation technology offers several solutions.
Fermentation can be deployed worldwide and can fulfill sudden market demand in
days rather than months. It enables tight control over the manufacturing process
providing a consistent quality product. More importantly, this technology has
the potential to deliver capsaicin at a price that enables market expansion and
development of new applications. Commercialization of such technologies will not
only solidify the leading role of the United States in synthetic biology
research but also will create high tech jobs while making globally competitive
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project is a
proposal to demonstrate the bioproduction of capsaicinoids by fermentation in a
microbial host. Capsaicin is currently manufactured through chemical extraction
from chili peppers. The process is inefficient and expensive. Recent
advancements in synthetic biology offer the ability to engineer non-native
biochemical pathways into microorganisms and produce chemicals using
fermentation. In this proposal, the capsaicinoid biosynthetic pathway will be
engineered into a microbial host and cultivated using a fermentation strategy
that results in a faster time-to-market while maintaining a strong economic
advantage. The experimental approach utilizes multivariate metabolic engineering
approaches in order to arrive at optimal solutions in the most time and cost
effective way. Successful demonstration of a functional capsaicinoid pathway
will enable more complex engineering efforts of natural products and will
greatly improve the understanding of this pathway in plants. Moreover, the
synthetic biology tools discovered during the course of this research and the
application of data science to synthetic biology have the potential to rapidly
accelerate innovation in this field.