* 1447234
* RAPID: Sociotechnical Systems under Stress
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Louise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 34,139.00

This study makes an important contribution to workplace safety and economic
security in managing risky, dangerous, yet essential operations in industries
such as offshore oil exploration, shale gas drilling, nuclear power generation,
as well as mining for the United States and the rest of the world. Such
industries, vital to the continued exploration of new sources of energy and
economic efficiency for the United States as a nation as well as a global
trading partner, nonetheless create risk to workers, plant operators, and
neighboring communities that potentially multiply the costs of error many times
over. Reducing the risk of error can be done effectively through the development
of a complexity index to measure the degree of strain placed on the performance
of large-scale, technical systems by unexpected disruptions. Such an index also
measures the impact of strain on the stability of the managing organization and
its ability to adapt to sudden, unexpected threats more effectively and
resiliently. Timely, accurate measurement of risk enables decision makers to
manage resources and personnel in complex technical systems, marshal needed
expertise, and communicate to relevant audiences more effectively. Developing
improved measures of tension between strain and stability occurring within
complex, sociotechnical systems provides an index of resilience that enhances
not only economic productivity, but also increases the innovation and creativity
of U.S. industry. Mismanagement of complex, sociotechnical systems, in contrast,
leads to large losses in lives, property, and economic security as witnessed by
the May 13, 2014 mining disaster in Soma, Turkey; the 2011 nuclear breach in
Fukushima, Japan, and the 2010 BP Oil Spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Reducing the
risk of large-scale, sociotechnical disasters through informed management of
resources, knowledge, trained personnel and timely communication represents a
substantive investment in economic security for U.S. industry and continuing
global trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop a prototype
complexity index to measure the rate of evolving strain vs. adapting stability
in complex, sociotechnical systems operating in rapidly evolving conditions. The
two functions of strain and stability will be measured as a joint distribution
that will serve as profile of resiliency for the system. The complexity index
will create a metric to indicate the current status of the sociotechnical system
as it is exposed to recurring risk, while indicating, simultaneously, the status
of reserve capacity available within the larger operational system that can be
mobilized to counter emerging threats. A critical factor in the sustainability
of a sociotechnical system's operation is its capacity to adapt to threatening
or damaging conditions. A prototype complexity index, designed to identify the
structure of a technical system's operation as well as its range of tolerance to
varying levels of demand, represents a fresh means of measuring the rate of
adaptation to recurring risk for sociotechnical systems under stress. The index
will measure the functions of strain and stability at different scales of
operation in reference to the overall system's capacity for innovative response,
based on the resources, skill, and knowledge of its managing organization. Well
designed, a complexity index may be adapted to measure strain vs. stability in
other sociotechnical systems operating in rapidly evolving conditions of risk.
This practical measure of resilience contributes to addressing management
problems in both technical and organizational systems. Findings will contribute
to the research literature on managing sociotechnical systems under stress.