* 1447350
* "Meeting with MBE Pioneers", a Special Symposium Held at the International Conference on Molecular Beam Epitaxy, Flagstaff Arizona, September 7, 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Yong-Hang Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project will support participation of Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)
of pioneers in a Symposium to be held on September 7, 2014 at the High Country
Conference Center, Flagstaff, Arizona. This special Symposium will precede the
International Conference on Molecular Beam Epitaxy, which will take place from
September 8 to 12, 2014. The MBE conference has taken place since 1978 and has
provided a prominent international forum for reporting new developments in the
areas of fundamental and applied molecular beam epitaxy research.. The Symposium
will foster advances in the leading research on III-V semiconductors, by
gathering a diverse group of experts, researchers and students. The program
provides the opportunity to learn about the latest developments in fundamental
and applied MBE research, synthesis of new materials, formation of novel
heterostructures, and the development of innovative devices. III-V, II-VI, IV-VI
and IV semiconductors are addressed including wide bandgap materials, nanowires
and quantum dots and various other novel devices. Technological advances of the
semiconductors addressed in the Symposium offer the means to meet the increasing
demand for higher performance devices with multiple functionalities, in support
of communications and sensing applications. Further dissemination will be
provided with a presentation of Symposium papers in the Journal of Crystal
Growth.