* 1447886
* Developing Standards for Data Citation and Attribution for Reproducible Research in Linguistics
* SBE,SMA
* 11/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Peter Pulsifer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2020
* USD 137,657.00

This project supports a series of three workshops and one panel presentation
bringing together relevant stakeholders to develop and promote standards for
data citation and attribution for linguistic data. Linguistics is a data-driven
social science, in which inferences about human cognition and social structure
are drawn from observations of linguistic practice. These observations, in the
form of recordings and associated annotations, represent the primary data sets
that underlie the field. This practice has its roots in philology, which relies
on texts as a primary data source. However, three recent and inter-related
factors make the data-oriented model of linguistics particularly relevant to the
field at the current time. First, a major shift in technology has resulted in
rapidly growing volumes of digital language data. Second, more than half of the
world?s languages are critically endangered, so that in the not-so-distant
future archival data will be the only source of information on those languages.
Third, the emergence of Documentary Linguistics as a recognized sub-field has
led to an increased focus on data curation and management. While linguists have
always relied on language data, they have not always facilitated access to those
data. Linguistic publications typically include short excerpts from data sets,
ordinarily consisting of fewer than five words, and often without citation.
Where citations are provided, the connection to the data set is usually only
vaguely identified. An excerpt might be given a citation which refers to the
name of the text from which it was extracted, but in practice the reader has no
way to access that text. That is, in spite of the potential generated by recent
shifts in the field, a great deal of linguistic research created today is not
reproducible, either in principle or in practice. The workshops and panel
presentation will facilitate development of standards for the curation and
citation of linguistics data that are responsive to these changeing conditions
and shift the field of linguistics toward a more scientific, data-driven model
which results in reproducible research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary factor
hindering the development of reproducible research in linguistics is the lack of
standards for data citation and attribution. Although language data are
increasingly recognized as important, there are no widely established guidelines
for the citation of these data. Equally important, there are no standards for
attribution. Lacking such standards, journals, academic tenure and promotion
committees, and peer review processes continue to emphasize linguistic analyses
over linguistic data, and as a result linguists have little incentive to make
data accessible. A data-driven linguistic science has the potential to provide
substantiation of scientific claims by promoting attention to the care and
structuring of language data. By the end of the project, the researchers will
have held three workshops to research and develop a model for data citation and
attribution in linguistics; facilitated discipline-wide discussion on these
topics at the 2017 annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America; written
a position paper on standards for citation and attribution in linguistics; and
submitted a proposal for a Resolution on citation and attribution to the LSA.