* 1447918
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel, Accurate and Reproducible Platform for the Developability Assessment of Protein Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Belinda Pastrana, Protein Dynamic Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

Broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is to (1) improve the decision making towards protein
therapeutics development (also known as developability), (2) reduce Research and
Development costs for the Biotechnology industry in general, (3) improve
timelines of new protein therapeutic candidates, thus proceeding to clinical
phase trials sooner, (4) resulting in fewer candidate withdrawals from clinical
trials, (5) reduce risk associated with protein aggregation and immunogenicity,
a potentially fatal outcome; leading to (6) overall quicker times for approval-
to-market, and finally (7) a reduction of product recall risk. The market
opportunity for protein characterization and identification market by
instruments also known as life sciences tools is estimated to be $ 80-85 billion
dollars. Our product is an innovative patented technology platform and related
services which will support the developability evaluation of new protein
therapeutic candidates in the biologics and biosimilars product portfolio. As an
additional funding source, we have adopted the production of a high quality
aggregate free potential diagnostic candidate biomarker for prostrate and
pancreatic cancer to allow for further research and development in other
research institutions. Completion of Phase I in the evaluation of formulation
conditions of protein therapeutics including monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) will
ensure progress towards the development of a high throughput platform for Phase
II evaluation.

The proposed project will address the current bottleneck of new protein
therapeutics within the biologics and biosimilars industry due to protein
aggregation. This is the single most prevalent reason that has hampered the
release of biotherapeutics into the market. Protein aggregation leads to loss of
efficacy and potentially to immunogenicity risks. Formulation is critical to
downstream processing, dosing, storage, and delivery of protein therapeutics.
Our goal is to test different formulation conditions through the use of Design
of Experiment strategies to identify the formulation conditions under which the
monoclonal antibody candidate is stable and aggregation free, even under stress.
We have designed an innovative patented platform using two dimensional infrared
(2D IR) correlation spectroscopy and perturbation correlation (PC) analysis
which is accurate, reproducible and does not use probes to determine the
mechanism and extent of aggregation, and stability of a mAb. A potential outcome
will be the developability assessment of novel candidates ensuring a pipeline of
protein therapeutics early in the research and development. If successful, Phase
II will involve a high-throughput platform to address the evaluation of protein
aggregation in plasma and final IV delivery conditions, for the design of a
predictive model for immunogenicity risk assessment.