* 1447889
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Detection and Enrichment of Nucleic Acids by Interfacing with Commercially Available Cell Sorters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Adam Sciambi, Mission Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to enable affordable detection and enrichment of
rare DNA or RNA molecules from a large background population. Currently, such
detection is performed on expensive, dedicated instruments that have low
sensitivity and are not able to enrich. The proposed strategy is to encapsulate
the fluorescently-identified target molecules in thin oil shells so that they
mimic cells, and then process them on sensitive and high-throughput cell-sorting
instruments that are readily available. By offloading the detection and
enrichment to such machines, all that is required by researchers is a simple
tool that encapsulates the molecules in thin oil shells. Applications afforded
by high sensitivity and enrichment are numerous, from rare pathogen or cell
detection to target capture of uncommon mutant sequences with the goal of
downstream sequencing. Between the reduced cost and expansion of capabilities,
this approach has the potential to become a widely adopted
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to enable high-
throughput digital PCR (dPCR) at a dramatic cost reduction by interfacing with
existing flow cytometers (FC). The main research objectives center on
characterizing and optimizing the dPCR droplets for use on a wide variety of FC
instruments originally intended for cell sorting. First, the biological,
chemical, mechanical, and optical properties of the dPCR droplets will be
optimized to guarantee compatibility with different FC systems while maximizing
earlier PCR efficiency and specificity. Next, serial dilutions of target
sequences will be run to test and improve detection thresholds. Those same
samples also will be benchmarked against currently commercially available dPCR
systems. In tandem, the droplet-on-FC system will be used in a research
collaboration to quantitate and characterize HIV latency in an infected cell
population. Initial results with FC-processed droplets are promising, as FC
systems are already remarkably flexible due to the range of cell types they must
be capable of accepting.