* 1447750
* Toward a Better Understanding of Magmatic Processes and Volcanic Hazards at Nyiragongo Volcano, DR Congo
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Kenneth Sims, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2017
* USD 267,619.00

Nyiragongo is a spectacular, active stratovolcano in the Virunga Volcanic
Province that towers over the city of Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR
Congo), and hosts the world's largest lava lake in its summit crater. Its
unusual lavas are some of the least viscous on the planet and are capable of
moving at velocities of up to tens of kilometers per hour. Nyiragongo is also a
dangerous volcano. It looms within 20 km of the major population centers of Goma
and neighboring Gisenyi Rwanda, with a combined population of at least 1
million. Destructive eruptions in 1977 and 2002 claimed many lives and
devastated infrastructure in this war torn region. The next eruption could prove
disastrous in this politically volatile and economically challenged area and
there is consequently an urgent need to provide a concrete scientific framework
for hazard assessment and risk mitigation at Nyiragongo. There is a dearth of
scientific contributions that address magmatic cyclicity at this volcano and
thus the primary goal of this research is to provide a temporal structure of
past eruptions by age dating lava samples from Nyiragongo's main cone and from
peripheral volcanic cones, which are especially dangerous because of their
proximity to the population of Goma, with many cones residing within the city
limits. Findings will be disseminated to the end-users, the residents of Goma
and surroundings. Collaborator Dario Tedesco, who for many years has worked
closely with the Goma Volcano Observatory and the United Nations addressing the
volcanic hazards in the DR Congo, will facilitate this goal. In addition to this
hazard assessment component, this research will focus on basic science queries
about the highly unusual lavas that erupt at Nyiragongo. Not only will this
study contribute to the understanding of the sources and evolution of lava flows
at Nyiragongo, but it will also provide an important end-member in global
studies of similar volcanic processes. For all of these reasons, this work will
be supported in part by NSF's International Science and Engineering
Section.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two explicit goals of this research involve 1)
hazard assessment and 2) basic science questions. The primary way in which the
first goal will be accomplished is through precise age dating of lava flows and
parasitic cones from Nyiragongo using 40Ar/39Ar, 14C, and U decay series
isotopes. A more complete temporal framework of past eruptions at Nyiragongo
will be gained from these age dates from lavas collected in 2010 and critical
new samples from Nyiragongo's lava flows and parasitic cones that will be
collected in an ensuing field campaign. The second goal is to enhance basic
scientific understanding of the sources, processes and timescales associated
with the petrogenesis of the alkaline, silica-undersaturated magmatism at
Nyiragongo. These results will then be compared with a separate and parallel
study of Nyiragongo's highly active sister volcano Nyamulagira, as well as data
from other alkaline volcanic suites around the globe. This goal will be
accomplished through the measurement of major- and trace- elements, radiogenic
Nd, Sr, Hf and Pb isotopes and both long- and short-lived U and Th decay series
isotopes in young, known age lavas collected from Nyiragongo's lava lake in
2010.