* 1447689
* Student Travel Support for Harmony 2015
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical to the development of any field. They
enable researchers and practitioners to exchange information reliably, apply a
variety of tools to their problems, and reproduce scientific results. The
COmputational MOdeling in Biology NEtwork (COMBINE) was created in 2010 to
organize standardization efforts for systems biology. This effort includes,
among others, the systems biology markup language (SBML) for mathematical
modeling; the biological pathways exchange language (BioPAX) for describing
pathways; and the systems biology graphical notation (SBGN) for visual
representations. In a separate effort, the synthetic biology community is
developing the synthetic biology open language (SBOL). While synthetic biology
has many unique requirements, there are also a lot of overlapping features such
as the need to construct mathematical models, describe pathways, and provide
visual representations. It is important to join these efforts, such that, the
synthetic biology community can leverage existing standards enabling the sharing
of tools and other infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help
enable these two communities to meet together at COMBINE's HARMONY 2015 meeting
to be held in Wittenberg, Germany on April 20th to 24th
(http://co.mbine.org/events/HARMONY_2015). Workshops like this one are
instrumental in making progress in the development of these standards.
Currently, most standardization efforts are either unfunded or only have very
limited support. Indeed, the success of these standards has been due to the
donation of time from many individuals to participate in discussions, write
specifications, serve as standard editors, and attend workshops. Many of these
individuals working on the development of SBOL are students based in the US who
would otherwise find it difficult to find the funds to attend this meeting.
Therefore, this project would help support travel expenses for these US-based
students working on the SBOL standard to travel to Germany for HARMONY 2015. Not
only would this be a valuable experience for these students, but it would also
greatly enhance our goal of bringing together researchers in synthetic biology
with those working in systems biology leading to integrated standards and shared
software and infrastructure. The goals of this workshop will be to (1) develop
synergistic relationships between systems and synthetic biology researchers; (2)
provide a tighter integration of standard development for systems and synthetic
biology; (3) perform outreach to modelers and experimentalists; and (4) discuss
a coordinated effort to advocate the use of standards in publications and
archival databases to enhance reproducibility of scientific results.