* 1447268
* An Analysis of the Evolution and Structure of Supercell Storms and Tornadoes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Joshua Wurman, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Continuing Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,016,546.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This study involves continued analysis of weather radar and
observational data along three main focus areas: (1) documentation of supercell
storm evolution including the physical processes that affect tornadogenesis and
tornado evolution, (2) documentation of the observed low-level wind field and
vortex structure in tornadoes, and (3) the expansion of a radar-based tornado
climatology. Given the difficulties in collecting the high resolution three-
dimensional data sets necessary to understand tornadogenesis, tornado evolution,
and tornadic wind field structures, the proposed work has the potential to
advance our understanding of tornado-scale processes, especially in the limited
number of cases where detailed surface-based observations are also
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Accumulated over
many years the previously collected data has produced a uniquely extensive set
of tornado wind-field measurements. The knowledge gained from this study is
critically important given the inherent variability of individual cases on both
the tornado and storm scales. The collection (and analysis) of measurements of a
statistically large sampling of tornadic storms is required to properly
understand the dynamics involved. This study will further expand the number of
cases included in the tornado climatology previously developed by this team of
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study will
improve our knowledge of wind fields associated with tornadoes, using a large
data set of field observations of these storms. This knowledge will help refine
conceptual models of tornado formation, dynamics and evolution. This research is
focused on answering long-standing questions relating to the formation of
tornadoes and tornado vortex wind structure. The research performed in this
study will improve future storm-scale numerical weather prediction efforts. The
investigators will collaborate with several universities across the country, to
infuse this new knowledge into the curriculum involved in the study of severe
and tornadic storms.