* 1447589
* EAGER: Data Privacy for Smart Meter Data: A Scenario-Based Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Stanton, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 266,101.00

Smart electric meters comprise one key technology element in an overall strategy
to modernize the nation's energy infrastructure. Smart meters capture data on
household energy usage at frequent intervals and transmit those data to utility
companies, who use the data to automate meter reading and billing, detect and
respond to outages, and manage grid operations. Data collected over time can be
used to forecast demand, understand customer behavior and develop new service
and pricing plans. In the long run, these data can drive forecasting and control
models that allow utilities to respond rapidly to fluctuations in power demand
with compensatory load control strategies. This capability can reduce the
magnitude of peak demand, thereby reducing both infrastructure costs and the
consumption of fossil fuels that power peak generation facilities. Despite these
advantages, smart meter data also appear to create powerful customer privacy
concerns that may inhibit the adoption of smart meter technology by utilities.
To address privacy concerns pertaining to the smart meter data, this project
proposes three studies: Study 1 uses public data on electricity usage to develop
a set of privacy scenarios that will be tested in focus groups to explore
consumer privacy concerns. Study 2 involves a quasi-experiment to assess key
dimensions of the scenarios and help identify which scenario has the highest
level of acceptability to consumers. Study 3 involves one-on-one discussions
with utility company representatives to develop a toolbox of communication
methods and content that balance consumers' privacy concerns with the goals and
constraints of utilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current theoretical model of
privacy and technology, based on an information boundary framework, posits that
consumers' willingness to share private information is rooted in the nature of
the relationship with the party with whom the information is shared. Although a
number of researchers have applied this information boundary framework to intra-
organizational situations, the framework has not been tested in the context of
smart meter data privacy. In the proposed sequence of three studies, this
project gathers data from informants with the intention of understanding whether
the information boundary framework is applicable to examining the relationships
between consumers and regulated monopolies. The proposed project provides
insights into public attitudes and concerns, as well as industry practices and
policies regarding privacy of smart meter data. Through direct interaction with
utility companies, as well as dissemination at industry conferences, in trade
journals and through the media, the researchers will share their findings with
practitioners, regulators and others who can create solutions that give
customers confidence about the protection of their data.