* 1447788
* BIGDATA: IA: DKA: Collaborative Research: Learning Data Analytics: Providing Actionable Insights to Increase College Student Success
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Thomas Brothen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,219,734.00

The six-year higher-education graduation rate has been around 59% for over 15
years; less than half of college graduates finish within 4 years. This has high
human, economic and societal costs. The National Research Council has identified
a critical need to develop innovative approaches to improve student retention,
graduation, and workforce-preparedness. The objective of this project is to
develop new computational methods to analyze large and diverse types of
education and learning data to help (a) discover successful academic pathways
for students; (b) improve pedagogy for instructors; and (c) enhance student
persistence and retention for institutions. The project outcomes are designed to
help students select courses that fit their needs, capabilities, and learning
styles, and are likely to lead to (faster) graduation; help instructors to
better meet student needs; and give advisors and institutions the analytics
needed to improve retention and persistence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will produce new dynamical system modeling, collaborative filtering,
and multi-task learning methods. Modeling the evolution of a student's knowledge
using a dynamical state-space system is a key innovation; the proposed research
will develop novel collaborative system identification and collaborative Kalman
filtering techniques for grade prediction. Technical innovations include
supervised learning approaches for evolving datasets, such as linear and non-
linear multi-task learning and collaborative multi-regression models with
controlled grouping of the latent variables. These innovations will coalesce
into three pilot applications: DegreePlanner for students, CourseInsights for
instructors, and StudentWatch for academic advisors.