* 1447797
* Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R) 2014-2019
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Suzanne Carbotte, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,064,726.00

The Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R) program has revolutionized the way the
Academic Fleet for oceanographic research goes about the process of data
stewardship. In 2009, the NSF Oceanographic Instrumentation and Technical
Services Program funded the R2R program as a 4-way collaborative effort between
data services groups at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO), Scripps
Institution of Oceanography (SIO), Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI)
and Florida State University (FSU). The mission of the R2R Program was to
document and preserve the underway data from every cruise in the U.S. academic
research fleet. R2R's work plan included uploading and classifying the end-of-
cruise data distributions from each vessel operator; publishing an online
catalog of vessels, cruises, datasets, and science parties; preparing and
submitting the data to the NOAA Data Centers for long-term preservation;
assessing the quality of selected data sets and providing quality feedback to
operators; creating a standard set of data products including quality-controlled
ship-track navigation, geophysical profiles (gravity, magnetics, bathymetry),
and real-time meteorology/near-surface oceanography; and developing an event
logging application to document at-sea operations. The R2R program team worked
in close collaboration with the University National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS) Office, vessel technicians, NOAA Centers, other NSF-funded ocean
data systems, disciplinary specialists in the research community, and
international partners. All UNOLS operating institutions, as well as the NSF-
supported Coast Guard Cutter (CGC) Healy, now routinely submit their cruise data
to R2R. R2R has achieved its primary objectives during its initial five years of
operation. Renewed funding will enable transition from a "development" focus to
an "operational" focus. Work in the next five years includes continued operation
of core infrastructure developed in the first phase of funding, as well as
selected new tasks designed to improve R2R's products and services in response
to community feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits of R2R will extend to key
stakeholders including vessel operators, research scientists,
&lt;br/&gt;cyberinfrastructure developers, funding agencies, and the general
public. R2R will provide tools and feedback to help marine technicians improve
data quality and documentation, and will free them from the need to maintain a
local data archive. A central cruise catalog for the academic fleet will ensure
that original field data from every cruise are routinely preserved and
disseminated, improving access for scientists and the public and simplifying
funding agency efforts to enforce data sharing requirements. Standardization of
data acquisition procedures across the fleet will facilitate integration with
observations from other platforms such as NSFs Ocean Observatories Initiative,
while enabling new synthesis efforts for a global ocean that is vast and
sparsely explored.