* 1447391
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer Science Compuverse
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Rick Kamal, Zendigo Group Inc dba EduNova
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,988.00

This SBIR Phase I project will design, build, and test a web-based, modular
curriculum for providing rigorous, accessible, and engaging computer science
(CS) education to grades 9 - 10 students. The U.S. is experiencing two human
resources gaps in computing. First, by 2020, the Bureau of Labor Statistics
predicts there will be 1.2 million more CS related jobs than Americans trained
to fill them. Second, female, African-American and Latino student participation
remains stubbornly low. This results in a loss of talent and innovation for
America, and lost career opportunities for U.S. students. Research suggests
these gaps are the result of too few students being introduced early to rigorous
and compelling CS education. Currently, 19% of U.S. high-school students take a
CS class, a percentage that has fallen over the last two decades (NAEP High
School Transcript Study, 2009). This issue is further exacerbated by a lack of
qualified CS teachers. The Phase 1 project prototype will be an easy-to-
implement, student-driven mechanism to provide standards-based CS instruction.
Unlike current initiatives that narrowly focus on programming, this prototype
will align with standards developed by the nation's leading organizations for
computing professionals and will allow under-trained instructors to provide
comprehensive CS courses to students. The proposed project will provide high
school students with an engaging and rigorous introduction to CS, and a clear
pathway to college-level study and careers in CS and computing-related fields.

The project will be designed according to Universal Design for learning
principles (UDL, 2013) to be student-driven and inquiry-based, and to support
multiple learning styles. Students will engage with complex computational
concepts and algorithmic constructs via interactive, multimedia, and adaptive
content. Research suggests that these approaches improve knowledge retention and
engagement with the subject (Gordon & Brayshaw, 2008). Unlike existing computing
education, this project will make explicit connections to real-world context and
societal impact which research suggests improves the engagement of students who
might otherwise not connect to computing (Owens et al., 2008; Barker et al,
2014). In Phase I, the essential project infrastructure and architecture, a
prototype of the reporting module and 5 of the 10 planned content modules will
be developed. System and compatibility testing along with iterative usability
and feasibility testing will be conducted. At the end of Phase 1, a pilot study
will be conducted with high school students (n=50) and CS teachers (n=5) to
assess the usability and the feasibility of the completed prototype and whether
the contextualized content increases female and minority students? affiliation
and interest in CS. Users will also evaluate the initial feasibility of a Phase
2 full product concept in a classroom setting based on their experience with the
prototype.