* 1447344
* BIGDATA: IA: DKA: Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Connectomics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Hanspeter Pfister, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 935,000.00

High-Throughput Connectomics &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connectomics is the science
of mapping the connectivity between neuronal structures to help us understand
how brains work. Using the analogy of astronomy, connectomics researchers wish
to build 'telescopes' that will allow scientists to accurately view the brain.
However, as in astronomy, the raw data collected by microtomes and electron
microscopes, the instruments of connectomics, is too large to store effectively,
and must be analyzed at very high computation rates. Our goal is to research,
develop, and deploy a software architecture that enables high-throughput
analysis of connectomics data at the speed at which it is being acquired. We
will develop the first computational infrastructure to support high-throughput
connectomics without human intervention. If successful, this system will allow
for the first time the mapping of a cortical column of a small mammalian brain
(1 cubic millimeter), and hopefully within a few years the mapping of
significant sections of a mammalian cortex. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution
to the big data problem of connectomics is a new high-throughput connectomics
software architecture that we call MapRecurse. MapRecurse, named so because it
bears some resemblance to the widely used MapReduce framework, will provide a
unified way of specifying sequences of computational steps and validation tests
to be applied to the collected data. Key to MapRecurse will be the ability to
layout data and computation in a structured way that preserves locality. Using
it, programmers will be able to apply fast, less accurate segmentation
algorithms to low resolutions of the data in order to quickly compute a first
version of the output neural network graph. Domain-specific graph theoretical
methods will then check for correctness of the graph and identify areas of
inconsistencies that are in need of further refinement. MapRecurse will then
apply bottom-up, local processing with slower, more accurate segmentation and
reconstruction algorithms to higher resolutions of the data, verifying and
correcting any errors. The iterations progress recursively and in parallel
across multiple cores, giving the approach its name. We believe that MapRecurse
and the data structures and algorithms developed here will find applications in
other high-throughput applications, such as, in astronomy, biology, social media
applications, or economics.