* 1447822
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Learning a Union of Subspaces from Big and Corrupted Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 608,530.00

This project develops theory and algorithms for automatically discovering
multiple low-dimensional structures in high-dimensional data, and evaluates
these algorithms in image clustering applications. The developed techniques
enhance our ability to handle big data problems from multiple sources and
modalities, and advance the knowledge on how to interpret massive amounts of
complex high-dimensional data. The techniques developed in this project can
significantly broaden the applicability of existing results in sparse
representation theory to subspace clustering problems, which have found
widespread applications in image processing (e.g., image denoising, compression,
representation, and segmentation), computer vision (e.g., motion segmentation
and face clustering) and dynamical systems (e.g., hybrid system
identification).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research develops provably correct
and scalable algorithms for learning a union of low-dimensional subspaces from
big and corrupted data. The algorithms are based on the so-called self-
expressiveness property of the data, which states that an uncorrupted data point
can be well approximated by an affine combination of other uncorrupted data
points. This research shows that by imposing a structured sparse and low-rank
prior on the coefficients, one can discover multiple structures in the data. In
the case of uncorrupted data, the research team studies conditions on the data
under which a perfect clustering is possible. In the case of data corrupted by
outliers, the research team studies conditions under which perfect clustering
and outlier rejection are possible. In the case of data with missing entries,
the research team studies conditions under which perfect clustering and data
completion are possible. The project also develops efficient and scalable
algorithms that benefit from distributed and high-performance computing for
solving the various subspace clustering problems. These algorithms enable
solving large-scale problems in computer vision, including image clustering.