* 1447235
* EAGER: Identifying Blockmodel Functional Modules across Multiple Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Byung-Jun Yoon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Broader Significance and Importance: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the high
complexity of analyzing high-throughput omics data, most of the existing
computational methods separately analyze the data collected from different
sources. Furthermore, they typically assume that the available prior biology
knowledge, such as molecular interactions manifested as biological networks, is
accurate. As the existing curated molecular interactions and functionalities
across public databases still have unsatisfactory coverage or consistency, it is
critical to develop effective analysis methods that can achieve biologically
meaningful solutions by integrating diverse evidence from multiple biological
networks. The objective of the proposed research is to develop a network-based
mathematical framework and a set of new computational algorithms for the
integrative analysis of multiple networks. The proposed research has strong
transformative potentials in network biology. If successful, it can eventually
lead to computational tools for more accurate and reliable identification of
novel biomarkers and functional pathways. Beyond that, through the ongoing
collaborations with biologists and physicians, it will open up new applications
of network analysis methods to improve our understanding of complex human
diseases. The interdisciplinary nature of this proposal promises to foster
cross-fertilization of ideas between engineering and biology through research
and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research investigates integrative analysis of
multiple biological networks, which are often noisy, to robustly identify
biologically significant functional modules. The proposed mathematical framework
provides a platform to address both critical issues in multiple network analysis
regarding the computational complexity and biological significance by
simultaneously analyzing multiple networks in a modular space. The advantage of
integrative analysis of multiple biological networks is two-fold: First,
cellular functional pathways that carry out critical functionalities are likely
to be conserved across different organisms. Multiple network analysis will
improve the performance of functional module identification. Second, new
evidence from the analysis of identified modules may effectively transfer
previously accrued knowledge to more confident curation and annotation of
molecular relationships and the underlying cellular mechanisms. The proposed
research and education activities are to: 1) design a new mathematical model for
multiple biological network analysis to identify network modules for better
understanding functional organization of cells and the complex cellular
mechanisms; 2) devise effective and efficient optimization algorithms, including
mathematical programming and stochastic optimization algorithms, to solve the
optimization problems at different levels of complexity; 3) evaluate the
performance of the proposed methods by constructing biologically realistic
benchmark datasets; 4) apply the methods to systems biology research through
collaboration with biomedical researchers; and 5) integrate research findings
into the education and training of students with various academic backgrounds in
the interdisciplinary field of computational network biology.