* 1447005
* Response of tremor and slow slip to tidal stress: Constraints on fault friction and weakening
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Heidi Houston, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 170,000.00

In the past 10 years seismologists have discovered a new type of fault behavior
- epitomized by slow slip earthquakes on plate boundaries, in which slip on a
fault occurs over a much greater area for a much longer time than for regular
earthquakes. These events cannot be felt, but are often detectable with GPS.
Here the PI studies the effects of small, but relatively well-known, stress
changes on slow slip earthquakes. The gravitational attraction of the Sun and
Moon on the Earth stress and slightly deform the Earth and also raise water
tides that flow and add to the changing stress. These small stress changes
affect deep fault zones and modulate slow slip and tremor, which is recently-
discovered weak seismic radiation associated with slow slip. The tidal stresses
can be calculated, so one can assess the effect of small known stress changes on
the generation of tremor, which is a marker for slow slip. The results bear on
how slow slip is enhanced and suppressed by tidal stressing, on levels of rock
friction deep in subduction zones, and on how the fault interface weakens as
slip accumulates during large slow slip earthquakes. This work provides the
first such estimate of in-situ intrinsic friction deep in a plate boundary.
Constraining the friction in deep subduction zones to a very low level, as
preliminary results indicate, is potentially tranformative, and has implications
for aspects of subduction zone science well beyond seismology, including
petrology, slab stresses, and geodynamics.

Episodic Tremor and Slip (ETS) is a recently-discovered phenomenon in which weak
seismic signals called tremor accompany slowly-propagating shear slip on a plate
boundary interface in slow earthquakes, often with durations of several weeks.
Deep on the Cascadia subduction zone under northern Washington, large M6.6 to
6.8 ETS events occur with unusual regularity for a seismic phenomenon, roughly
every 14 months. The proposed approach utilizes the well-calibrated tidal
stresses to probe the response of the region accommodating episodic slow
deformation in the deep subduction zone. Analysis of tidal stresses at the time
and location of 33,000 tremors from 6 ETS events reveals the strong influence of
tidal stress, and particularly, that tremor sensitivity to tidal stress evolves,
increasing over several days as slow slip accumulates at a given location. This
increase in sensitivity implies progressive weakening of the fault. This work
will extend the study of the influence of tidal stressing to 1) tremor that
occurs between the major ETS events, 2) large ETS events all along Cascadia, and
3) ETS events in Japan. The PI will also determine preferred poroelastic models
that provide the best correlation between tremor and tidal stresses. The goal is
to better constrain friction and fault weakening and restrengthening on the
plate boundary during the ETS cycle. The preliminary research has yielded the
first clear finding of evolving tremor sensitivity to tidal stress over days of
ETS slip at a given spot, likely due to progressive fault weakening. These
results constrain the timing and degree of fault weakening during ETS, while the
proposed work will address the timing of restrengthening during the 14-month
intervals between ETSs, as well as the relative behavior of tremor tidal
sensitivity in different geologic and tectonic settings along the Cascadia
subduction zone, and along the Nankai-Kii subduction zone. Additionally, the
preliminary research has yielded the first in-situ estimate of intrinsic
friction on the deep subduction interface, while the proposed work will deliver
similar results for a wider sampling of locations and portions of the ETS
seismic cycle. This approach has shown the potential to constrain key properties
and processes in the deep subduction environment: intrinsic friction, fault
weakening, and subsequent restrengthening. Furthermore, the possible effects of
slow-slip-generated stress on the adjacent hazardous locked portions of
subduction zones mandate better understanding of slow slip phenomena. For
example, it appears that the recent devastating 2011 Tohoku earthquake was
preceded by slow slip.