* 1447416
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Usable Multiple Scale Big Data Analytics through Interactive Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Christopher North, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 998,912.00

Gaining big insight from big data requires big analytics, which poses big
usability problems. Analyses of big data often rely on several computational and
statistical models that operate on multiple levels of data scale to discover and
characterize noteworthy patterns. The models work jointly or in sequence to
filter, group, summarize, and visualize big data so that analysts may assess the
data. As a simple example in big text analytics, massive text is first sampled
for relevant or representative words, then further reduced by a complex form of
modeling (e.g., topic modeling), then visualized by applying a dimension
reduction algorithm. As the size of data increases, so does the number of models
and, likewise, the need for human interaction in the analytical process. By
interacting, humans include expert judgment into the analytical process, and
efficiently explore and make sense of big data from varying perspectives.
However, for a variety of reasons, interacting with any individual model is
difficult, let alone a growing number of models. Thus, current human-computer-
interaction research is merged with complex statistical methods and fast
computation to develop a usable, multi-model analytic framework for big data.
Wrapped in software, the framework will be accessible to both professional and
student users alike; i.e., available to make new discoveries in current
government and industrial big datasets, as well as, educate future analysts at
the undergraduate and graduate levels given new teaching modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new analytic framework extends Visual-to-Parametric
Interaction (V2PI) to Multi-scale V2PI (MV2PI). V2PI currently supports usable
small-data analytics, and enables users to adjust model parameters by
interacting directly with data in visualizations. That is, V2PI interprets
visual interactions quantitatively to update underlying model parameters and
produce new visualizations. MV2PI now links together several models that operate
at multiple levels of data-scale in a unified interactive space. In MV2PI,
small-scale data interactions in visualizations propagate to larger scale models
(by inverting them and updating their parameters) and new visualizations are
generated. In the text analytics example, if users drag several data points
together to hypothesize a cluster, the inverted dimension reduction model
computes updated dimension weights, queries relevant new hits at the large
scale, identifies changed topics, and updates the layout to show big-data
support for the new cluster. With MV2PI, users may interactively explore large-
scale data and complex inter-relationships between models in real time, and in a
usable fashion that directly supports their natural cognitive sensemaking
process. Development of MV2PI involves: (1) formulation of an explicitly stated
framework ; (2) creation of new interactive models (e.g., Interactive K-means
and Interactive Latent Dirichlet Allocation) that cover different levels of
scale and support MV2PI model inversion; (3) implementation of computational
methods to support high-performance, real-time model updates; and (4) evaluation
of MV2PI software framework for usability and effectiveness. The project web
site (http://www.apps.stat.vt.edu/bava/mv2pi.html) will include information on
MV2PI development, access to software, datasets, educational materials, and
publications.