* 1447130
* Investigation of Ancient and Modern Melting Processes Preserved in Sub-oceanic Island Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* James Day, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Plate tectonic processes occurring at the surface are ultimately governed by
convection occurring within Earth's mantle. Understanding mantle convection
processes requires a fuller understanding of both compositional and thermal
variations in the mantle. This project aims to address compositional variations
in the mantle, through the study of mantle fragments, known as "xenoliths",
erupted in lavas from the Canary Islands. These xenoliths preserve evidence that
the mantle from which they originated experienced ancient melting events (>>1
Ga), but that the chemical evidence for these events have been partly obscured
by later modification of the xenoliths during incorporation and eruption within
the lavas. Goals of the project are to develop methods to identify ancient and
modern melting processes preserved in oceanic mantle beneath ocean islands, like
the Canary Islands, and to use this new information to understand compositional
variation in the Earth's upper mantle.

A more refined understanding of when and how mantle heterogeneities are formed
and, in some cases, destroyed has profound impact on our understanding of mantle
melting processes, melt composition and physical behaviour of the mantle.
Science questions will be addressed by measuring Nd-Hf-Os isotopes, highly
siderophile elements and major- and trace-element abundances in a suite of
xenoliths to understand the long-term evolution and HSE distribution in the
mantle and to examine processes involved in generation and preservation of
heterogeneous mantle. The new data will also be used to evaluate melt
interactions and metasomatism in samples. Our methods will test hypotheses for
the formation, evolution and destruction of depleted mantle domains in oceanic
or continental environments. This will include comparison of modern melting
processes in the islands with possible ancient melting processes preserved in
the xenoliths, to assess models for the generation of refractory mantle in
subduction-zone, plume or ridge settings, or as global-scale melting events, and
to explore models for highly-depleted, refractory mantle domains as sources of
distinct isotopic and elemental signatures recorded in some intraplate magmas.