* 1447587
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Statistical Machine Learning for Spatio-Temporal Climate Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Auroop Ganguly, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 356,998.00

While statistical machine learning has seen major advances over the past two
decades, rigorous approaches for high-dimensional spatio-temporal scientific
data analysis have not received as much attention. On the other hand, several
core scientific areas, including climate science, ecology, environmental
sciences, and neuroscience, are generating increasing amounts of high-resolution
spatio-temporal data. It is vital to develop rigorous machine learning
approaches for such complex high-dimensional spatio-temporal data in order for
key scientific breakthroughs in these areas in the next few decades. The project
contributes to these endeavors by focusing on two key technical and scientific
areas: spatio-temporal big data analysis and climate science. The project
systematically develops the statistical machine learning foundations for the
analysis of large scale complex high-dimensional spatio-temporal data, and
applies such advances to problems arising in climate science, where the total
amount of data is set to cross an Exabyte (1 Exabyte = 1000 Petabytes) soon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical work in the project has three broad and
interacting components: structured probabilistic graphical models for spatio-
temporal data analysis, generalized graphical models for multivariate heavy
tailed distributions, and physics-guided models with a richer class of
structural constraints and capturing multi-scale phenomena. The project applies
these technical advances to climate science, by generating climate projections
at high-resolutions. Currently, the lack of requisite spatial resolution of
current climate models makes automatic assessments of impacts, adaptation and
vulnerability (IAV) difficult for a variety of sectors, including urban
planning, freshwater resources, food security, energy, transportation systems,
human health, and coastal systems.