* 1447826
* BIGDATA: F: DKM: Collaborative Research: Making Big Data Active: From Petabytes to Megafolks in Milliseconds
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Vassilis Tsotras, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 763,620.00

A wealth of digital information is being generated daily through social
networks, blogs, online communities, news sources, and mobile applications in an
increasingly sensed world. Organizations and researchers recognize that
tremendous value and insight can be gained by capturing this emerging data and
making it available for querying and analysis. First-generation Big Data
management efforts have been passive in nature -- queries, updates, and/or
analysis tasks were mainly scaled to handle very large volumes of data. In
contrast, this project will develop new techniques for continuously and reliably
capturing Big Data collections (arising from social, mobile, Web, and sensed
data sources) and will enable timely delivery of the right information to the
relevant end users. In short, this project will provide a scalable foundation
for moving from Big Passive Data to Big Active Data. Techniques should be
developed to enable the accumulation and monitoring of petabytes of data of
potential interest to millions of end users; when "interesting" new data
appears, it should be delivered to end users in a time frame measured in (100's
of) milliseconds. This project will build such an Active Big Data Management
system and make it available as open source to the community. Students will be
trained in technologies related to Big Active Data management and applications;
such training is critical to addressing the information explosion that social
media and the mobile Web are driving today. The general-purpose foundation for
active information dissemination from Big Data will have broader impacts in
areas such as public safety and public health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
many challenges involved in building a foundation for Big Active Data. On the
"data in" side, these include resource management in very large scale, LSM-based
storage systems and the provision of a highly available, elastic facility for
fast data ingestion. On the "data processing" side, challenges include the
parallel evaluation of a large number of declarative data subscriptions over
multiple) highly partitioned data sets. Amplifying this challenge is a need to
efficiently support spatial, temporal, and similarity predicates in data
subscriptions. Big Data also makes result ranking and diversification techniques
critical in order for large result sets to be manageable. On the "data out"
side, challenges include the reliable and timely dissemination of data of
interest to a sometimes-connected subscriber base of unprecedented scale. As a
software base, this project will be jump-started by using
AsterixDB(http://asterixdb.ics.uci.edu/), an open-source Big Data Management
System that supports the scalable storage, searching, and analysis of mass
quantities of semi-structured data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further
information see the project web sites at https://www.ics.uci.edu/BigActiveData
and http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~tsotras/BigActiveData