* 1447974
* SBIR Phase I:  Reducing Recidivism Through Technology: Connecting People Released from Incarceration to Resources and Communities in the 21st Century
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Carol Peeples, Humboldt Consultants LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to reduce recidivism using a software system
developed to elicit positive behavioral changes through an educational training
and support system. The United States has the highest rate of incarceration in
the world, with hundreds of thousands of people annually released from prison
and jail and recidivism rates as high as one out of every two people released
returning to incarceration within three years. The rate of recidivism impacts
the cost of corrections and taxpayers in every state, diverting state dollars
from programs such as higher education, transportation, and health care, while
decreasing the tax base of productive workers, increasing the need for social
services, and impacting public safety. In terms of human costs, re-incarceration
is a personal loss for the recidivist, a waste of human potential, and a
negative impact on families, neighborhoods, and communities. This project is a
high-risk high-return proposal with broad society impact. It has the potential
to decrease the cost of corrections for taxpayers, improve the lives of formerly
incarcerated people and their families, increase the number of productive and
tax-paying individuals, decrease demand on social services, and support
neighborhoods, communities, and society as a whole.

This project provides an educational platform specifically designed for the
needs of the 97 percent of incarcerated individuals who are subsequently
released from incarceration and attempting to re-enter society with minimal
support from institutions or society. Registered users will have access to a
user-friendly website, re-entry related curriculum and content appropriately
delivered on an individualized basis, and access to an in-reach curriculum that
provides users with the technological skills necessary to navigate the website
and its software. Grounded in educational theory, this project will utilize
trending educational efforts such as developing competency-based learning models
and creating customizable educational experiences in order to develop and
deliver its re-entry focused curriculum, reach isolated learners on a personal
basis, create a virtual ecosystem for its specific audience, and collect
feedback through a variety of mechanisms. Efficacy will be measured by tracking
registered users' success upon release from incarceration using a variety of
recidivism metrics. The project will be tested at the local level and then
scaled to meet the national need for improved behavioral outcomes from the
population of individuals re-entering society following incarceration.