* 1447104
* Recoupling the Megathrust: Evaluation of the Transition from Postseismic to Interseismic Behavior in Nicoya Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 309,995.00

Subduction zones are responsible for over 90% of the world?s largest
earthquakes, and are responsible for virtually all tsunami generation. While
geoscientists understand the driving force for such earthquakes, little is known
about why they occur where they do, and particularly how the subduction fault
(termed the megathrust) locks up for the development of major earthquakes. These
environments remain difficult to understand because they generally occur
offshore, and are difficult to observe with primarily land-based geophysical
instrumentation. However, the Nicoya Peninsula of Costa Rica has a unique
geometry that allows for land-based observations of the seismically active
interface. Additionally large earthquakes occur there approximately every 50
years, with the most recent in September 2012. Now, in the years that
immediately follow this major earthquake, a unique opportunity exists to observe
the recoupling of the megathrust fault and die-off of aftershocks associated
with this process. The project will support the collection and modeling of
ground deformation and earthquake activity in the region over a three-year
period following this latest large earthquake to evaluate how the environment
returns to a state of building stress for future earthquakes. The research
performed in this study will improve our understanding of the relationship
between behavior just after an earthquake to past, and potentially future
earthquakes in a subduction zone. This work is of significant societal relevance
as it identifies the utility of prior ground deformation data to develop more
accurate assessments of earthquake potential in such zones.

This project will support a team to perform two time-critical field GPS
campaigns and operate a local seismic network to capture the transient
deformation and earthquake activity beneath Nicoya while it transitions back to
interseismic behavior. The project will support a graduate student to assimilate
the campaign data with ongoing continuous GPS, existing campaign GPS data
collected immediately after the earthquake, and prior recorded microseismicity
to image and understand the state of recoupling along the active plate
interface. The team will combine GPS and seismic datasets to model the
deformation as controlled by interface afterslip, viscoelastic mantle
relaxation, and spatially variable interface recoupling. The team will develop
numerical models using a newly constructed geometrically accurate plate
interface model that identifies large structural features that correspond to
seamounts and sutures in the downgoing plate. Constrained by ongoing
microseismicity recorded by the local network, models will differentiate
afterslip regions from mantle relaxation, clarifying the relative contribution
of interface and mantle controls on deformation. Through the evaluation of
campaign and continuous GPS along with the evolution of microseismicity in the
years immediately following the September 2012 Nicoya Earthquake, the team will
illuminate the development of megathrust coupling. The contributions from mantle
relaxation, interface complexity, and adjacent slow-slip activity will be useful
for understanding the development and transfer of stress along the subduction
zone environment. This work will provide: 1) high-resolution images of
aftershock and early interseismic microseismicity; 2) spatially-dense images of
changes in ground deformation in the 5 years following the 2012 Nicoya
Earthquake; 3) detailed models of interface slip and recoupling with time; 4)
characterization of stress-dependent viscoelastic behavior of the mantle wedge
beneath northern Costa Rica; 5) develop meaningful comparisons between the
transitions from late-interseismic locking, to coseismic slip, then early-
interseismic locking models; and 6) evaluate the role of subducted topography in
affecting the new interseismic locking. This project, while focused on only one
subduction environment, spans the late-interseismic and coseismic periods. The
results from this work will be used for future evaluation of the seismic cycle
not just along Nicoya, Costa Rica, but will also be applied to subduction zones
globally as the community develops more and advanced images of both interseismic
locking and coseismic behavior using GPS, seafloor geodesy, and other
techniques.