* 1447879
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: CSD: DKM: Theory and Algorithms for Processing Data with Sparse and Multilinear Structure
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Yoram Bresler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 949,011.00

Tensors, or multidimensional array structures, naturally arise in big data
applications such as psychometrics, multimedia, social media, genomics,
neuroimaging, geospatial data, and turbulent flow simulations. Tensors in these
applications have massive amounts of data and are difficult to store, transmit,
compute with, and analyze. To perform these tasks successfully it is crucial to
discover and utilize relevant and informative structure within the data, which,
in the tensor context, often has the form of a decomposition or factorization
into a relatively small number of simpler constituents. Unfortunately, compared
to the simpler matrix case, existing mathematical theory and computational tools
for tensors are severely limited, and do not meet the needs of big data
applications. The broad goal of this project is to close this theoretical and
practical gap in tools for tensors for big data. Because of the fundamental and
ubiquitous role of tensors in Big Data, the results of this research have the
potential to impact every field in which big data is of interest. In particular,
the new tools and methodology have the potential to enable new fundamental
discoveries in neuroscience, with important benefits to human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research aims for
computationally efficient algorithms with theoretical performance guarantees.
The work emphasizes highly scalable online and distributed versions, approaching
the fundamental limits. Approaches include relaxations to achieve low rank
decomposition, identifying fundamental limits for compressed sensing, and
consideration of practical issues such as noisy data. These algorithms are
validated on big data applications in multimodality functional neuroimaging and
neuroscience. As it draws on and includes mathematics, computer science,
engineering, statistics, and neuroscience, this research is highly
multidisciplinary.