* 1447006
* Investigation of Fluid-Seismic Processes Associated with the Bayou Corne, LA Sinkhole
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Douglas Dreger, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2018
* USD 199,889.00

In June of 2012 the residents of Bayou Corne, Louisiana began reporting the
occurrence of earthquakes, and unusual gas bubbling in the local waters. The
USGS deployed broadband seismic instruments in the region and confirmed that a
swarm of shallow earthquakes was occurring near the west flank of the
Napoleonville Salt Dome. On August 2, 2012 a sinkhole formed at the location,
filled with a slurry of water, crude oil and debris, leading to a declaration of
emergency and evacuation of nearby residents. Preliminary analysis of the
seismic records revealed that the individual earthquakes have a source signature
that indicates a volume increase, which is believed to be due to high-pressure
fluid and gas migrating from the deeper reservoirs to the surface through rock
fractures resulting from the collapse of a side wall cavern in the salt dome.
Many of the seismic records for earthquakes at Bayou Corne share features that
are observed in volcanic and geothermal systems in which fluids at depth can
generate a variety of earthquake and tremor phenomena. The study of the Bayou
Corne seismicity will shed light on fluid-controlled seismic source mechanisms,
and the investigation of how the seismic signals changed over time will lead to
understanding of how the system evolved, and the process of failure that lead to
the formation of the sinkhole. The methods employed and refined through the
course of the study will more broadly improve seismic monitoring capability and
hazard assessment associated with ongoing mining, oil and gas production,
wastewater disposal, as well as the monitoring of volcanic activity.

Through the course of the project the thousands of small (magnitude 0 to 2)
earthquakes in the weeks prior to the formation of the sinkhole, and continuing
afterward will be investigated. A method in which the seismic signals are
continuously scanned enabling the autonomous detection, location and estimation
of seismic source parameters used to determine full seismic moment tensors that
are capable of resolving both shear and tensile components that will inform on
the nature of deformation occurring in the system and the importance of gas-
charged fluids in the seismic source process. Preliminary work utilized
simplified one-dimensional seismic velocity models to describe the wave
propagation from source to receiver, however the geology in salt dome
environments is very complex, and the proposed research will utilize a three-
dimensional seismic velocity model, and appropriate numerical codes, to generate
three-dimensional propagation transfer functions to improve the imaging of the
earthquake source mechanisms. In addition to the micro earthquakes there are
observations of harmonic tremor that are similar to volcanic tremor and indicate
a process of fluid migration through a network of fractures. There are also
long-period (20s) tremor in which preliminary modeling has suggested they are
the temporal pulsing of a volumetric source. There are even longer period
signals that can be interpreted as broad tilting of the ground. The diverse
signals will be modeled with fluid-crack dynamic models and other mechanical
models to investigate the relationships between them, and to the failure process
of the geologic materials within and adjacent to the salt dome, and the
formation of the sinkhole.