* 1447831
* BIGDATA: F: DKM: Collaborative Research: PXFS: ParalleX Based Transformative I/O System for Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Hartmut Kaiser, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 430,489.00

Recent decades have seen the development of computational science where modeling
and data analysis are critical to exploration, discovery, and refinement of new
innovations in science and engineering. More recently the techniques have been
applied to arts, social, political and other fields less traditionally reliant
on high performance computing. This innovation has grown out of realization some
20 years ago that I/O (input/output) support for high performance parallel and
distributed architectures had lagged behind that of pure computational speed,
and further that bring I/O up to speed was both critical, and a rather difficult
problem. The core hurdle of contemporary I/O on large HPC machines relates to
issues of latency in large parts caused by the deficiencies of the historical
I/O model that was relevant when computers were exclusively large, centralized,
single processor systems shared by many time-sharing programs. In order to
improve I/O on scalability on future hardware architectures novel approaches are
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conducting research on an
extension of ParalleX, a new highly innovative parallel execution model. The
extension provides a powerful I/O interface that allows researchers to create
highly efficient data management, discovery, and analysis codes for Big Data
applications. This new extension, known as PXFS, is based on HPX, an
implementation of ParalleX based on C++, and OrangeFS, a high performance
parallel file system. The research goal driving PXFS is to extend HPX objects
into I/O space so that the objects become persistent and storage becomes another
class of memory, all accessed as a single virtual address space and managed by
an event driven dynamic adaptive computation environment. Critical aspects of
this approach include futures-based synchronization, dynamic locality
management, dynamic resource management, hierarchical name space, and an active
global address space (AGAS). The overall goals of PXFS are to eliminate the
division of programming imposed by conventional file system through the
unification of name spaces and their management, and to minimize global
synchronization in order to support asynchronous concurrency. The research
methodology is to implement a Map/Reduce application framework using PXFS and
evaluate its effectiveness in both performance and ease of
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conducted at three major research
universities involving undergraduate and graduate students, post-docs, and high-
school teachers and their students. The project includes a PI from the
functional genomics field acting as domain science expert in order to focus the
development efforts on real world problems. Graduate students and post-docs
involved in the project are trained in these areas to promote scientists who
understanding both aspects of Big Data problems. The project engages under
represented minorities with the goal to inspire them to pursue a career in
computer science or genomics. The software developed by the project is available
open-source and archived using an integrated source code revision repository,
wiki, and bug tracking software system in addition to code releases with
accompanying documentation.