* 1447491
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: CSD: Topological Data Analysis and Machine-Learning with Community-Accepted Features
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Paul Bendich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,508.00

This project develops a new set of techniques from topological data analysis
(TDA) to enrich the analytical toolkit for big data problems. In particular, TDA
is well-suited at picking up repetitive (even quasi-repetitive) patterns that
exist at many different scale levels within a dataset. The developed techniques
can be applied to many multimedia applications. For example, a system that can
correctly recognize certain motion patterns from a large set of surveillance
data can help to identify threatening situations as they arise. Or a methodology
that takes short song snippets and extract indicators of genre similarity may
eventually be used to suggest new sound patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project constructs an analytical pipeline for using TDA-ML (machine-learning)
methods on features already in use in the multimedia research communities.
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) is almost fifteen years old. One of its key
tools is the persistence diagram (PD), a compact and robust summary of the low-
dimensional multi-scale topological and geometric information in a high-
dimensional point cloud. Crucially, this information is extracted without need
for dimension reduction. Over the last few years, two exciting developments have
enriched TDA. First, theoretical and practical work on algorithms and
implementations has enabled the fast computation of large numbers of PDs.
Second, a coherent methodology has developed to do machine-learning (ML) with
PDs as features, with several examples showing that one can augment more-
standard feature sets with PD features, and find interesting signal that was not
apparent before. This research discovers compelling signals in these features
which are not previously apparent, but are immediately understandable because of
the choice of features. The research team investigates both video and audio
features. The ML methods are used to further measure importance of the features
in a given context.