* 1447570
* Doctoral Consortium Support for the 2014 International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Julie Shah, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 16,000.00

This student travel grant supports graduate/undergraduate and young researchers
to attend the 2014 International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling
and to participate in the Doctoral Consortium (ICAPS-DC). The ICAPS DC is a
primary method for broadening participation and improving retention of doctoral
researchers in the field of automated planning and scheduling. The DC at ICAPS
2014 is the 12th occurrence of the event, and takes place in June 2014 in
Portsmouth, NH, USA. This is the first ICAPS held in the US since 2007. Those
receiving awards through the Support Fund are able to participate in events,
including but not limited to the DC, where they can receive career and research
advice from peers and mentors, present preliminary results and plans for their
dissertations, and build professional relationships. To support career
development, invited speakers present emerging research opportunities, discuss
research skills and the process of transitioning to the workplace after
graduation. The participation of Ph.D. students at ICAPS 2014 and the DC is be
beneficial to both the students and the international planning community, and to
ensure cross-fertilization among researchers in areas of planning, scheduling,
robotics, operations research, combinatorial search, knowledge representation
and reasoning, and applications.