* 1447398
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving food safety using hyper-stable enzyme cleaning products
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Jill Fuss, Cinder Biological, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve food safety by integrating
hyper-stable enzymes into cleaning products. Industrial enzymes are a growing,
multi-billion dollar green industry that reduces energy, water, and harsh
chemical use while improving process efficiency in many sectors. Despite the
broad use and success of industrial enzymes, their application and economic
impact has been severely limited by the narrow thermal and chemical operational
ranges available. The goals of this project are to develop a new enzyme platform
that allows production of enzymes with greatly increased thermal and acid
stability, allowing these enzymes to be applied in industries that have not
previously been accessible to enzymes. The initial target market is the dairy
cleaning market, where these superior products have the potential to increase
production due to faster cleaning, better removal of protein contaminants and
biofilms, reduced water use, prevention of food borne illnesses, and improved
food hygiene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to use a
unique hyperstable enzyme production platform to generate enzymes for commercial
use in dairy cleaning applications. Although the genes from extreme organisms
have been studied for over forty years, much of their commercial potential has
not been captured due to their incompatibility with traditional protein
expression systems. The hyperstability of our enzymes allows them to work with
hot, acidic, detergent cleaning steps to more effectively remove biomolecules
and biofilm contaminants from food processing equipment. The plan is to test
these enzyme formulations on laboratory and real world samples from local
dairies and determine their efficacy to clean membranes and to remove
biomolecule and biofilm contaminants. The project also aims to optimize the
enzyme production platform to improve profit margins. By applying extreme
enzymes to cleaning dairy processing facilities, this project will demonstrate
the power of biodegradable enzymes to improve food safety by providing superior
cleaning in less time while using less water and fewer harsh chemicals.