* 1447816
* SBIR Phase I:  High Speed Electrophotographic 3D Printing System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* James Mason, Xactiv, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will propel additive manufacturing
into customized healthcare products, reduce environmental impact for
manufacturing, and increase efficiency of supply chain fulfillment. This will in
turn result in the creation of lower cost for unique and small batch parts
thereby reducing overall cost in these critical areas. Presently very slow print
speed is a universal concern for 3D printing processes. By substantially
speeding up the 3D process and reducing the amount of waste, the economic break-
even point, where the cost of 3D printing equals the cost of plastic injection
molding, is reached for a much smaller number of parts. The system cost is also
expected to be similar or less than the system cost of present 3D systems while
the materials cost is comparable to present methods since very similar powdered
thermoplastic materials are used. The extremely high process speeds achievable
with this innovative technology, coupled with the fact that this approach will
work with full color thermoplastic materials, makes this a potential game
changer for additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the
technology found in office laser printers. This technology has never been used
before in rapid prototyping systems. There have been previous attempts to
harness laser printing technology but they have all found it difficult to make
parts thicker than about a quarter inch. This project is a radical innovation in
the application of the technology in that it separates two critical functions,
transfer and consolidation, that have always been combined in previous attempts
to use the technology. This innovation enables much greater control of both
functions in a way that resolves the problem of building thicker parts by making
the process look much more like that used in a laser printer. The innovation
also allows the 3D printing of parts to be up to five times faster than any
existing method. The anticipated technical result is to build multi-layer blocks
of material quickly and uniformly layer by layer. The process does also include
the capability to support parts during build. This is accomplished by using a
second laser printer engine that creates an image of support powder that is
transferred with the build layer image. The support layer can be dissolved away
after the part is built.