* 1447639
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Collaborative Research: Clustering Algorithms for Data Streams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will develop novel theoretical methods and algorithms for
clustering massive datasets with applications to astronomy, neuroscience and
natural language processing. Clustering is the process of creating groups of
data based on similarities between individual data points. The developed
theoretical methods will be used in applications where clustering algorithms are
critical and the input data is extremely large. First, new clustering algorithms
will be designed to scale and will allow for better cosmological simulations.
The simulations involve billions of particles in each snapshot, and existing
clustering algorithms based upon a simple friends-of-friends approach do not
scale to these cardinalities. Second, this project will advance the
computational capabilities in statistical neuroscience by employing clustering
algorithms to discover both regular patterns and anomalies in normal and
abnormal brain graphs. Finally, this research will explore the important topic
of finding anomalies in massive text streams, such as Twitter. In this setting,
one is concerned with detecting anomalous bursts in traffic content that share a
similar pattern. These bursts might signal an important political event or a
natural disaster. This project will support undergraduate and graduate research
aimed at developing skills needed for algorithmic work on massive data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There exist numerous heuristics and approximation
algorithms for many variants of the clustering problem. However, these methods
are often slow or infeasible for applications with massive datasets. This
research will improve space and time upper bounds for clustering algorithms in
the streaming model. This project will address the k-mean and k-median problems
in the dynamic streaming model, extend the results on separable data when the
input comes from Euclidian space, improve the bounds in the sliding window
model, combine the coresets technique with novel sampling approaches and the
method of smooth histograms. The PIs' previous work has already been applied to
natural language processing and this project will expand this direction further
and explore the important topic of "First Story Detection." Furthermore, this
research will explore the similarities and differences between various sampling
and sketching techniques, and how they could be used in large multidimensional
astronomical databases, like SDSS (Sloan Digital Sky Survey) SkyServer. These
novel approaches will provide major speedups for the execution of large
statistical aggregate queries. The new streaming algorithms will be used to find
substructure in very large cosmological N-body simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site at:
http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~vova