* 1447413
* BIGDATA: F: DKA: Collaborative Research: Structured Nearest Neighbor Search in High Dimensions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Pedro Felzenszwalb, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

A fundamental problem in the analysis of large datasets consists of finding one
or more data items that are as similar as possible to an input query. This
situation occurs, for example, when a user wants to identify a product captured
in a photo. The corresponding computational problem, called Nearest Neighbor
(NN) Search, has attracted a large body of research, with several algorithms
having significant impact. Yet the state of the art in NN suffers from important
theoretical and practical limitations. In particular, it does not provide a
natural way to exploit data *structure* that is present in many applications.
For example, although the identity of a depicted object does not change when one
varies the lighting or the position of the object, the current NN algorithms
will treat the resulting images as completely different from each other and thus
will mis-identify the object. To overcome this difficulty, in this project the
PIs will develop new efficient algorithms that incorporate problem structure
into NN search. The PIs expect that such methods will produce substantially
better results for many massive data analysis tasks.

To ensure that the work is grounded in an important application, the PIs will
focus on computer vision, an area where Internet-scale datasets are having a
substantial impact. NN search is vital for computer vision, and in fact many
senior computer vision researchers view improved NN techniques as their top
algorithmic priority. Image and video have significant structure, often spatial
in nature, which algorithmic techniques such as graph cuts have been able to
exploit with considerable success. The proposed work will formulate new variants
of NN search that make use of additional structure, and will design efficient
algorithms to solve these problems over large datasets. In particular, the PIs
will investigate three structured NN problem formulations. Simultaneous nearest-
neighbor queries involves multiple queries where the answers should be
compatible with each other. Nearest-neighbor under transformations considers
distances that are invariant to a variety of image transformations. Nearest-
neighbors for subspaces involves searching a set of linear or affine subspaces
for the one that comes closest to a query point. Broader impacts of the project
include graduate training in both algorithms and image processing.

For further information see the project web site at:
http://cs.brown.edu/~pff/SNN/