* 1447480
* Collaborative Proposal: Experimental Studies of Dilute Pyroclastic Density Currents
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Benjamin Andrews, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2018
* USD 29,058.00

Pyroclastic density currents are hot and fast-moving mixtures of solid particles
and gas produced by explosive volcanic eruptions or the collapse of lava domes.
They travel great distances, pose substantial hazards, and alter landscapes. The
processes governing the movement of, and transport in, pyroclastic density
currents are not well understood quantitatively. Even conceptual models remain
controversial. Basic questions remain about how hills, ridges, and valleys alter
and direct pyroclastic density currents and about how air mixes into the
currents. These key processes control current speed, direction, and injection of
ash into the atmosphere. The long term outcome of better understanding
pyroclastic density currents is a scientific foundation for assessing the
hazards they pose.

This project will use dynamically scaled laboratory experiments, in particular
their interaction with topography, to understand pyroclastic density current
dynamics. This will be accomplished by imaging the three-dimensional velocity
and concentration fields inside modeled dilute pyroclastic density currents, and
quantifying the entrainment of air and sedimentation of particles. This
understanding will improve our ability to relate field deposits to the dynamics
of these currents. The experimental setup is designed to permit a large number
of experiments and hence to explore relationships between parameters and
processes.