* 1447906
* SBIR Phase I:  Color Based Use Indicator for Infection Prevention
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Edward Castellana, Sienna Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is for the development
of a color-based use-time indicator for intravenous (IV) needle-free connectors
to prevent blood stream infections. By indicating to a nurse or health care
provider when to change needle-free connectors, the technology will improve
compliance with the Centers for Disease Control guidelines and prevent blood-
stream infections (BSIs) that are the result of contamination introduced during
the IV delivery of fluids and drugs. Simple and clear color-based use indicators
on IV needless connectors will also standardize processes for changing
connectors, leading to a reduction in associated mortality, and also lower
overall healthcare costs. Additional impacts will include a decrease in the
average length of a hospital stay, a reduction in workload for the already taxed
health care industry, and an improvement in the quality of life during and after
extended medical care. By increasing compliance in changing the connectors, the
indicator will also translate to an immediate increase in the utilization of
needle-free connectors, products that are manufactured inside the U.S. The total
addressable market for this device is estimated at $90 million domestically and
$180 million worldwide.

The intellectual merit of this project is the development of a novel
nanotechnology-based indicator technology that will change color when critical
medical components need to be changed. Research will be performed to i)
fabricate and optimize the novel color change material, ii) characterize the
color shifts, iii) integrate the color change material into the appropriate
medical grade substrates and produce master batches of hybrid materials, iv)
optimize the color shift process in one or more hybrid materials, v) produce a
prototype IV-line connector, and vi) translate the indicator technology into
existing IV line components. Anticipated results are the production of a novel
hybrid colorimetric indicator material capable of a clear visual indication of
the time-of-use of an intravenous line component, the realization of an
indicator prototype, and the demonstration that the indicator technology can be
integrated within existing IV line components.