* 1447113
* US -Thailand, Czech Republic, Norway, South Africa Workshop: Catalyzing GLOBE Alumni International Near-peer Mentoring (CGAIN)
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Elena Sparrow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2016
* USD 47,258.00

In collaboration with NASA, NOAA, and the US State Department, NSF supports the
activities of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
(GLOBE) program. GLOBE is an international hands-on environmental/earth science
research and education program for a global community of elementary and
secondary schools participating in 112 countries. GLOBE's vision promotes and
supports students, teachers and scientists to collaborate on inquiry-based
investigations of the environment and the Earth system. Now in its 19th year,
GLOBE has provided professional development and training in the content and
skills of environmental science for over 65,000 teachers from 24,000 schools and
engaged more than 10 million students in: learning about the scientific process;
discovering the science of their environment; and, contributing more than 90
million protocol-based observations in support of scientific research. A
significant number of students who have been introduced to science through GLOBE
have continued on to obtain degrees in science, technology, engineering and math
(STEM) and pursue careers in STEM. As noted in several recent reports, the
health and vitality of the STEM workforce is critical to the Nation's
prosperity. It is also observed that STEM research is increasingly conducted as
a global enterprise built on multiple international collaborations. As such,
programs like GLOBE, which engage students in STEM pathways within a culturally
diverse and rich context, are extremely important. A growing community of former
GLOBE participants is seeking to find meaningful and cost-effective ways to give
back to the GLOBE program and contribute to its efforts to support a vibrant and
diverse community of students engaged in scientific endeavors worldwide.
Defining strategies for leveraging the ongoing enthusiasm and support of a
global network of GLOBE alumni is an important and cost-effective opportunity
for sustaining and expanding the impact of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funds to convene a strategic
planning workshop to develop a coherent framework for activating and employing a
new alumni network comprised of previous participants in the GLOBE science and
education program. This workshop will be held in parallel with the annual GLOBE
partner meeting and quadrennial Global Learning Expedition (GLE) in New Delhi,
India (August 3-8, 2014), in order to leverage the availability of a larger
community of GLOBE scientists, educators, trainers, students, partners, and
sponsors attending the GLE. The workshop agenda is focused on sharing of current
activities being undertaken by specific alumni communities, collecting input
from the GLE participants regarding priority areas where alumni involvement can
be most useful, developing a strategic plan that considers operational factors,
laying a foundation for creation of a GLOBE alumni near-peer mentoring network,
and recruitment of international participants in research on the effectiveness
of the GLOBE alumni near-peer mentoring activities. The team of GLOBE
participants convening this workshop has been involved as leaders or trainers
within the program for several years and they have the necessary skills and
connections to make this workshop succeed in achieving its goals. NASA and NSF
have supported a recent modernization of the GLOBE technical infrastructure used
for communication, data sharing, and analysis; these upgrades have dramatically
improved the ability of GLOBE participants to use social media and more
sophisticated collaboration software. These upgrades have been accompanied by a
shift in the governance model for GLOBE operations, from being centrally managed
in the United States to a more community-driven management process. These
reforms make the proposed effort to meaningfully engage the GLOBE alumni
especially timely. The GLOBE program is well-positioned for new growth; having
additional support from alumni as both near-peer mentors and role models will
both help GLOBE realize this potential and provide new mechanisms for supporting
the STEM ambitions of its students.