* 1447738
* SBIR Phase I:Feasibility of Adjustable Eye Pressure Control within an External Shunt
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Lucinda Camras, Camras Vision, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project allows for a more effective glaucoma treatment
by tailoring eye pressure based on disease progression for each patient. In
2015, the US glaucoma market is estimated to be over $2 billion and our
addressable market, glaucoma surgical therapies, is estimated to be $534M. The
incidence for glaucoma increases with age, and as the baby boomer population
gets older, there will be a growing need for glaucoma treatments. To treat the
glaucoma, patients will undergo lifelong drug regimens, multiple laser
procedures, and invasive surgical procedures. However, even with all these
treatment options glaucoma patients still go blind from glaucoma. Our novel
design and approach to glaucoma will personalize the treatment for patients and
remove the need for numerous and costly procedures. Most importantly, the
personalization of glaucoma therapy will optimize visual protection for every
patient.

The proposed project will demonstrate the feasibility of the first external
glaucoma drainage device to adjust and set pressure in the eye. Glaucoma is a
leading cause of irreversible blindness and is only treatable by reducing eye
pressure. Surgical treatments are unpredictable with suboptimal success rates
based primarily on the choice of drainage site. This novel device drains to a
new area of the eye to avoid the complications and unpredictability associated
with the current glaucoma surgeries. The device also can provide the first-ever
personalized treatment for millions of glaucoma suffers by fine-tuning pressure
based on the needs of the patient throughout his or her lifetime. Preliminary
studies have shown safety and feasibility of the device; however, the
customizable and adjustability of replaceable component has yet to be
investigated. Therefore, this Phase I research project will test and optimize
the replaceable component within the device and determine the risk of
biofouling. The ability to set a stable pressure safely, reliably, and
predictably would be a major advancement in glaucoma treatment.