* 1447105
* Remote Triggering Inside Versus Outside Geothermal Fields
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Guoqing Lin, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2017
* USD 101,813.00

Remote triggering by large earthquakes at regional distances has been globally
observed and intensely studied since the 1992 Mw 7.3 Landers earthquake in
California. However, most of the previous studies were conducted at spatial
scales of hundreds of kilometers and did not differentiate the actual
operational geothermal fields with anthropogenic setting and their adjacent
fault zones with natural setting. A two-year project is proposed for detailed
analyses of the remotely triggered seismicity to examine hypothesis that
geothermal fields respond differently from their vicinity to remote earthquakes
due to the stress-state changes that are associated with the anthropogenic
activity inside the geothermal field. The expected results will improve
knowledge of the effect of pore fluid pressure on earthquake initiation and
interaction and contribute to models of remotely triggered and induced
seismicity, which will be important for evaluating the potential of future
seismic hazards in geothermal fields due to remote earthquakes and human
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposed work, three operational
geothermal fields under active tectonic settings in California corresponding to
three large distant earthquakes are selected. The focus of this research is to
compare different behaviors between each geothermal field (~10x10 km^2) and
their adjacent fault zones (~100x100 km^2) that are split into several subareas.
The results will address the following questions: (1) How does seismicity rate
change inside and outside the geothermal fields responding to each remote
earthquake? (2) How different are the stress fields inside and outside the
geothermal fields? (3) How do shallow and deep earthquakes respond to remote
triggering? (4) Is there any correlation between the net production rate and the
seismicity rate inside the geothermal field? (5) What is the difference in the
seismic velocity structure and in situ Vp/Vs inside and outside the geothermal
fields? &lt;br/&gt;