* 1447057
* EAGER: Influence of the Alzheimer's Disease Microenvironment on Stem Cell Fate
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Jennie Leach, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

1447057&lt;br/&gt;Leach, Jennie B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
examine how cell response is influenced by the neurodegenerative brain caused by
Alzheimer's disease. The Pi is interested in the behavior of stem cells as these
unique and important cells have great promise for the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease (AD) and other neurodegenerative disorders. Some positive results have
been obtained in animal studies of AD suggesting that neural stem cells support
healthy brain function. Yet, there have also been contradictory reports that
beta-amyloid peptide, the primary protein component in senile plaques found in
AD, may damage stem cells. Even if stem cell therapies in AD animal studies are
unambiguous successes, there are still considerable challenges associated with
translating those advances to clinical treatments for humans, in part because of
differences between human and animal models of AD, and differences in stem cell
behavior between humans and rodents. Thus, a molecular-level understanding of
the impact of the AD environment on human neural stem cells will be imperative
prior to clinical translation of stem cell therapies. It is proposed to explore
the molecular basis for neural stem cell response in an AD-like culture
environment that will inform our understanding of the potential behavior of
neural stem cells in the neurodegenerative brain. The work combines
bioengineering with neuroscience and thus relates to CBET areas of interest. The
proposed work is appropriate for an EAGER mechanism as it is exploratory, based
on a new, unproven hypothesis, but if successful, could lead to new
transformational discoveries at the interface between engineering and
neuroscience. Thus, in this project graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in an interdisciplinary environment. The unique resources at UMBC such
as the Meyerhoff program, will be leveraged to recruit diverse undergraduates
and graduate students into the program providing mentoring and training
experiences that will enhance their academic and professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to examine the role of beta-amyloid and the
AD environment on neural stem cell fate in cultures that provide a soft, three-
dimensional (3D) environment which is particularly important in light of the
recent findings by the PI that suggests a role of integrin signaling in both
neural stem cell differentiation and beta-amyloid interactions with cells in
vitro. Given the potential interaction between beta-amyloid and cell-matrix
signaling, it is hypothesized that beta-amyloid disrupts normal integrin-
mediated signal integration during stem cell differentiation in 3D.
Additionally, because disruption of integrin-cell contact can trigger a reactive
astrocyte state, it is further hypothesized that aggregated forms of beta-
amyloid in the 3D AD-like environment will alter neural stem cell
differentiation towards reactive astrocyte phenotypes. To test this hypothesis,
in Aim 1 neural stem cell viability will be examined in the presence of A-beta
in 2D vs 3D cultures that contain integrin-binding domains (i.e., collagen) or
lack integrin-binding domains (agarose). To ensure that differences between 2D
and 3D conditions are not due to differences in mass transfer rates, A-beta
transport in these systems will be thoroughly characterized using fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy. Then neural stem cell fate will be examined in these
environments, and as time allows, a combination of techniques will be used to
probe the role of integrin subunits and downstream molecules in the signal
transduction pathway in cell fate. Based on these and available literature
results, in Aim 2 a mathematical model will be build of A-beta-integrin signal
integration that will guide experimental design and help discriminate between
competing mechanistic hypotheses. While the ultimate goal of this project is to
rigorously test this novel hypothesis, with the one year of funding from this
EAGER, the work will focus on completing key underlying experiments that will
provide solid preliminary data for a future multi-year proposal.