* 1447470
* BIGDATA: F: DKM: Spectral Analysis and Control of Evolving Large Scale Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sanjeev Khanna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

During the last decade, the study of complex networks has diffused through many
branches of science. How do we characterize the connectivity structure of the
Internet, the power grid, or the human brain? Are there universal principles
underlying the structure of these diverse systems? The availability of massive
databases and reliable tools for data analysis provide a powerful framework to
explore these structural questions. Furthermore, as the structure of most real-
world networks is inherently evolving, an understanding of the dynamical
complexity of networks is needed to provide a realistic description of such
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop efficient algorithms to
analyze structural properties of large-scale networks. The PIs will also explore
the connection between local structural properties and global spectral graph
properties of relevance, such as the spectral radius of the adjacency matrix or
the spectral gap of the Laplacian. The analysis will be extended to time-
evolving networks and dynamic models of network evolution will be developed.
Three scientific objectives of this proposal are: (1) designing algorithms to
efficiently estimate local and global structural properties of large-scale
networks, (2) relating local structural properties of a graph with its global
spectral properties, using tools from spectral graph theory and convex
optimization, and (3) developing predictive models of network evolution, as well
as control strategies to drive the evolution of the network structure towards
desirable spectral properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks are ubiquitous
(the Internet, the web, biological, and social networks to name a few), and are
continually evolving. Thus, developing efficient tools for understanding the
evolution of structural and spectral properties of networks is of great
relevance to many scientific disciplines. The project will support and train one
PhD student, as well as involve undergraduate students in research at the
University of Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the
project web site at: &lt;http://sites.google.com/site/victormpreciado/research-
projects/nsf_bigdata_2014&gt;