* 1447969
* SBIR Phase I:  Hierarchically Porous Membrane Media for Affinity-based Separations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Rachel Dorin, TeraPore Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the development of a polymeric material that
dramatically improves protein purification. This project will focus on creating
a material based on block-copolymers that specifically addresses the high purity
needs of therapeutic proteins manufactured by the biopharmaceutical industry.
Therapeutic proteins are utilized in the treatment of an array of diseases and
the market for such products continues to grow. Proteins currently represent the
majority of top revenue generating therapeutic pharmaceuticals, and their
dominance in the industry is expected to increase as new therapeutic
applications are discovered. While the need for therapeutic proteins is evident,
materials and methods for their manufacture and processing have not kept up with
demand. The structures generated through this project have unique physical and
chemical properties that enable the rapid and selective purification of
therapeutic proteins, resulting in lower production costs and higher production
capacities for end-users. This novel and highly selective purification material
has the potential to address pressing commercial needs in the biopharmaceutical
industry, increase the availability of therapeutic proteins to individuals, and
further our scientific understanding of block copolymer structures and their
applicability to bioseparations.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are the development of a
hierarchically porous membrane chromatography material and its application to
the purification of therapeutic proteins. The use of affinity-based
chromatographic resins for the purification of proteins is widespread but
suffers from low throughput, which leads to high costs. An alternative to
affinity resins are membrane chromatography units that utilize both diffusive
and convective flow to increase throughput, however, typical media for membrane
chromatography has limited functionality and capacity. For this project, a block
copolymer that can be functionalized with highly selective ligands will be
synthesized and processed into a membrane structure containing porosity on
multiple length-scales. Using a facile and scalable process that leads to the
spinodal decomposition of the block copolymer and a sacrificial polymer, this
membrane chromatography material is expected to have macro-scale pores offering
convective flow for separation applications as well as high surface areas
offering high capacity for target proteins. After functionalizing with the
appropriate chemical moiety, this new material will be investigated as a
separation media using feed streams containing the target protein. Static and
dynamic binding capacities of the block-copolymer membrane chromatography
material will be investigated and benchmarked against competitive performance
metrics.