* 1448918
* STTR Phase I:  Low Temperature Cofired Multilayer Ceramic Power Transformers Incorporating Base Metallization Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Clive Randall, Solid State Ceramics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 224,967.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to a wide range of
electronics as to include power supplies, inverters point-of-load (POL) power
devices, voltage isolators and voltage sensors. The high thermal operation that
is EMI/RFI immune and very rad hard enables completely new electronics design
solutions for medical, space, defense, and energy exploration. This new
technology proposed will be ideal for distributed POL solutions for commercial
solar energy, high performance adaptors and converters for mobile/portable
electronics, robotic integrated subcompact power supplies. The success will also
open up new capabilities for agencies such as NASA, and commercial space
companies to integrate a new subcompact solution for converting mains bus power
to all of the subsystems that is far more radiation and high temperature
tolerant than anything ever previously available. This is of particular interest
to the SmallSat/CubeSat (miniaturized satellite) community. There will also be
spin-off benefits to manufacturing of higher performance actuators and
transducer devices that will see significant decreased costs through use of
significantly less expensive copper materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will address the
challenge of enabling high power/high performance ceramic transformers that
replaces conventional magnetics. Many electronics applications can benefit from
replacing magnetic transformer with ceramics. Advantages include large increase
in safe operating temperatures, drastically reducing the electromagnetic/radio
frequency interference (EMI/RFI) issues, and reducing the size/weight. At
present, no such transformers exist. Any solution will require multilayer
construction; however, for transformers this introduces several difficult and
unsolved challenges in electronics process engineering that are not issues for
multilayer ceramic capacitors, piezoelectric actuators and piezoelectric sensors
manufacture. These new challenges include that the multilayer construction must
now enable individual poling of each layer; because transformer devices must
operate at resonance they now generate much greater levels of thermal energy
requiring drastically improved thermal management (electrode electrical/thermal
conduction); also requires replacing soft ceramic with low loss hard ceramic.
Copper introduces very superior properties in electrical/thermal conduction but
requires significantly lower process temperatures that will be challenging to
achieve for sintered hard ceramic but offers enormous pay-off with success. The
research will investigate the promising approach of a new low temperature
process that uses new doping chemistries and advantageous copper electroding.