* 1448480
* EAGER: Tracing the Use of Research Resources Using Persistent Citable Identifiers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Matthew Mayernik, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 281,718.00

Research organizations, data repositories, and universities are beginning to
assign persistent web-accessible identifiers to scientific resources. Assigning
these persistent identifiers serves two crucial purposes. First, they are
assumed to increase the traceability and reusability of scientific resources by
allowing data sets, software, and other resources to be cited within the
scientific literature. Second, without such traceability, it is difficult, if
not impossible, to develop tools to measure the impact such resources have
within the communities they belong to, or to understand the spread of that
impact. Significant progress has been made in the past few years in the
development of recommendations, policies, and procedures for creating and
promoting these citable identifiers. While these efforts have raised the
awareness of citation principles, which primarily address solutions to this
issue moving forward, little progress has been made in tracking how data sets
and other digital resources have actually been identified and cited in the past.
This project focuses on developing efficient and extensible computational
approaches to such attribution tracking. This effort will inform broader efforts
to understand how scientific communities benefit from the use of scientific
resources, facilities, and services. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using a multifaceted
experimental design, the project examines whether resources with persistent
identifiers receive more attribution (through citations or acknowledgements)
than those that do not. The research questions focus on the benefits of
assigning persistent identifiers to scientific resources, namely, whether the
overall citations of such resources increase, and whether the traceability of
such citations of resources increased with resource persistent identifiers. The
outcomes and contribution of this project center on providing insight into 1)
whether human or computational approaches compare favorably in terms of their
accuracy and efficiency in finding relevant references to scientific resources,
2) whether persistent identifiers provide quantifiable benefit in terms of
increasing the amount a resource is referenced by users, and 3) whether
persistent identifiers are being included in significant numbers in references
to scientific resources.