* 1448227
* Archeomagnetism of Southern Africa: Implications for Longevity of the South Atlantic Anomaly
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Rory Cottrell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2019
* USD 309,999.00

A broad low intensity area in Earth's recent magnetic field spans the southern
Atlantic Ocean, Africa and South America. This is commonly called the South
Atlantic Anomaly (SAA). The SAA allows a relatively close approach of Earth's
radiation belts, affecting spacecraft operations. The low magnetic intensity
decreases the efficiency of magnetic shielding in the region, which can
influence atmospheric ozone. Many believe the SAA is linked to the dramatic
decay of the dipole geomagnetic field intensity during the last 160 years, and
the growth of an area of reversed magnetic field on Earth's core beneath South
Africa. Some have even speculated Earth is heading toward a geomagnetic field
reversal. But understanding these phenomena within the context of longer-term
geomagnetic history has been limited by a lack of Southern Hemisphere
archeomagnetic data (that is, data from archeological objects that were fired to
high temperature and subsequently preserved a record of Earth's magnetic field
as they cooled). Our research and education program is aimed at understanding
the history of the geomagnetic field in the SAA region as recorded in southern
Africa. The main focus of the work is the collection and subsequent analysis of
archeomagnetic data from Iron Age burnt structures, and tests of models
addressing how the nature of the boundary between Earth's core and mantle may be
giving rise to recent changes seen in the geomagnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archeomagnetic data from Iron Age sites
of southern Africa (ca. 1000-1650 AD) show a sharp intensity drop at 1300 AD, at
a rate comparable to modern field changes in the present-day South Atlantic
Anomaly (SAA), but to lower values. The recurrence of low field values may
reflect magnetic flux expulsion from the core promoted by the unusual core-
mantle boundary composition and structure beneath southern Africa defined by
seismology (specifically the African Large Low Velocity Seismic Province, or
LLVSP). Because the African LLVSP is a longstanding structure, this region might
be a steady site of flux expulsion, and perhaps the triggering site for
geomagnetic reversals, on time scales of millions of years. If correct, this
conceptual model is transformative because it suggests reversals do not initiate
at random locations, but instead nucleate at core-mantle boundary sites that
promote flux to leak upward. The model predicts modulation of the field on time
scales of the lifetime of an eddy in the core flow, and will be tested by
extending the archeomagnetic record of Iron Age southern Africa. The research
program is integrated with undergraduate and graduate education and will be
conducted with geologists and archeologists from South Africa, Botswana, and
Zimbabwe. This project was co-funded by the GVF fund in the Office of
International Science Engineering.