* 1448613
* SBIR Phase I:  Long-distance, robust and unobtrusive visual tags for proximal interaction with public display infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Szymon Jakubczak, Polka dot IO Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,800.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to dramatically
transform the way people interact with and take information away from their
physical environments. As information displays and mobile devices continue to
multiply, they give access to ever increasing amounts of information. However,
limited by their narrow input and output interfaces, personal devices
inadvertently isolate their users from their immediate surroundings, instead
focusing their attention toward the digital content in the cloud. Natural and
effortless interaction could reconnect us to the physical world. Enabling
seamless public-private communication has the potential to revolutionize
physical display media, outdoor advertising, and public signage. It can generate
new interactive experiences which are both immersive and personalized to the
user bringing second screen applications beyond dedicated space, such as living
room or airplane seat. Furthermore, it can shift digital content delivery from
cellular networks to much more granular proximal networks. Going forward, in the
advent of wearable camera-enabled devices, such technology can become the
primary source of local context and intent information, relieving the user from
the task of manual or vocal input. It will become the essential stepping stone
as information services move from ?request? to a more powerful ?suggest?
mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop visual tags which can be scanned from afar while remaining
visually unobtrusive. Visual barcodes trade small size, large decoding distance,
and robustness. The proposed technology overcomes this trade-off by re-
evaluating the characteristics of the usage scenario and fundamentally
reorganizing the object-scanner relationship. This research will result in a
practical system design which shifts considerable complexity from the scanner to
the infrastructure. With lower complexity, the visual tags can be decoded
quickly, robustly, and at distances beyond the reach of 2D barcodes.
Additionally, by leveraging a novel spatio-temporal display technique, called
VRCodes, the proposed visual tags are essentially imperceptible. This research
will advance this technique to use no dedicated visual real estate. A side
outcome of this work is a better understanding for how much information can be
transmitted through the visible light channel unbeknownst to the end viewer.