* 1448166
* SBIR Phase I:  High Frequency Network Traffic Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Nithin Michael, Waltz Networks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it could dramatically increase the
efficiency of communication networks. The ability to dynamically, adaptively and
optimally route traffic on data networks is expected to lead to network cost
savings of 60% - 70% for network service providers. The project leverages the
recent industry shift towards software-defined networking (SDN) that is
projected to address a $35 billion market by 2018. The excitement behind SDN is
driven primarily by the promised performance benefits of better traffic control.
The company plans to capitalize on this market shift by implementing its
optimized, dynamic and adaptive traffic control algorithms in SDN-controlled
data networks. The resulting social impact will be that end users will have
access to faster, cheaper and more robust data networks. In the longer term,
efficient software control of networks will enable rapid innovation in
networking, leading to new network applications that have not yet been
envisioned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project focuses on delivering commercial, smart, traffic control
algorithms that can unlock the full capacity of modern communication networks.
Today, due to unprecedented traffic growth, network operators face major
challenges in efficient resource utilization. The problem is that the inherent
randomness of data traffic has led to network designers over-provisioning
networks to the point that they currently run at 30% - 40% utilization on
average. The company's competitive advantage is a new algorithm that will enable
optimal management of traffic variations by adjusting network routes in real
time while retaining the scalability and simplicity of today's protocols. The
goal in this project is to build a prototype application that can be used to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed solution at selected test
partners. Feedback from the demonstrations will be used to further develop the
prototype into an application that can be integrated with test partners'
commercial networks. By the end of the project, the company anticipates
completing beta tests and verification of the application in commercial
settings.