* 1448939
* STTR Phase I:  3D Position Sensing Utilizing Wireless Low Frequency Magnetic Beacon and Its Application to a 3D Man-machine Interaction Device
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Harry Diamond, AccuPS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to facilitate
the creation of many applications utilizing a low-cost, high definition 3D
motion-sensing device in many distinct areas including computing, entertainment,
automation, robotics, industrial design, manufacturing, training, and education.
For example, high-speed motion sensing without line-of-sight limitations can
play an important role in understanding the dynamics of human body motion and
ergonomics, allowing applications for sports and industrial training to evolve.
The existing &amp;#8232;3D man-machine interaction market is segmented into a
few small application areas and it remains small largely because of the
limitations in existing technologies. The end users and solution providers still
seek a compact, easy-to-use, and intuitive solution. This project will
significantly enhance our understanding of wireless 3D motion tracking and its
application to man-machine interface technology, resulting in an easy-to-use,
fast and accurate 3D user interface device. As the mouse completely changed the
way man and computer have connected over the last several decades, an easy-to-
use, intuitive, and natural 3D man-computer interaction device will have great
impact in the way we relate to computers/machines, resulting in a significant
commercial impact in a broad range of application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project will develop a wireless magnetic beacon-based 3D position
sensor and its application to a 3D man-computer user interface. Existing 3D
position tracking solutions for applications requiring 3D man-machine
interaction utilize optical video sensors, infrared sensors, inertial sensors,
ultrasound sensors or bending sensors. Despite recent progress, various
fundamental challenges remain, including a line-of-sight requirement and the
lack of haptic-feedback when using optical sensing, and the drift issue for
inertial sensing. The proposed technology utilizes a magnetic beacon signal, and
the unique characteristics of the proposed 3D user interface device include non-
line-of-sight capability, absolute position and orientation tracking without
drift, haptic feedback capability, low computational load, high accuracy, and
high read speed. Anticipated applications include input devices for CAD design,
digital art, 3D medical imaging systems handling 3D MRI, CT, and inner organ
images, and educational devices requiring 3D interaction. The developed 3D
device will significantly improve the work productivity of end users through its
compact size and intuitive way of use. It will also provide a new opportunity
for application developers to build cost-effective yet powerful 3D interaction-
based design, educational, instructional and training apps.