* 1448551
* SBIR Phase I:  A Programmable Residual Solvent Analyzer based on Fourier Transform Molecular Rotational Resonance (FT-MRR) Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Brent Harris, BrightSpec, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,907.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new
analytical chemistry technique for rapid quantitation of chemicals in complex
mixtures. The life science and chemical instrumentation market is $45 billion
annually. The introduction of Quality by Design manufacturing processes has
increased the need for accurate, high-speed, maintenance-free techniques for
chemical analysis. The target application for this project is the detection of
residual chemical solvents and genotoxic impurities in pharmaceutical
manufacturing. The new technique to be developed uses molecular rotational
resonance (MRR) spectroscopy to identify molecules based on their three
dimensional geometry, resulting in a method with high chemical specificity. MRR
is a high-resolution spectroscopy technique that makes it possible to directly
analyze gas mixtures containing a large number of chemicals without the need for
prior chemical separation using chromatography - a time-consuming step of
current analysis methods that requires significant technical supervision. As a
result, MRR-based chemical analysis instruments can provide rapid measurements
of trace levels of chemicals in a manner that is compatible with real-time
manufacturing processes requiring constant measurement for quality assurance.
Chemical analysis instruments using MRR spectroscopy offer lower cost of
ownership through higher measurement throughput, reduced consumables cost, and
maintenance-free operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is the introduction of a new technique for chemical analysis that solves
major problems in the current set of tools available to the field. MRR
spectroscopy has the highest chemical selectivity of any spectroscopy technique
and can easily distinguish molecular isomers - a challenge for techniques that
rely on mass to establish the chemical identity. Compared to other spectroscopy
techniques, the method has higher spectral resolution that makes it possible to
accurately analyze samples that are mixtures of many compounds (with several
components at trace levels). Unlike mass spectrometry methods, the gas mixtures
can be directly analyzed without the need for prior chemical separation using
gas chromatography (GC). As a spectroscopy method, quantitative chemical
analysis can be performed without the labor intensive and time-consuming process
of running measurement standards. The instrument combines recent advances in
high-power, solid-state millimeter wave (mm-wave) light sources, low-cost
microwave synthesizer integrated circuits, and high-speed digital electronics to
implement a time-domain, Fourier transform (FT) measurement approach. FT-MRR
spectrometers reduce the measurement time by a factor of 1000 or more over
existing rotational spectroscopy techniques, making the technique competitive
with other high-sensitivity chemical analysis tools.