* 1448198
* SBIR Phase I:  Software for Developing Consumer-Driven Healthcare Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Mary Kay O'Connor, PatientsVoices, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it prepares hospitals for consumer-
driven healthcare. In 2015 44% of US consumers will be enrolled in high
deductible insurance plans8. Increasingly consumers will be deciding where to go
for care. This software provides hospitals with fast, easy access to actionable
insight on how to improve patient experiences. The result is loyal patients and
families that repeatedly return to the hospital for care. This means a strong
customer base and financial security for the hospital. The software is also
expected to have a positive impact on healthcare costs. It provides hospitals
with a ?patient feedback loop? that makes it easier for hospitals to seek
patient input on new ways to deliver care e.g. early morning video classes for
working, chronically ill patients. This easy access to patient feedback also
helps hospitals anticipate patient problems and prevent costly trips to the
emergency department or hospital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project
addresses an emerging healthcare problem?how to improve financial results while
improving the patient experience. Hospitals today rely on generic surveys
mandated by the federal government to monitor patient satisfaction. Few
providers have access to feedback that allows them to identify and fix problems
that matter to their patients. This project solves the problem by developing
software that is able to quickly and efficiently analyze patient stories about
recent hospital experiences. This tool not only identifies problems that need
fixing from the patient?s perspective, it also highlights opportunities, e.g.
how to streamline hospital discharges. There currently is no software available
for analyzing patient conversations and stories. This research will develop a
dictionary of words and phrases that patients commonly use when describing their
hospital experiences. It will evaluate alternative methods for extracting
insight from patient stories to determine which approach delivers the most
accurate results. This type of software is also able to ?learn?, i.e. new words
or phrases can be added to the system so the software actually becomes smarter
over time. Finally, the software will summarize and report patient feedback so
hospitals know what issues are most important?from the patient?s perspective.