* 1448580
* SBIR Phase I:  New Crystallization Modifiers for Low Calorie Fats in Food Products
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Earl Wagener, TETRAMER TECHNOLOGIES, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to facilitate the commercialization of new low
calorie fat technology to solve some of the largest obesity and related health
issues facing the United States while providing a patentable new additive
platform to sell or license to the $600 billion food industry. With high caloric
density foods being the primary cause for the obesity epidemic, the facilitation
of low calorie fat substitutes will have a powerful impact on the health of a
large portion of society, reducing health care costs and providing a positive
economic impact. Locally, the development of this technology will result in
potential growth of high technology jobs in South
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase I research project
are to address the growing obesity epidemic in the US through the development of
new molecular architectures for crystallization modifiers a low calorie fat
substitutes which have been shown to reduce caloric intake by 90%. Previous
attempts to commercialize fat substitute technology, such as Olestra from
P&amp;G, have encountered issues with undesirable anal leakage of the fat
substitute out of the body which have dramatically reduced their market
acceptance. This issue has been addressed by Tetramer, but due to the innovative
molecular structures used, a suite of new commercial crystallization modifiers
must be developed which can modify the crystallization rates to best match the
performance of current natural fat products. Therefore, the key technical
objectives are to determine the fundamental mechanism of how Tetramer?s new
crystallization modifiers can solve both the nucleation and crystal growth modes
governing the crystallization rates during manufacture of food compositions
containing low calorie fat replacers. The structure/activity relationships
developed will allow a new class of crystallization modifiers to be
commercialized which will allow the fat reduction technology to be more rapidly
applied to the large markets within the food industry. These new structures
could also be applied to non-food applications such as clarifiers for polymer
products.