* 1448293
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast Slewing Voltage Regulator for Package Integrated Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* David Tournatory, Gazelle Semiconductor Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be to dramatically decrease power consumption and
significantly reduce the voltage regulator footprint while still deploying
standard CMOS semiconductor processes. This project will develop products that
will lead the commercial trend toward in-package voltage regulators, and will
increase the competitiveness of the U.S. semiconductor industry. The reduced
size and cost, and the ability for the chip to be placed in the package, enables
the various system components to have their own voltage regulator, which, due to
the faster slew rate, results in the ability for devices to host the
increasingly sophisticated applications necessary for big data and other
advanced applications. In addition, the use of the technology developed under
this project in data centers will translate to more energy-efficient electronic
infrastructure that contributes less to the nation's CO2 emissions and their
impact on climate and the environment.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop an in-
package voltage regulator based on the company's novel proprietary architecture
that will dramatically decrease power consumption, significantly reduce the
voltage regulator footprint, and increase slew rates, while still remaining
within the circle of standard CMOS processes. For the last 40 years the buck DC-
to-DC voltage regulator (VR) has been used to convert line- or battery-powered
DC voltages to supply these System ICs. IC makers have optimized the efficiency
of these VRs to saturation. To achieve the next step function in system
efficiency, the power dissipation in the SoC itself must be improved with new
methodologies to balance needed versus delivered power. Meanwhile there is an
insatiable desire to reduce the volume of these electronic products both in
industry and consumer markets. The company's integrated voltage regulator
technology will address these challenges by dramatically decreasing power
consumption at its load: the system IC. Its new modulator architecture with
switching frequencies orders of magnitude faster than today's buck VRs will also
significantly reduce the size of the voltage regulator and thus system footprint
while remaining economically competitive with high volume IC processes.