* 1448445
* SBIR Phase I:  Millimeter-Scale Wireless Sensor Node for Intracranial Pressure Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* ZhiYoong Foo, CubeWorks Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is transformational, bringing about the next generation
of computing platform in millimeter-scale form factor. The proposed pressure
monitoring system is built upon a modular sensing platform, allowing the sensing
modality to be easily changed to befit a variety of new application space.
Therefore, even though the end goal of this project is to develop a commercial
product that can be implanted to aid neurosurgeons in treating patients with
hydrocephalus, the ultimate goal of this research is to achieve a true 'smart
dust' computer to open up the next generation of computing paradigm. Millimeter-
scale sensor nodes complete with energy autonomy and wireless communication can
enable smart sensors to be connected in the least obtrusive way and distributed
in large volume. A successful completion of this project would mark a
significant milestone towards massive-scale realization of internet of things,
dramatically accelerating the technology adoption and research impact of
millimeter-scale wireless sensor nodes. Both academic and industrial community
across multiple disciplines and fields will benefit from the new era of
computing in an unprecedented form factor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop and
commercialize a complete pressure monitoring system in millimeter-scale volume.
One application that can benefit from such a system is intra-cranial pressure
monitoring for hydrocephalus patients. Hydrocephalus, a condition which
cerebrospinal fluid builds up in the brain's ventricle area, causes head
enlargement, epilepsy, and death. Practical hydrocephalus treatment is the
surgical implant of a medical shunt which relieves excess fluid into other body
parts. The biggest issue with current shunts is the lack of embedded monitoring.
Neurosurgeons currently resort to educated guesses of desired valve settings
should be or whether it is clogged. This incurs added cost for multiple visits
if the pressure setting is incorrect, and both doctors and patients are blind-
sighted about the shunt's status. With a millimeter-scale volume, the proposed
pressure monitoring system can be pre-installed inside the shunt's reservoir, or
injected with a syringe needle into an implanted shunt to provide real-time
status to patients and doctors such that shunt failures can be prevented and
better studied.