* 1448883
* STTR Phase I:  Low Cost Copper Contacts with Built in Barriers for Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Delaina Amos, Bert Thin Films, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to lower manufacturing costs in the
photovoltaic (PV) industry. In the past decade, the solar energy industry has
seen double digit compound annual growth rates. This success has resulted in the
industry consuming nearly 10 percent of the global silver production. The cost
of metallization on silicon solar cells has become a notable cost driver for the
manufacturers and the lack of stability of silver spot prices increases the
volatility in this highly competitive industry. The successful implementation of
copper inks would lead to significant cost savings, due to copper being around
100 times cheaper than silver. This project supports a materials research and
development for a renewable energy industry that has the potential to offer
significant cost savings to a very large industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop copper
based inks and pastes with an in-built diffusion barrier. The inks and pastes
will be formulated from copper nanoparticles manufactured in solution phase.
During this stage barrier layers will be grown directly upon the particles. This
project will study the growth mechanisms of the nanoparticles and performance of
the diffusion layer using high tech analysis techniques. The inks will be
designed to be thermally processed using intense pulsed light (IPL) treatment,
an advanced manufacturing technology. Reaction kinetics during IPL treatment
will also be investigated in order to optimize ink formulations. This project
will result in the formulation of two copper based inks for screen and ink jet
printing, with optimized thermal processing conditions. Metal contacts formed
with these inks will show that the barriers mitigate diffusion of copper into
silicon and are a viable option for the replacement of the current silver
contacts on silicon solar cells.