* 1448707
* SBIR Phase I:  Broadly Tunable Room-Temperature Terahertz Quantum Cascade Laser Sources And Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Karun Vijayraghavan, ATX Photonics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the growing demand for compact
broadly-tunable terahertz (THz) sources used by pharmaceutics for tablet
inspection, the manufacturing sector for quality control, the medical community
for diagnostic imaging, security agencies for contraband drug and explosives
detection, firms developing high sensitivity chemical/biological sensors, and
the scientific community active in THz research. Currently a void exists for
compact and affordable source systems, particularly in the 3 - 6 THz range. We
will be the first company to offer room-temperature THz systems based on
semiconductor laser technology that provides narrow-band continuous wave (CW) or
quasi-CW output tunable in nearly the entire 1 - 6 THz range. Our system will
provide the largest spectral coverage and tuning bandwidth amongst competing
commercial THz sources of similar size and operation. Our key value proposition
is providing THz developers with a compact room-temperature maintenance-free
turn-key THz system with unprecedented spectral coverage that is similar in
size, operation simplicity, and manufacturing cost as commercially successful
broadly-tunable external-cavity diode and quantum cacscade lasers.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
widely tunable room-temperature terahertz (THz) semiconductor laser sources and
systems. Our technology platform is based on room-temperature THz difference-
frequency generation (DFG) in dual-wavelength mid-infrared quantum cascade
lasers (QCL). The DFG-QCL source active region is designed to support lasing at
two mid-infrared frequencies. Emission at an intermediate THz frequency is made
possible by quantum-engineering the active region to possess broadly distributed
second-order optical nonlinearity for efficient generation from 1 - 6 THz. The
laser chips will be integrated in an external-cavity (EC) system and a computer-
controlled diffraction grating is rotated to select the THz emission line. The
tuning range of the system will be significantly larger compared any other
compact THz sources on the market, which is very important for sensing and
spectroscopic applications. Room-temperature operation will enable a compact
system footprint and robust housing suitable for portable operation.