* 1448222
* SBIR Phase I: Multi-month, Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System For the Treatment of Glaucoma
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Kenneth Mandell, LayerBio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,958.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is embodied in the project's anticipated advance
of the state-of-the art in controlled release technology, where there is a
compelling need for sustained treatment in a range of medical conditions and
diseases. The feasibility of the proposed technology has already been
demonstrated in several other medical applications. For example, the technology
has been demonstrated for coating intraocular lenses for cataract surgery to
automatically deliver vital medications during the postoperative period.
Likewise, the technology has been demonstrated in delivery of biologics that
enhance wound healing for diabetic ulcers and bone healing after fracture. Other
chronic and recalcitrant medical conditions and diseases that would benefit from
long-term, controlled release include other ocular diseases (e.g., macular
degeneration, chronic uveitis), cystic fibrosis, cancer, chronic pain, and more.
Furthermore, it is also anticipated that the successful commercialization of
this technology will motivate additional research and innovation in materials
and nanofabrication for medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop a multi-month, sustained release, biodegradable nanoparticle drug
delivery system for treatment of eye diseases. At present, treatments for
glaucoma and other ocular diseases rely on medication administered as topical
eye drops. However, eye drops present significant limitations in efficiency and
compliance among patients with daily drop regimens resulting in poor clinical
outcomes. It is expected that the project will obviate the need for eye drops.
The proposed technology is based on a proprietary layer-by-layer nanofabrication
technique that enables assembly of drugs into an ultra-thin polymer coating.
Drug coated nanoparticles are administered to the eye using a minimally invasive
procedure. There the nanoparticles gradually degrade in the aqueous environment,
releasing drugs directly to target tissue in a controlled and sustained manner.
Vital medications are delivered locally within the eye improving bioavailability
while requiring significantly decreased total dosage compared to eye drops. In
Phase I the team will incorporate an existing FDA-approved drug into an LbL-
assembled coating atop nanoparticle substrate cores. Extended release in vitro
at therapeutically relevant drug concentrations will be demonstrated. The
successful commercialization of this technology will significantly advance the
state of the art in sustained release technologies and dramatically improve the
standard of care for glaucoma patients.