* 1448876
* Transforming Undergraduate Education in Engineering: Mobilizing the Community for Change
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2018
* USD 388,315.00

The "Transforming Undergraduate Education in Engineering: Mobilizing the
Community for Change" project carried out by the American Society for
Engineering Education (ASEE) seeks to identify the critical components of
engineering curricula, pedagogy, and educational culture necessary to support
the education of engineers over the next decades of the 21st century. Technology
has radically changed the world we live in and engineers, scientists,
mathematicians, and technologists have been central to these developments.
Technology has also transformed the typical engineering workplace and practice.
Practicing engineers working today have little need for many of the facts and
methodologies that were essential just a decade ago and now require skills and
knowledge not previously anticipated. Engineering education has not kept pace
with changes caused by technology. Content, pedagogy, and university culture
have remained relatively static, and although there have been some changes, the
most common engineering classroom is still a passive lecture. The project
intends to catalyze change by building broad and thorough consensus within the
engineering community on a shared vision of the future of engineering education.
The project will enumerate critical steps for the vision to be achieved and will
coordinate the pursuit of each critical step throughout the engineering
education community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project will focus on
Phases II and III of a planned four-phase process. In Phase I of the project,
"Synthesizing and Integrating Industry Perspectives," ASEE brought together
industry and academic representatives for an intensive exploration of the
knowledge, skills, and abilities needed in engineering today and in the coming
years by the primary customer of engineering education, namely employers. This
group found the engineering profession and the abilities of engineering
graduates under pressure from several directions, with current training viewed
as pursing a trajectory that may lag behind the technological demands of the
nation in 2024. Areas of growing importance include: project management,
effective product development, system integration, leadership, communication,
and the ability to merge engineering, business, and societal priorities.
Building on these findings, Phase II will involve students from diverse fields
of engineering, representing the demographic diversity of the student body, and
reflecting institutional diversity in terms of Carnegie classification and
geographical location, to render the perspective of the primary consumer of
engineering education. Phase III of the project will then involve input from
professional societies and selected Federal agencies. Individuals representing
professional organizations will be invited to provide their feedback and
observations on the state of engineering careers and educational programs.
Results from all three phases will provide an up-to-date assessment of the
knowledge, skills, and abilities needed in engineering today and in the next
decade. That assessment and the findings on which it is based will be shared
more widely with the STEM education community in a culminating activity
involving a large group of invited stakeholders convened to create a flexible
framework that fosters transformative changes to engineering curriculum,
pedagogical approaches, and academic culture.