* 1448869
* EAGER: Heterogenized Fluorophthalocyanine Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Sergiu Gorun, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

EAGER: Catalytic Materials Lacking C-H Bonds for Petroleum Sweetening and
Hydrocarbon Oxidations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processing of hydrocarbon
natural resources using air as the oxidant remains a major goal of catalytic
science. While catalytic materials based on inorganic components are known,
advances based on organic materials are limited by the fact that the currently
known organic catalysts are labile and thus unstable with respect to the
chemistry they promote. A key advance may be the generation of materials that
can benefit from the large body of knowledge accumulated within organic
chemistry. Professor Sergiu Gorun of Seton Hall University has in mind robust
catalyts bioinspired by the enzyme Cytochrome P450, that is capable of oxidizing
hydrocarbons. These organic catalysts are made robust due to C-H bond
replacement by C-F bonds. Unlike the enzyme, the catalysts will utilize only air
for oxidations.The field of catalysis will benefit since the work will provide
insights into ways to reduce the deleterious effects, such as corrosion, of
thiols in petroleum distillate fuels, as well as advancing the direct oxidation
of methane, an abundant resource to provide other chemicals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at synthesizing a family of
perfluorinated metallo-phthalocyanines, designed to retain strong coordinating
properties in spite of having strongly electron withdrawing perfluoroalkylated
substituents. The metal complexes will be anchored on solid-state supports,
including silica gel, via (i) the interaction of their bulky fluoro substituents
with surface oxygen species and\or (ii) the additional interactions between
peripheral amino groups, planned to be introduced at the macrocycle ring, with
the support surface. The presence of the fluoroalkyl ligand groups is expected
to exacerbate the Lewis acidity of the coordinated metal and thus to favor the
coordination of substrates. Redox active metals, such as cobalt, will be
studied, while a non-redox one, for example zinc, will provide a control
molecule, thus permiting the differentiation between metal vs. ligand-centered
redox reactions for sulfur compound oxidation. The same catalysts, but including
additional metals such as ruthenium, will be used for the oxidation of aliphatic
hydrocarbons. In this case, the complexes will be encapsulated in inorganic
frameworks, such as zeolites or mesoporous materials.