* 1448848
* STTR Phase I:  A Social and Data-Driven Platform for Searching Healthcare Providers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Evangelos Christidis, SmartBot360
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project results from it providing a novel way to more
effectively match patients to healthcare providers. Patients will be able to use
the developed system to discover and compare the most suitable and experienced
healthcare providers for their unique health needs, instead of just viewing a
directory of providers in their area. For example, the proposed system will
recommend to a patient searching for "knee replacement surgery" orthopedic
surgeons with experience in this or similar procedures, positive health outcomes
and high past patients satisfaction levels. The patient may then compare these
surgeons by expertise, relative cost, location and several other attributes. By
helping patients select the best healthcare providers, the proposed system not
only has the potential to improve health outcomes, because providers will see
the patients more relevant to their expertise, but may also reduce the number of
"shopping-around" visits which may lead to a reduction in overall healthcare
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase
I project will study methods to exploit Big Data, ranging from government-
published health metrics and surveys to public social media data, to better
match patients to healthcare providers. A key challenge is that many of these
sources include free text, which must be analyzed to extract medically
significant information. Further, different sources refer to the same medical
terms in different ways; for example "myocardial infarction" vs. "heart attack",
or "doctor knows her stuff" vs. "doctor is knowledgeable". Data mining and
artificial intelligence techniques will be leveraged to identify which provider
properties - medical school, years of experience, affiliated hospitals, and so
on - should be used when searching for providers and how these properties should
be best weighted and combined, given the healthcare needs of a patient.