* 1448008
* SBIR Phase I:  Middle School Teacher- Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) Expert Mobile Matching Software Application
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* MaryJean Koontz, STEMKids LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will produce an
online Matching Tool for Middle School teachers to connect with Science, Math,
Engineering and Technology (STEM) experts and find STEM Project-Based-Learning
(PBL) products. With this Matching Tool, teachers will be able to connect
virtually with diverse STEM experts for teacher and student mentoring, virtual
discussions and presentations; find PBL products for individual and group
projects; and locate diverse STEM experts who are familiar with PBL products and
projects. STEM experts will be recruited during the project with an emphasis on
women, people with disabilities, underrepresented minorities and veterans.
Middle School is a key stage in children's education and aspirations. The
broader impact of the project is to bring real-time, diverse faces of STEM
experts both to the teacher and into the classroom thus increasing children?s
self-esteem and interest in STEM by using the "if you can see it, you can be it"
truth in education. The central goal of this project is to create strong and
measurable links between STEM experts and Middle School teachers and students,
thus inspiring America's next generation of STEM experts and teachers.

This Matching Tool addresses a validated teacher need to connect industry and
university STEM experts to Middle School teachers and students. The Matching
Tool also provides matches to PBL products and projects, thus easing the
adoption of Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) standards that require
project-based learning. The easy-to-use expert matching program will also
provide a video portal for diverse STEM experts to pop up via video on classroom
computer and mobile devices. The backend NGSS tagging system will aggregate and
measure expert knowledge transfer from the STEM community directly to Middle
School teachers and students. The Matching Tool will include two Dashboards for
Teacher/School reporting and Corporate/Foundation reporting. With widespread
commercialization of the tool, the resulting connection between industry
experts, teachers and students should provide industry STEM mentors to over
12,000 middle school teachers via a network of over 100,000 STEM experts in the
first two years. The resulting impact will be to inspire students to study STEM
fields and eventually secure STEM jobs. The resulting market impact is an
increase in locally grown STEM employees, thus leading to an increase in
American innovation and global competitiveness in many key areas of our economy.