* 1448861
* STTR Phase I:  Self-Calibrating, High Sensitivity, Harsh Environment Gas Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Patrick Kung, Micro-Precision Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to address the
gap between the low-end gas sensor market, dominated by semiconductor and
electrochemical gas sensors, and the high-end gas sensor market, dominated by
infrared gas sensors. Augmenting the capabilities of semiconductor gas sensors
will close this gap, which will expand their use in existing applications and
disruptively open up new applications, especially in cost-sensitive industrial
applications. This will help satisfy the progressive demand for gas sensors
driven by increasing government regulations for workplace safety and emission
control. The technology can be universally applied for the detection of gases
that constitute a majority of the global market?carbon dioxide, oxygen,
hydrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide, among others?which will be further
explored during Phase II. The technology can also be applied for the detection
of biological agents, such as proteins, cancer cells, or DNA. This STTR project
will advance existing electronic materials and device technology, whose results
will be disseminated through archival journal articles and conference
presentations. In addition, a Hispanic graduate student will be participating in
the project and will have the opportunity to spend time at the small business
concern and conduct research in a small business
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Research (STTR) Phase I project will develop high sensitivity gas sensors based
on enhancement-mode AlInN/GaN high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) with
functionalized gate electrodes to provide for self-calibration and operation in
harsh environments. The use of lattice-matched AlInN eliminates the
piezoelectric polarization typically found in III-nitride materials, especially
at elevated temperatures, while the use of enhancement-mode (normally-off)
operation enables self-calibration of the gas sensor by having a zero background
signal. While sensitivity to a particular gas is determined by the choice of
functional coating, the Phase I effort will focus on hydrogen gas sensors with
the goal of achieving sub-ppm sensitivity. The first half of the effort is
devoted to optimizing the material and device properties of the enhancement-mode
AlInN/GaN HEMTs with respect to hydrogen sensitivity. The second half of the
effort is devoted to the integration and packaging of the HEMTs into a hydrogen
gas sensor and testing under adverse conditions. If successful, this research
will enable new capabilities in low-cost semiconductor gas sensors, especially
for harsh environment applications.