* 1448581
* SBIR Phase I:  An Automated Microfluidic Platform for Delivery of Biomolecules Into Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Harrison Bralower, SQZ Biotechnologies Company
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to address a major barrier in fundamental biological
research and next-generation clinical treatments: Delivering materials into
cells. Cells are the basic functional unit of the body yet understanding their
role in disease and harnessing their inherent potential to combat ailments has
been limited by our inability to deliver material to their cytoplasm. By
facilitating access to a cell's interior one could enable rapid progress in the
ability to probe intracellular processes and engineer cell function for
therapeutic purposes. This project aims to further develop a promising new
concept of intracellular delivery capable of overcoming many conventional
barriers associated with the current state-of-the-art. The platform will
potentially facilitate the development of novel therapeutics based on a deeper
understanding of cell function and a more robust ability to engineer cell fate.
Indeed, addressing such a fundamental challenge in the biomedical field would
provide substantial benefits to society and could impact numerous commercial
opportunities. Potential applications include basic research, high-throughput
drug discovery screening, and cell-based therapies to treat cancer
immunotherapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop a vector-free microfluidic platform for intracellular delivery of
biomolecules in order to increase efficacy, and improve ease-of-use. The
platform uses a novel method based on rapid, transient deformation of cells
("cell squeezing") as they pass through a microfluidic constriction. The
squeezing process causes temporary disruption of the cell membrane and
facilitates passive transport of target delivery materials into the cytoplasm.
The proposed work aims to introduce automated, closed-loop control of key
parameters (pressure, temperature, and flow rate) that govern the delivery
process. These additions will allow users to precisely tune the amount of
material delivered to cells and the resultant viability. By developing this
hardware, the technology will be well-positioned for increased adoption and
commercialization by the end of Phase I. The proposed hardware controllers will
be verified and validated through relevant studies using primary immune cells, a
disease-relevant subset of cells that are recalcitrant to existing delivery
methods. Finally, the proposed work would facilitate the launch of a robust
prototype system for early-stage testing in high-impact applications.