* 1448127
* Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Citation Across the Data Life Cycle Using DDI
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Mary Vardigan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 14,137.00

This project brings a group of experts in data citation into a workshop
involving researchers and experts in Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) and
metadata standards. The DDI standard is the premier metadata standard for the
social sciences. Biomedical data are also in scope, as the lines between the
social sciences and other disciplines are blurring. The lifecycle branch of DDI
(DDI-L) allows documentation of data from initial concept and study development
to archiving and reuse. The DDI standard has been refined over the course of the
last 18 years. Integration of citation information into uniquely identifiable
information elements across the whole lifecycle would leverage this already
well-adopted standard as a foundation for developing metrics that measure
production and reuse of data. DDI-L already has structures for various
activities (e.g., data collection and sampling), entities (e.g., funding
organizations and archives), and tools (e.g., software and instruments) within
the research process. The focus of this project is to ensure that DDI integrates
the necessary information elements to support the collection of desirable
citation metadata. The DDI Alliance is currently developing its next-generation
specification - DDI4 - which is model-based and modular. This workshop will feed
into the DDI4 development, as robust citation capabilities are part of the
design goals. But more importantly, the workshop will produce a set of best
practices for citing data at all levels and providing attribution to all dataset
contributors. These best practices could be applied to other metadata standards
in other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating citation information into
an existing lifecycle metadata framework will supply the foundation for metrics
of impact of datasets, instruments and procedures, as well as for their
creators. It should also serve as the foundation for tools to collect this
information during the normal research workflow. As these metrics become adopted
in promotion and tenure decisions, documenting data will increasingly be seen as
an activity carrying a reward, rather than as just burdensome overhead. This, in
turn, should lead to better documentation and more reusable, better quality
data.