* 1448641
* SBIR Phase I:  Megabit-Per-Second Underwater Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Thomas Riedl, OceanComm Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in addressing a
long-standing roadblock to the further development of undersea technology.
Today, there is no wireless broadband communication available underwater. Each
remotely operated vehicle requires a tether for communication and a support ship
for tether management. The proposed modem technology is video-capable and would
obviate the need for tethering and expensive support ships. In 2013, the subsea
industry demanded more than 123,000 ROV days and these are expected to increase
to at least 140,000 days in 2017. An ROV support ship costs about $120k/day
totaling over $7B spent on ROV support ships in 2013. The proposed video-capable
modems would be sold to ROV manufacturers and operators that want to eliminate
the need for ROV support ships and much of the $7B in associated cost. The
proposed modem technology connects remotely operated vehicles and machinery to
wired infrastructure, enabling safe operation of heavy subsea machinery without
the possibility of cables or tethers getting tangled, causing damage or worse.
This project will create 10 new jobs in the next three years, with many more to
be added as the production is scaled-up. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to develop a
faster, cheaper, more reliable wireless communication system for the sub-sea
industry. Current state of the art communication links for the deep ocean are
either tethered, requiring long, bulky, expensive cables to connect machinery
and systems, or have extremely low data rates, enabling only the most
rudimentary of tasks. The proposed underwater wireless communication system will
provides data rates in the Mbps (megabits/sec) range - 1000 times faster than
existing underwater wireless communication technologies - and enable video
streaming and real-time control of subsea infrastructure, machinery, and mobile
underwater vehicles. Since radio signals do not propagate far underwater, the
proposed technology uses sound waves, as whales and dolphins do, for
communication. The speed of sound is 200,000 times slower than the speed of
radio propagation, and mobile acoustic transmitters and receivers hence suffer
from severe Doppler distortion. The proposed technology dynamically measures,
tracks, and compensates for this distortion, to enable wireless communication at
data rates never before possible underwater.