* 1448123
* EAGER: Citation++: Data Citation, Provenance, and Documentation
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Gary King, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Most of the advances in science in the last 400 years come not merely from
researchers working by themselves, but rather from a community of scholars
cooperating and competing in pursuit of shared goals. Critical components of
this community are built from scholarly citation, which turn isolated works into
a network of scholarship that can be navigated and mined. For centuries, the
outcome of such scholarly endeavors were written publications. With the coming
of the digital age, new forms of scholarly output, such as data collections and
digital publications have become commonplace. Unfortunately, the practices of
citation and attribution that have been the mainstay of written publications are
insufficient for this new digital world. A citation for digital data needs to be
more descriptive than a reference to the location of the item; it needs to
describe what the data is, where it came from, and how it was produced. This
research will yield new techniques, tools and demonstrations of an extended
citation service that uses data provenance, a formal record of how an object
came to be in its current form. This extended citation service will facilitate
activities such as research reproduction and
attribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provenance-enabled data citation system
developed in this work will both be embedded in an existing data platform
(specifically, Dataverse) as well as functioning as a standalone service. The
system addresses the following set of specific data citation challenges: It
directly includes executable transformations for a limited, but important set of
tools: R and SQL. For other tools, it provides a standardized documentation
capability to describe transformations. The system is sufficiently flexible to
serve either as part of a publication workflow, where data is part of a more
conventional publication, or in support of a standalone publication. It also
provides data summaries.