* 1448133
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost 3D bio-printer toolkit for STEM education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Mayasari Lim, SE3D INC.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
low-cost educator solution in three-dimensional (3D) bio-printing technology.
The motivation behind this work is to increase accessibility and use of this
technology to students in state-funded high schools and colleges. The low-cost
3D bio-printer is bundled as an educational toolkit to help teachers to engage
students in more hands-on projects and promote project-based learning in the
fields of science and engineering. The proposed 3D bio-printer platform will
engage students in different projects and/or activities in fields related to
biosciences and bioengineering that will challenge them to explore, experiment
and discover their interests, as well as develop their problem solving skills.
The broader impact of this innovation is to produce next generation Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce with deeper
understanding and more developed skills in applying their knowledge to solve
real-world problems. The commercial impact of this innovation is to increase
awareness of students to choose career pathways in the biosciences, medicine and
bioengineering, which will play an important and significant role in
contributing to the future healthcare workforce in the United States.

The project innovation involves hardware, software, and materials development
for creating a low-cost bio-printer and educational toolkit designed for
academic instruction in high-school and college levels. The primary goal of this
Phase I project is to produce a complete package that integrates innovative bio-
printing technology into Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
education. This will be achieved by engineering reliable hardware components,
integrating a user-friendly and simple software solution and developing an
educational toolkit for instructors and educators. The proposed innovation
leverages from existing know-how in open-source 3D printing technology to design
a new low-cost 3D bio-printer that is easy to use and catered for educational
instruction. The project will also focus on developing easy-to-use reagent kits
to facilitate experiments in 3D bio-printing. The proposed Phase I project will
produce a low-cost 3D bio-printer with reliable printing performance, bio-
reagent kits and instructional material to help teachers create classroom
content for projects in science and engineering.