* 1448520
* SBIR Phase I:  A Massive Open Online Authoring Platform for Language Learning Content
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Benjamin Grimley, Speak Agent, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will determine how a system can be developed that
replaces second-language textbooks with an intelligent, personalized solution
that delivers custom content directly from teacher to student. This system would
address challenges posed by low student engagement, high material costs, a need
for personalized learning, and a lack of content availability on mobile devices.
It will be the first platform to apply open educational resources (OER) to
second-language acquisition at scale. This affords an opportunity to observe OER
adoption and to understand the dynamics of mulch-author collaboration, forking
and merging projects, and editorial systems for maintaining quality. The system
could transform the field from a closed system driven by top-down publishing
processes into an open system that is more responsive to the evolving needs of
educators and students. This will reduce material costs, increase content
availability (particularly in critical languages), and enable customization of
materials to each program model, class and individual student, thus improving
learning efficacy. Educators will also be able to collaborate on large-scale
course development projects and share back to the education community. Other
fields, including math, science and social studies may be able to utilize a
similar system, if proven feasible.

This SBIR Phase I project will result in a cloud-based platform for second-
language learning content that aims to disrupt the current publishing model and
produce a transformation in how teachers teach and how students learn. It will
empower the community of language educators to contribute content to a shared
repository that all may reuse, revise or remix in their own lessons, units and
courses using the clone-fork-merge methodology widely used in software
development. It further enables rapid deployment to mufti-platform learning
environments, including mobile devices, and integration with education
information systems. As proven by open-source software, the creativity unleashed
by massive-scale collaboration can increase content availability at a faster
pace than top-down publishing can -- and at a lower cost and with a far greater
degree of flexibility and customization. The Phase I research goals are to
measure student and teacher engagement, impact and commercial viability.
Researchers will indirectly observe 1,000 beta users' anonymous behavior over 4
months and measure non-personal data, as well as solicit survey responses from a
sub-group of participating educators. By analyzing aggregate public behaviors
that are minimally influenced, researchers aim to simulate the dynamics of a
robust open education community.