* 1448690
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Immunoassay Platform for Faster and More Accurate Protein Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Lucas Smith, BioAnalytics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) proposal will be the development of a simplified testing method
for measuring the concentration of specific proteins within a sample for
diagnostic testing. In recent years, protein quantification has begun to play an
increasingly important role in medical diagnostics, academic research, and
pharmaceutical development, industries that together represent a $13.8 billion
global market. In each of these areas, additional steps directly contribute to 5
of the top 8 factors driving the transition to new methods including: increased
error, longer testing time, higher technician costs, decreased throughput, and
added complexity. The proposed technology addresses each of these areas in a
broadly applicable fashion by reducing the overall number of steps by up to 50%
using materials that are estimated to contribute to a mere 1% increase in the
cost of each test. This is particularly relevant to the medical diagnostic
industry, where speed and accuracy have an immense effect on patient treatment
and therapy success. Further, the reduction in test complexity represents a key
factor enabling the development of portable devices with the potential to allow
for new domestic applications as well as increased access to medical testing in
third world countries.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a broadly applicable label-based
immunoassay platform with fewer steps than conventional immunoassays. It is a
well-established problem in the field that label-based immunoassays require
independent antigen and detection antibody binding steps, and that single step
label-free immunoassays provide significantly lower sensitivity. The proposed
project aims to develop an alternative to the conventional sandwich immunoassay,
which uses intramolecular binding kinetics to combine antigen and detection
antibody binding steps in a fashion which allows for label based target
detection following a single incubation of typical duration. This method will be
initially studied using streptavidin-biotin binding as a model system to
optimize complex formation and demonstrate fluorescent-based detection following
a single incubation. This platform will then be applied to antibody mediated
detection of the myocardial infarction indicator cardiac troponin I. This system
will then be evaluated in comparison with the conventional sandwich immunoassay.
At the conclusion of this research, the goal is to provide proof-of-concept data
for a simplified immunoassay platform with the potential to combine immunoassay
steps to provide up to two-fold improvements in speed, technician time,
accuracy, throughput, and complexity.