* 1448646
* SBIR Phase I:  A Unified system for low-cost, Scalable Projection Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Kevin Karsch, Lightform, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the creation of tools that democratize a
new interactive medium called projection mapping. Projection mapping uses video
projectors to overlay digital content (images, animations or video) onto 3D
physical objects, allowing viewers to experience and interact with digital
experiences in an entirely new way. These interactive displays will add value to
a wide range of industries where dynamic, 3D presentations are needed to inform,
educate, advertise or entertain. Applications include educational experiences at
museums or schools, healthcare applications for rehabilitation and
visualization, new training and simulation displays, as well as broad uses in
advertising and entertainment. For example, a retail end aisle display could
more easily attract customers by demonstrating product features with projected
light directly on or around the physical product. Alternatively, an interactive
diorama in a museum could allow visitors to learn history through an immersive
visual experience. This project will bring projection mapping from high budget,
niche markets into low budget, mainstream markets. Cost reductions will be
realized through technological advances that decrease design, setup and
calibration requirements, which in turn will advance technological capabilities
and content authoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to develop a novel software and
hardware system for authoring projection mapping content. The proposed system
will greatly simplify a currently complex content authoring process, and will
enable entirely new passive and interactive experiences which fuse digital
content with the physical environment. The system is comprised of a content
authoring software suite and a projector-depth camera hardware unit capable of
high-resolution 3D scanning. Research objectives entail novel software
algorithms in the areas of 1) automatic calibration of projector-camera systems,
2) optimized structured light scanning of 3D objects, 3) automatic, precise re-
alignment and registration of the system in response to movement of the physical
model, 4) intuitive authoring tools for creating passive and interactive
projection mapping experiences.