* 1448349
* SBIR Phase I:  Research and Development of Circular Flux Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Charles Vann, Vanntec LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide motors /
generators that will be more practical to buy, use, and maintain, because
Circular Flux Devices (CFDs) are a fundamental advancement in efficiency and
practicality of both motors and generators. Because CFDs are more efficient,
they will consume less energy per motor unit. Since about half the electricity
on earth is consumed by electrical motors and all electricity is produced from
electrical generators, even small improvements in these devices will result in
significant energy reduction. Higher efficiency along with lower weight, cost,
and size were specifically requested in the Department of Energy?s, Electric
Vehicles Everywhere Challenge. CFMs answer those needs and the needs of many
other evolving and current motor applications. Also, the much lighter Circular
Flux Generators (CFG) solves the weight issue of direct drive wind-turbines
enabling the elimination of the costly and high maintenance gearboxes. CFG wind-
turbines will be lower-cost to build, install, and maintain, making wind power
more cost-effective. Greenhouse gases diminish as wind-power replaces fossil
fuel plants. The anticipated results are a scientific understanding and
commercialization of a new technology that will significantly improve our
society by reducing global energy consumption and global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will advance the understanding and development of the
fundamentally new concept of a Circular Flux Device (CFD) to a level that will
enable, promote, and facilitate their commercialization. Generators and motors
are designed today basically the same as described by Nikola Tesla in the late
1800s. This old design makes them heavier, larger, and more expensive than
necessary, limiting their applications and efficiency. However, CFDs enabled by
the patented Folded Electromagnetic Coil are a fundamental improvement that
makes these devices lighter, smaller, less-expensive, and more-efficient. The
design is substantially different and represents a fourth topology concept,
Circular Flux. Since the CFD is fundamentally new and commercial application is
currently available, considerable research and development is needed to fully
understand how they work and how to optimize and commercialize them. Thus, the
research objectives are focused on analysis, building prototypes, and testing
prototypes, that should result in a better understanding of this new technology.