* 1448788
* SBIR Phase I:  Metal Nanocomposites designed for Low Power Sintering for use in Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Lance Pickens, MadeSolid, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable a broad range of industries to
quickly and relatively inexpensively create custom metal components. What before
would have been impossible to do with traditional CNC machining, or cost-
prohibitive to do with traditional direct metal laser sintering additive
manufacturing, can now be accomplished with low cost equipment. This will allow
businesses ranging from medical, to aerospace, to automotive to rapidly iterate
on their designs and increase the pace of new developments. The impact on our
society is difficult to predict, just as the impact of the Internet was also
grossly underestimated with the way that it has now become part of our everyday
lives. The innovation itself is to greatly lower the cost of creating custom
metal parts, thus enabling a wide variety of other industries to
flourish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to create a new
type of metal composite that works with low cost additive manufacturing
equipment by finding new ways to direct energy into fusing the metal particles
together. The innovation is in the choice of materials that enables the ease of
processing. The anticipated technical results are the creation of proof of
concept sample parts and a determination of their mechanical strength as
compared to other more traditional methods of manufacturing. Often individuals
with an idea for a new product or business are held back by the high cost of
prototyping that limits it to only the largest, most established companies. The
research addresses the current extremely high cost of using additive
manufacturing to create custom metal parts.