* 1448360
* Workshop on Supporting Scientific Discovery through Norms and Practices for Software and Data Citation and Attribution
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Thomas Carsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,935.00

Scientific researchers, and particularly academic researchers, are embedded in a
reputation economy. Tenure, promotion, and acclaim are achieved through
influential research. There are few incentives for scientists to share data and
software, and tenure and promotion decisions lack consideration of such
activities; and to compound the problem, there are disincentives such as risking
the loss of attribution. Some scientists distrust the public access model for
software and data, and prefer to share data and software only by personal
request, which assures attribution through personal contact and implicit social
contract. There is also a lack of well-developed metrics with which to assess
the impact and quality of scientific software and data. New practices and
incentives are needed in the research community for software and data citation
and attribution, so that data producers, software and tool developers, and data
curators are credited for their contributions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will facilitate a national, interdisciplinary exploration of new norms
and practices for software and data citation and attribution, with the goal of
informing the Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) and Software
Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation (SI2) NSF programs. Social and technical
challenges facing current software development and data generation efforts will
be identified and participants will explore viable methods and metrics to
support software and data attribution in the scientific research community. This
workshop will address registration of software and data, repositories for
software and data, methods for tracking software and data usage, software and
data annotation, collecting and curating metadata on software and data, ensuring
appropriate attribution by software and data users, alternatives to traditional
publication models for attribution, adaptation of commercial models for software
and data attribution, proportioning attribution metrics to match degree of
effort and role in software development and data generation, and establishing
reward metrics for open science. Workshop outcomes will include actionable plans
to enable the broader research community to implement the software and data
attribution practices that are identified and advanced by the participants of
the workshop.