* 1448907
* STTR Phase I:  Wireless Communication Integrated Active Noise Reduction System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Lichuan Liu, Invictus Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 224,699.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to reduce the
risk of health impairments and disabilities for infants caused by high noise
levels. The proposed WCIANR system can dramatically reduce the educational and
public health cost by reducing hearing impairment, cognitive disorders, learning
disabilities, and acute vital sign variability of NICU infants. For example, the
lifetime educational cost and the lifetime cost of hearing loss have been
estimated at $115,600 to $175,000 per child. The average total cost is around
$2.1 billion per year. In addition, parental bonding is critical in a child's
life because this first relationship determines the biological and emotional
?template? for all future relationships. The proposed WCIANR system can provide
these vital bonding opportunities for NICU infants and their parents and improve
infants? language development. Communicating with NICU babies can also benefit
the new mothers in preventing postpartum depression and improving bonding. In
addition to infant incubators, the proposed ANR system is applicable to any
commercial industry where hearing protection is necessity to prevent people from
hearing injury and loss, such as automotive industry, mechanical fabricating
industry, medical equipment industry, mine industry and aviation
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project seeks to demonstrate the feasibility of a wireless
communication integrated active noise reduction (WCIANR) system for the neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) environment, combining an improved active noise
reduction (ANR) capability with a wireless unattenuated voice pass through
function to permit communication with an infant. Traditional ANR systems cannot
be applied directly to incubators without modification due to complicated noise
models in the NICU. The NICU environment has multiple unexpected noise sources
both inside and outside the incubators. The proposed system would combine feed-
forward and feedback ANR systems to generate a larger zone of silence, offer
deeper noise attenuation, and operate in complex noise environments. The
proposed ANR system should reduce the level of the noise at the infant?s head by
20-25dB. In addition to reducing the unwanted noise reaching the infant, the
WCIANR system will facilitate the two-way wireless communication between the
infant and his or her parents and caregivers.