* 1448069
* EAGER: Assessing Established and Alternative Citation, Attribution and Impact Metrics for Scientific Software through Data Mining and Direct Tracking Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Piotr Sliz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Software is the means by which scientists harness the power of computing. Much
of the most widely used research software are those created by other practicing
scientists. Science has a critical interest in identifying and rewarding the
production of useful and impactful computing tools. Traditional metrics for
assessing scientific significance and impact, like citation, may not adequately
reflect the total utility and benefit resulting from a program's creation,
dissemination and use. Basic questions of incentive and reward for computational
tool creators, even within the traditional frameworks of citation and funding,
remain unclear, and questions of accurately assessing use vs. utility vs.
productivity have yet to be rigorously examined. The goal of this research is to
improve current measures for impact of scientific software, evaluate alternative
metrics, develop methods for analyzing the direct measurement of research
software usage, and deploy tools to aid research software users and developers
to better cite, gauge and evaluate software use, impact and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of sociotechnical systems and
methods for disseminating data gathered through the direct tracking of research
software usage within the SBGrid consortium of software users will provide
unique insight and information to program authors and developers regarding the
use, impact and productivity of their software. This tracking information will
also provide users with an automated means of recoding and documenting their
computational workflows and protocols, and help relieve the difficulties in
compiling comprehensive bibliographic information of computational methodologies
and procedures. In addition to improving future progress in assessing the
metrics of scientific software use, data mining techniques will be employed to
retrospectively examine historical and contemporary databases and data
repositories containing software usage data and metadata, publication and
citation information, and research output to assess the efficacy and accuracy of
traditional measures of scientific impact. The mined data will also be analyzed
and used to evaluate new and existing alternative metrics for measuring the
scientific impact of research software and computational tools.