* 1448927
* Undergraduate Biology Education Research:  Investigation and Implementation Conference, July 12-17, 2015 at Bates College in Maine
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Susan Elrod, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

An award has been made to support a Gordon Research Conference on Undergraduate
Biology Education Research. This Conference will take place from July 12-17,
2015 at Bates College in Maine. Undergraduate science education is of critical
interest to science education researchers, campus leaders, scientists,
politicians, and the nation's technology industry. Among recommendations for
reform are calls for increasing the diversity and numbers of students who
graduate with STEM, increasing the scale at which evidence-based teaching and
learning approaches are used, and increasing the abilities of students to
conduct science that is becoming more interdisciplinary in nature. There is now
a solid base of research that supports making significant changes to
undergraduate programs such as focusing on major concepts and the application of
knowledge, using more evidence-based teaching strategies, aligning learning
assessment with course outcomes and teaching strategies, providing more research
experiences for undergraduate students, and aligning outcomes and pedagogy
across high school, community college and four-year institution
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together scholars from
communities that rarely interact (biology researchers, biology instructors,
science education researchers, faculty development specialists, and leaders of
scientific societies) but who are working in overlapping arenas to advance our
understanding of what it takes to more systemically change undergraduate biology
programs and to synthesize new directions for future research. While the
conference will focus on the community engaged in biology instruction,
investigators from other disciplines who can contribute to the discussion will
also be invited. Key issues to be addressed include: cutting edge instructional
and assessment techniques, elucidating the common challenges across biology that
impede systemic change in biology programs, identifying the levers for change,
describing mechanisms and strategies known for measuring and monitoring change
over the long term, and determining the impacts of systemic change on student
learning and persistence with a focus on underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is now a confluence of emerging research and
reports, rising up from campuses and spurred by national projects such as Vision
and Change, PULSE, and the NSF-funded Research Coordination Networks in
Undergraduate Biology Education. This creates an opportunity for participants at
this Gordon Research Conference to address issues on the horizon that represent
new challenges, strategies, and technologies that have the potential to hasten
the rate of change in undergraduate STEM education.