* 1448566
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Nano-Electro-Mechanical Scanning Probes for Failure Analysis of the 10-Nanometer Node and Beyond
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Kwame Amponsah, Xallent LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 174,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development of a multiple integrated tip scanning probe device for use in
semiconductor device failure isolation and analysis. The underlying motivating
factor stems from a lack of testing equipment with high resolution and
sensitivity necessary for identifying faults as the semiconductor industry
shrinks feature sizes to 10 nanometers and beyond. Successful development and
use of the integrated device will allow engineers to understand the root cause
of failure mechanisms of solid state devices at these advanced nodes. The
commercial impact of this new capability for failure analysis on next-generation
devices will be profound. The miniaturization of semiconductor devices has led
to a decrease in the cost per transistor of seven orders of magnitude in the
last 40 years, and new process and measurement technologies are needed to
continue this trend. The reduction of transistor size enables high performance
devices at a lower cost and lower power. The proposed multiple tip technology
will enable the development of these advanced-node highly scaled transistors
that will form the platform for the next generation of high-performance
electronic devices such as personal computers, cell phones, and healthcare
equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the
use of monolithically integrated scanning probes to facilitate the extension of
semiconductor failure analysis to devices with feature sizes of ten nanometers
or less. Crucially, conventional characterization and test methods are
increasingly ineffective when applied to structures smaller than 100 nanometers,
causing challenges for engineers in research and development, process control
and failure analysis. Subtle defects become increasingly prominent drivers of
failure as device size and operating margins decrease, e.g., processing
anomalies in thin gate oxides, substrate problems related to doping, and line
width variations. These issues can occur at length scales invisible to
traditional scanning electron microscopy and optical-based tools, requiring
novel approaches. The proposed multiple integrated tip devices leverage powerful
nano-electro-mechanical capabilities and scale well even below 10 nanometers. In
addition, cost effectiveness of the nanofabrication techniques, combined with
monolithic integration of sensing structures and tailoring of the tips would
enable robust, high-volume testing, a key need for the semiconductor industry.
Research objectives include the fabrication of nanoscale multiple integrated tip
devices, atomic force imaging of transistors and active electrical
characterization of transistors. The anticipated result is accurate electrical
characterization of transistor performance using the multiple integrated tip
device.