* 1448221
* SBIR Phase I:  Robotic System for the Sorting of Construction and Demolition Recyclables
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Matanya Horowitz, Cognitive Robotics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to change the
fundamental economics of the recycling process. Analysis suggests that the
system can drive the cost of recycling&amp;#8232; to levels competitive with, or
below those of, landfilling, drastically changing the waste landscape. No longer
will recycling be driven by government mandate, and grow slowly only because of
public education and pressure. Instead, market forces will be aligned with waste
diversion. The roadmap begins with attacking Construction &amp; Demolition
waste, followed by the entire solid waste stream. Although it is estimated that
up to 95% of the waste stream could be recycled, only a third of the 250 million
tons that are generated each year in the United States is currently diverted.
Greater diversion would provide immense savings in landfill and processing
costs, and benefit the environment as well. Tens of millions of pounds of
greenhouse gas emissions from virgin material mining may be eliminated, and
pollution from landfill waste reduced. The existing sorting process is expensive
and unprofitable, requiring human workers to manually sort debris, an extremely
dull, dirty, and dangerous profession. This innovation has the potential to
eliminate these trade offs between cost and environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will create a scalable, integrated robotic system that autonomously sorts
Construction &amp; Demolition waste for recycling. This advance in autonomous
systems is made possible by a series of innovations in robotics: (1) new safety
features in robotic hardware that ensure efficient and &amp;#8232;safe
collaboration with human workers, allowing for the system to be deployed with
virtually zero retrofitting in existing facilities; (2) new motion planning
techniques that allow for trajectories to be generated in real time, customized
for the characteristics of the waste, safety, and any uncertainty in individual
objects? position;&amp;#8232; (3) modern machine learning techniques that allow
the system to classify waste at levels approaching human performance, with a
continual training signal obtained via human supervision; and (4) tremendous
improvements in both computer vision and robotic manipulation, allowing for
previously unseen objects to be modeled and manipulated reliably. These
innovations pave the way for a new era in recycling, where waste is sorted
cheaply, safely, and reliably on a universal scale.