* 1448915
* STTR Phase I:  Automated Music Theory Instruction for Secondary and Post-Secondary Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Halim Beere, Illiac Software, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project develops automated instruction for the music education
market, replacing human labor with music analysis algorithms, and paper course
materials with digital multimedia documents. Despite the positive effects of art
education on achievement, many arts programs are being cut or underfunded; as a
result these students are at higher risk of poorer grades and not completing
their college degrees. Learning music requires extensive practice and
individualized guidance, as taught in private lessons for hundreds of years. The
proposed solution brings a unique and innovative software system to the
marketplace that will automate and reinforce substantial parts of music theory
instruction. Early results indicate that this technology can improve learning
thereby reducing the need for remediation at higher grade levels and helping
maintain the benefits of arts education in US schools even in the face of
budgetary pressures. Numerous studies have demonstrated that increased emphasis
on education in the arts stimulates intellectual capacity and creates wider
benefits such as facility in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics) and interpersonal skills. This is a market of millions of students
with extensions into larger markets, such as amateur musicians throughout the
world.

The key innovation of the software lies in its proprietary music analysis
algorithms that enable substantial amounts of music theory instruction to be
automated, including close to real-time correction, feedback and grading of
complex, secondary and post-secondary exercises in tonal music analysis and
composition. By using the software in place of paper instruction materials, a
music student can practice composition and analysis as much as needed to master
topics, receiving instantaneous feedback and guidance from the digital teacher.
For music instructors, the technology completely removes the need to grade
papers, reducing what now takes them hours of human labor per week to seconds at
the push of a button. The software implements a multimedia document model that
integrates all the common types of media used in music theory pedagogy: music
notation (with or without automatic analysis), MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital
Interface), text editing, images, vector graphics, video and audio playback.
Early results indicate that this technology improves learning, thereby reducing
the need for remediation at higher grade levels and helping maintain the
benefits of arts education in US schools even in the face of budgetary
pressures.