* 1448319
* SBIR Phase I:  Single molecule detection of biomarkers using gold nanorods for in-vitro diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* David Freedman, NexGen Arrays, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a new diagnostic platform technology that
is faster, more sensitive, and lower cost as compared with current diagnostic
tests. Faster diagnostic results will improve hospital care by quickly and
accurately isolating infectious patients and preventing co-infections. Current
in-vitro diagnostic tests are, either, very sensitive, requiring significant
infrastructure and technical expertise to perform, or, are quick and easy-to-use
with poor predictive value. This SBIR project will enable a medical diagnostic
platform that works with complex fluids (e.g., whole blood) to distinguish
numerous pathogens and clinical biomarkers in a rapid time-frame without
compromising on the predictive value. Combining a rapid test with improved
sensitivity and an easy "sample-to-answer" method of operation fundamentally
disrupts the two existing previously separate market capabilities for medical
diagnostics. Additionally, the platform is being developed to be used in a
sample-to-answer format so that it can be used in resource-limited settings, and
near the point-of-care; for example, in West Africa for diagnosing Ebola virus.
This technology addresses a significant market opportunity that is currently
experiencing rapid growth.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop the use of gold nanorod tags for
single molecule counting of biomarkers on an interferometric sensor surface. The
use of nanorods with polarization enhancement will result in a 10-fold increase
in signal over the use of spherical particles. This allows the use of a lower
numerical aperture objective and reduces the imaging constraints because the
depth of focus is in microns rather than nanometers. Another advantage as a
result of increased signal from nanorods, is that it allows imaging of the
sensor at lower magnification. The increase in the field of view enables imaging
of entire assays without the need of motorized X-Y stages. The work potentially
will result in a diagnostic platform with a significantly lower cost,
dramatically reduced instrument size, fewer mechanical failures, and
significantly improved acquisition speed. There are two primary objectives for
the proposed work. The first is to optimize the use of gold nanorods for
detection of protein and nucleic acid biomarkers. The second is to prototype and
demonstrate a low-cost nanorod-based instrument. Completion of objectives will
enable a path toward commercialization of the technology for in-vitro
diagnostics.