* 1448519
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Solid-State Cerenkov Detector for Portable and Wearable Neutron Radiation Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Roy Clarke, Endectra, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 165,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to bring a disruptive neutron detector
technology to market, filling an urgent need for real-time, portable and
wearable radiation detectors. Successful commercialization of this innovative
technology will serve a broad customer base in the nuclear detection and
verification industry. This includes nuclear power industry workers, national
lab staff, and homeland security personnel, all of whom need to detect the
presence of neutron-emitting radioactive materials and assess the health physics
risks in real time. This multi-billion dollar market is currently well served
with gamma ray and x-ray detection devices, but the capabilities for wearable
neutron dosimeters and detectors are currently less well developed. The proposed
technology closes this gap and thus addresses new commercial opportunities
across a targeted array of markets: in addition to supporting U.S. technology
leadership and safer low-carbon nuclear energy generation, this project will
explore new kinds of directional arrays for neutron imaging and portal
detectors, helping to make the nation's borders more secure against illicit
nuclear materials and providing improved tools for nuclear safeguards and
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the feasibility of a novel compact,
wearable neutron detector/dosimeter based solely on solid-state technology.
Research objectives include a thorough quantitative assessment of the detector
front-end material response to neutron radiation, evaluation of its
optoelectronic characteristics, and gamma discrimination. This will be the first
detector of its kind, enabling portability, low cost, real time signal
capability and complete integration with semiconductor microdevice technology.
The novel device concept combines a directional optical converter (neutrons to
secondary electrons to light) with state-of-the-art optoelectronic detection to
provide a digital output which is compatible with wireless reporting protocols
and internet integration. The proposed device can therefore be reconfigured for
many radiation detection tasks that are currently not feasible with larger,
bulky devices using conventional gas proportional and scintillator detector
technology. The anticipated result is a novel disruptive neutron detection
approach. The research to be performed at the forefront of neutron detection
science includes a thorough evaluation of the neutron-capture process, and aims
for the first time to better understand the radiation response of a high density
of large capture cross-section nuclei in a high-purity optical medium.