* 1448575
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Piezoelectric Sensor for Quality Assurance of Asphalt Binders used in Highway Construction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Chetana Rao, Rao Research and Consulting. LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
paving industry's need to monitor changes in asphalt binder properties in real
time. It aims to develop an advanced prototype of a piezoelectric-based testing
system to rapidly verify the uniformity and specification compliance of asphalt
binders for quality control (QC) and verification testing purposes. Supply of
asphalt concrete (AC) for paving is a $25-32 billion industry in the United
States; of this, the cost of asphalt binders is around $6-8 billion. Assuring
binder uniformity and specification compliance is therefore of great importance
to suppliers, contractors and owner agencies. The successful realization of the
proposed device will help minimize project delays and premature failures, as
well as the associated litigation. Assuming 5 percent of the AC placed results
in early failures related to binder quality, the device has the potential to
save at least $1 billion annually. The ability to measure the binder's
rheological attributes in-situ, between binder production and mixing of the
asphalt, is currently unavailable in the market. Such data will enhance the
industry's understanding of the impacts of binder production, storage and
transport process on its uniformity. This will help improve the production
processes within the industry and achieve longer-life
roadways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
its emphasis on real time binder uniformity measurement in terms that are
directly relatable to the properties measured by the standard specification used
to accept asphalt binders in the US: AASHTO M320. Moreover, the device will be
designed to be field-portable and cost-effective to promote widespread adoption.
The impetus for such a device has never been greater given the sharp rise in
post-refinery modifications of asphalt binders at blend terminals or at the
contractor's plants. This effort will leverage the bench-top prototype system
developed under previous national research studies, and which has been deemed
feasible, in concept, to deliver the key parameters needed to do QC of asphalt
binders. This project will specifically address several technical challenges
including miniaturization of base unit electronics into a hand-held unit
suitable for field testing, optimizing the piezoelectric sensor materials and
dimensions for broadest operating range, design of a base unit for field
operation, establishing QC test methodology, developing numerical techniques for
data reduction, and integrating hardware and software. The anticipated results
from this effort will be (i) a functional prototype and (ii) the realization of
methodology and software for quality control testing.