* 1448734
* Coordination and Participation:  Writing Workshops - Adaptation Actions for a Changing Arctic - Bering Beaufort Chukchi Region
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,995.00

This award will support US attendance at meetings to develop a report that will
contribute to the US National Assessment, and also address the current
adjustments and future needs of individuals, communities, industries, and
relevant sectors of society. This assessment will&amp;#8232; be completed for
the near-term (2030) and more distant future (2080), providing individuals,
community planners and industry with insight into possible future scenarios. By
targeting adaptation, including barriers to adaptation in various sectors and
communities, the report will inform planners, decision-makers and those who set
policy relevant to adaptation. This information will ultimately help society
anticipate and adapt to the Arctic?s ongoing and future physical, socioeconomic
and technological changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Adaptation Actions for a
Changing Arctic" (AACA) is to be an assessment of climate and integrated social
and environmental frameworks and models that can inform adaptation actions in
the face of Arctic change. The AACA is the main contribution by the U.S. to an
international synthesis effort of the same name that &amp;#8232;will focus on
adaptation to multiple stressors. Funds will support U.S. participation in two
workshops to complete an assessment of the adaptations residents of the
Bering/Beaufort/Chukchi Sea region have implemented to deal with the rapid
changes in climate, landscape, ecosystems and social systems that have occurred
in recent decades. The report that will result from these workshops will be an
assessment of the broad array of changes in &amp;#8232;the Arctic regions of
Northwestern Canada, Northern Alaska and Eastern Russia and adjacent seas.
&amp;#8232;It is expected that &amp;#8232;the report will lead to a better
understanding of the social responses to change and to a discussion of where
additional research or investments are needed to facilitate near-term&amp;#8232;
and more distant adaptation actions.