* 1448353
* RAPID: Data Collection of Internal Forces During Dismantling of a Steel Bridge
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Matthew Yarnold, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 24,810.00

Collecting bridge performance data on an existing bridge is useful to understand
internal forces that a structure experiences under service condition. A bridge
that has provided service for more than eighty years is planned to be dismantled
in August 2014. Generally when a bridge is decommissioned it is demolished with
explosives for efficiency. However, this steel bridge will be dismantled one
piece at a time because of its proximity to the new replacement bridge. This
dismantling provides an opportunity to collect data of bridge member forces
using sensors and wireless data acquisition system. The data will be used for
validating computer simulation algorithm with real field data. The bridge that
has been in the service for a long time generally weakens due to deterioration
of material and due to loading of traffic. The collected data will help in
understanding aging of the bridge. A relatively small amount of investment will
provide rich data that will be useful to researchers in modeling life-cycle
performance of a typical bridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will collect
field data during dismantling of an old steel truss bridge. The data will be in
the form of internal forces in truss members. Strain gages and wireless data
acquisition system will be used to collect data of internal forces as the bridge
is dismantled piece by piece. Since the bridge has been in use for more than
eighty years there has been some deterioration of materials and connections.
Detailed data on the existing condition of members and connections will be
collected prior to beginning of the dismantling of the bridge. The collected
data will be archived for later use by the principal investigator and other
researchers to validate current numerical simulation algorithm. There is a
potential of assessing uncertainties in modeling aspect of truss bridge
structure as well as in environmental deterioration. Preliminary numerical
simulation using available software will be pursued to assess efficacy of
simulation of a bridge that has been in service.