* 1448692
* SBIR Phase I:  Enzymatic Synthesis of Insect Pheromones
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Mike Chen, Provivi Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is an insect pest control breakthrough for the
agricultural industry. Provivi, Inc. (Provivi) intends to develop novel
biosynthesis technology for producing insect pheromones, i.e. chemicals that
insects use for communication. Pheromone based insect control can fulfill the
following unmet needs: (1) safety, biodegradability, and leaving no residues on
products (2) not interfering with beneficial insects (e.g. bees and ladybugs),
(3) not resulting in insecticide resistance, (4) and serve as a complement to
existing pest management strategies. While pheromones have been long recognized
for their potential in crop protection, their high synthesis costs have
prevented broad adoption. Provivi?s technology aims to enable a dramatically
lower cost synthesis of pheromones. This has the potential to change how farmers
control damaging insects by adopting pheromone solutions in favor of traditional
insecticides. From a commercial perspective, by lowering the cost of synthesis,
Provivi pheromone products can immediately enter existing pheromone markets, and
ultimately penetrate markets for which currently only traditional insecticides
are affordable to farmers.

The objectives of this Phase I research program are (1) the demonstration of a
biosynthetic approach to the synthesis of a class of insect pheromones, (2) the
identification of enzymes with sufficient activity to warrant further
development and, (3) quantifications of the biocatalysis performance for
generating a process model of the proposed synthesis route. At the heart of the
proposed pheromone synthesis route is a biocatalytic transformation that has not
been described in the existing enzyme literature. This project aims to identify
enzymes capable of supporting this novel reaction by screening members of enzyme
families that are known to catalyze similar reactions. Using the best identified
enzyme variant, this project will demonstrate the feasibility of the company's
synthesis route by performing a gram-scale synthesis of an in-market insect
pheromone. By performing the gram-scale synthesis, it will help to determine the
biocatalyst reaction parameters including yield, productivity, product titer and
byproduct titers. These parameters will allow the development of a detailed
process model of the synthesis route and assess the synthesis cost reduction
enabled by the proposed technology.