* 1448935
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Manufacturing Processes for Multiple Field Freeform Microlens Arrays for Ultra-Low Cost Medical Endoscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Subba Shankar, Ohio Surgical Optics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project is that smaller and less expensive
medical endoscopes will be made possible, which will allow physicians to see
better inside the human body. These devices will shorten recovery times, improve
diagnosis and treatment, move procedures from operating rooms to exam rooms, and
lower health care costs. In addition, physicians will be able to visualize in
parts of the body that were previously inaccessible. Health care will be
improved throughout the world, particularly in developing countries. This
project advances the state of the art in the design of micro-optics as well as
their manufacture. Large arrays of tiny but precise lens components will be
assembled in one operation, drastically reducing costs. The micro-optics and
advanced manufacturing techniques developed in this project will also be
applicable to other imaging systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop new designs for micro-optics with a particular emphasis on
medical endoscopes and new manufacturing techniques. High performance free-form
optics that use multiple fields will be designed to produce images within
acceptable limits for biomedical optics and be manufacturable. A high volume,
precision manufacturing process will be developed for these optics. Wafer level
assembly technology will be used to combine multiple arrays of micro-optic
elements. Lens systems thus produced will be tested to determine whether they
are within the design specification for mechanical and optical performance.
Optical camera calibration and an image processing pipeline will be developed to
combine the multiple fields and correct aberrations and produce accurate image
reconstruction.