* 1448657
* EAGER: Systematic Approach to Improve Probability of Metabolic Engineering Success
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Mattheos Koffas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 179,779.00

The field of metabolic engineering continues to excel at producing specialty and
commodity chemicals from simple, renewable feedstocks, but focus on the field's
successes in literature and media neglect the larger picture: many metabolic
engineering efforts produce industrially irrelevant titers in the early stages
of research and sometimes throughout the duration of the project. This EAGER
award will address the question of whether there are fundamental steps that can
be taken early in metabolic engineering projects to maximize their success
rates. The PI will address his hypothesis that the regulation of the amount of
cofactors (small molecules that enable certain enzymes to function) is central
to the ability to control metabolic pathways in cells in such a way as to enable
the production of useful biochemicals for biomanufacturing purposes. In
addition, the PI will train graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research and expose high school students to cutting edge
research in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
investigator will apply a broadly applicable, systematic approach to improve the
success rate of metabolic engineering endeavors by performing a rigorous case
study of the production of a complex biochemical in E. coli. The PI hypothesizes
that the dynamic regulation of cofactor biosynthesis is key to metabolic
engineering success, and will use the CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) system to
achieve dynamic cofactor expression control in order to test his hypothesis. He
will examine the fate of accumulating cofactor and cellular response via pulse-
chase metabolic analysis and quantification with LC-MS/MS. Cellular response to
cofactor accumulation will be monitored using comparative RNA-seq
(transcriptomic) and iTRAQ (proteomic) analysis between wild-type and engineered
strains. The PI will then use results from this case study to begin to
generalize rules concerning co-factor regulation and impacts on metabolic
engineering success.