* 1448633
* EAGER: Development of software citation methodology for open source computational science
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

Software plays an increasingly important role in modern research. In many
physical sciences, including geophysics, astrophysics, and high energy physics,
research addresses phenomena occurring on extremely small or large time and
space scales where experimental and observational work are difficult. In these
disciplines numerical modeling, computational simulation, and data analysis are
required to advance knowledge. Many researchers and developers work individually
or in teams, sometimes over years or decades, to develop specialized software
for modeling and data analysis, to advance both research and education. These
efforts broadly benefit communities of researchers when useful codes are shared
openly, but, the lack of established means to cite software is a significant
barrier to sharing source code beyond the individual developer or team. Software
citation gives appropriate attribution to the developers, and promotes
reproducibility of results. This project brings together an interdisciplinary
team of experts in library science, computational science, science and
technology studies, and a computationally-intensive physical science
(geophysics) to develop and test new solutions to this problem.

The team will assess the needs of the community, and will develop a software
tool for citation of open source software that describes the software
environment and that is embedded into workflows that software developers and
researchers alike will use and find usable. Using the computational geophysics
community as the community of practice this project pilots a new process for
software citation that will identify and address the community's needs and
remove barriers to adoption. The geophysics research community has developed
extensive scientific software suites to address fundamental research on
societally important problems such as earthquake systems science. By enhancing
the visibility and credibility of open source software that is essential to
scientific progress, the project will increase the scientific impacts of
software development investments. By providing a means to credit the effort of
scientists who develop software, the project will encourage the career
development of talented developers and computational researchers and hence,
encourage development and dissemination of better quality and better-documented
software. Better quality and better documented software that can be
appropriately cited helps address the challenge of reproducibility in scientific
research, needed to verify and validate modeling results. Finally, improved
availability and usability of software will give other scientists and
researchers new tools and techniques to solve their most challenging research
problems, enabling new discoveries.