* 1448108
* Transformational Advances in Additive Manufacturing and Associated Research Workshop; Austin, Texas; August 7, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Joseph Beaman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 28,683.00

3D Printing is one of the most promising new manufacturing technologies today,
with many applications already and the promise of many more in the future.
However, while today's 3D Printing processes can produce parts with very complex
geometries, they are slow, rough, and difficult to inspect and this limits their
use in industrially-relevant applications. Support will provided for the
participation of leading US researchers in 3D Printing in discussions aimed at
identifying promising breakthrough approaches to improving 3D Printing with
leading researchers from the UK. These workshops will be held in conjunction
with two of the leading annual conferences focused on 3DP, one in the United
Kingdom and one in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive
Manufacturing (AM) has huge potential, but currently has technological
limitations, including slow build speed, poor surface finish, limited ability of
conventional inspection methods to characterize complex AM parts, requirements
for temporary support structures that must be removed after process completion,
and often poor energy efficiency. Two workshops are proposed, the first on July
7, 2014, the day before the 9th International Conference of Additive
Manufacturing and 3D Printing in Nottingham, UK, and the second on August 7,
2014, the day following the 25th International Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF)
Symposium in Austin, Texas. These workshops will bring together leading
researchers in the US and the UK for focused discussions on identifying
breakthrough approaches to addressing the limitations in current AM processes.