* 1448745
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial Fuel Cell Optimization for Energy-Positive Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Mark Sholin, Arbsource, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop electricity-generating wastewater
treatment systems with an initial focus on food & beverage processors. The
target return on investment is an average 3-year payback period on the cost of
equipment and installation. Successful completion of this Phase I project will
potentially pave the way towards deployment of on-site wastewater treatment
infrastructure at food and beverage processing facilities. If successfully
commercialized, this technology could lead to significant improvements in the
energy efficiency of wastewater treatment.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are to optimize the performance
and durability of components used in microbial fuel cell systems. In particular,
our focus is on designing low-cost anode and cathode materials that can be
manufactured in large quantities. Microbial fuel cells work by growing non-
genetically modified Anode Respiring Bacteria (ARB) within bioreactors. The ARB
consume wastewater pollutants including sugars, starches, and proteins. As the
ARB consume these pollutants, they harvest the electrons (or chemical energy) of
these compounds and transfer this energy onto conductive electrodes suspended
inside each module. The technology development challenges that must be overcome
to enable commercialization of this technology involve proving the long-term
stability of the anode and cathode materials, selecting a suitable, low-cost
cathode catalyst with compatible binder, and developing practical operation and
maintenance procedures to limit the accumulation of excess biofilm and salts
inside the system.