* 1448061
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Material Recycling for Lithium Ion Battery Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Michael Lerner, OnTo Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be to recycle materials for use in manufacture of
advanced batteries. Success and commercialization of this projects? technology
will facilitate recycling of consumer and electric vehicle waste batteries. The
project enhances scientific understanding by demonstrating the durability,
robustness and recyclability of advanced engineered materials. Societal and
commercial impacts of the successful commercial implementation include: (1)
Preservation of critical materials (for example cobalt) for processing into the
new battery. (2) Savings of energy used in mining, and the avoidance of sulfur
oxides (SOX) and arsenide that result in processing ores. (3) Elimination of
hazardous disposal costs of end-of-life batteries. (4) Reduced manufacturing
costs. (5) Establishment of new jobs required for collection, processing and
distribution of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase I
research project are to demonstrate feasibility of recycling material from
lithium-ion batteries. The research project will recycle scrap batteries using
innovative processes that produce material suitable for use in new batteries.
The project will process and characterize the recycled materials and compare
those technical results with appropriate standards. To stage the pre-commercial
demonstration, new cells will use recycled materials and be characterized
directly for capacity, rate and cycle life. The Phase I project will target a
small cell made using recycled material. The Phase I project will result in
comparative analysis of small cells made using recycled material and standard
commercial material, with performance expectation of the cell from recycled
material to be within 5-10% of the cell from fresh commercial material.