* 1448937
* STTR Phase I:  Development of an Automated Bioreactor System for Tissue Engineered Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) Graft Production.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Michael Smietana, STEL Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to bring to market a novel tissue engineered
graft for anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) replacement. Tears of the ACL are one
of the most common knee injures among athletes. Existing repair options utilize
tissue harvested from the patient's body resulting in donor site morbidity and
post-operative pain or tissues harvested from cadavers, associated with
increased risks of disease transmission and re-tearing. Additionally, both
current graft options are designed to be stiff and exceed the native ACL
properties, shielding the regenerating tissue from mechanical signals necessary
for optimal tissue growth. Failure to regenerate normal ACL function leads to
diminished return to competitive levels of activity and leads to increased risk
of early onset osteoarthritis. Utilization of an extensible tissue engineered
graft capable of responding to local loading environment should return normal
function to the ACL and improve long-term patient outcomes. The application of
this novel technology will define new treatment strategies for ligament repair
and other sites of soft tissue injury and improve our understanding of tissue
regeneration within the body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses significant manufacturing and bioprocessing challenges
inherent to the commercialization and translation of tissue engineered products
from the laboratory to the clinic. In addition to demonstrating clinical
efficacy and meeting regulatory standards, a new tissue engineered product needs
to have a cost-effective manufacturing processes and deliver an improved cost-
benefit ratio to displace existing graft options. This project will first
develop a novel, automated, and closed bioreactor system that will provide the
means to easily manufacture and store standardized FDA-approved engineered
tissues clinical use. Second, multiple bioreactors will be integrated to
simultaneously and cost-effectively fabricate multiple tissue constructs for
physiological, pharmaceutical, and medical applications, fulfilling an important
knowledge gap in the field. The implementation of an automated manufacturing
system during the early research stage has the potential to significantly lessen
the technical, regulatory, and commercial barriers that tissue-engineering
technologies and companies are likely to encounter in the future pre-market
stages. In addition, the bioreactor may serve as a model or platform for other
tissue-engineering technologies attempting to streamline their laboratory
processes into safe, reproducible, appropriately scaled manufacturing processes
capable to meeting clinical demand.