* 1448985
* STTR Phase I:  Gait Tracker Shoe for long term accurate measurement of walking and running
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* John Lach, JKM Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project centers around the ability to provide accurate
gait data for every day real world activities. Certainly this could be something
of a game changer in the field of locomotion rehabilitation where self-reporting
of compliance is an issue. In the growing activity of running this can change
the way runners (or even cross-country skiers or skaters with modified
algorithms) train. With this capability runners would know the history of their
gait through a training session or race. For an individual with a condition that
needs long term monitoring this technology can provide for the first time,
detailed data on how one locomotes in the real world. One can determine not only
the number of steps one takes and how large each step was, but detailed
information on what activities the user performed, such as walking up or down
stairs; walking up or down slopes, walking versus running, etc. Finally, IMUs
could be packaged in different devices that could be used to objectively measure
rehabilitation activities other than walking.

The proposed project uses advances in our ability to gather accurate information
from Inertial Measurement Units (IMUS) and combines them with an innovative shoe
design to allow economical measurement and reporting of out-of-lab locomotion
for individuals. Using new mathematical algorithms the data from the IMU sensors
can accurately determine gait, running or walking, parameters. They can also
distinguish the type of locomotor activity a person is engaged in, such as
walking up a hill vs running on a level surface. The analysis of this data over
extended periods of time will be a practical application of the use of Big Data
(large data sets where special analysis tools are needed). This work will allow
low cost reporting in rehabilitation settings avoiding the issues of self-
reporting and the high cost of supervised rehabilitation. This work will also
develop apps for smartphones to allow real time feedback to individuals to
ensure that they are following their prescribed rehabilitation. Advanced
manufacturing with Bluetooth data transmission and induction charging will allow
the IMUs to be placed inside the shoe sole protected from the elements.