* 1448204
* SBIR Phase I:  Implementing a low-cost seismic network using mobile phones and MEMS accelerometers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Battalgazi YILDIRIM, Zizmos, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a dense and inexpensive seismic
network that will monitor earthquake hazard and provide real-time notifications
of impending tremors to residents in affected areas. This earthquake early
warning system will also help operators of nuclear power plants and other
utilities, transportation infrastructure and critical manufacturing facilities
downgrade their operations in a timely manner ahead of a seismic event. An
affordable and scalable seismic network could have as many as tens of thousands
of sensors in metropolitan cities, enabling the creation of highly accurate
shaking maps with resolution down to 100m (compared with resolutions of around
10km for current maps), providing valuable information for homeowners, city
developers, and insurance companies to compute insurance risk and
premiums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
Project addresses the lack of effective early warning systems in the US and in
many other earthquake prone countries. Traditional seismic networks are costly
to construct and operate. This project proposes to create a scalable seismic
network for a fraction of the cost of a traditional seismic network. The company
plans to use inexpensive MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Sensor) accelerometers
attached to internet-connected used/recycled smartphones to detect vibrations
and transmit pre-processed data to a server. Fast magnitude estimation
algorithms will be developed for both the client sensor devices (i.e. the
smartphones) and server computing platform to reliably distinguish earthquakes
from other vibration sources and to estimate the magnitude and time of arrival
of tremors in affected areas. The objective is to generate a warning within two
seconds of the origin of an earthquake, thereby providing sufficient time for
appropriate actions to be taken in surrounding affected areas.