* 1448738
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercialization of a Novel Titanium Alloy Additive Manufacturing Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Matthew Petros, SoliDreams, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 147,041.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is based in furthering the innovation in an
already innovative additive manufacturing (AM) industry. This proposal
represents up to $120M in potential revenue within a ten year period in an AM
process that will be orders of magnitude cheaper than competitive processes.
With regards to a societal impact, additive manufacturing represents a paradigm
shift in manufacturing and a significant opportunity to bring manufacturing and
jobs back into this country. The economic and environmental implications of the
additive manufacturing opportunity are thus incredibly vast for America and for
the world. Local manufacturing has implications for both the economy and the
environment. The Selectively Inhibited Sintering technology potentially
represents a further refinement in accessibility to this burgeoning
technological field, especially for small to medium sized companies that cannot
afford the use of incredibly expensive competitive
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement a
disruptive additive manufacturing technology. The core concept behind the
Selectively Inhibited Sintering process is the prevention of selected segments
of each powder layer from sintering. In the current metal process, a commercial
piezoelectric print head is utilized to deposit a liquid inhibitor solution at
the part boundary of each layer. Once all of the layers have been completed, the
entire part is removed from the machine and bulk sintered in a conventional
sintering furnace. The inhibitor at the part boundary decomposes into hard
particles that retard the sintering process. The metal powder particles in this
region are prevented from fusing, allowing for removal of inhibited boundary
sections and revealing of the completed part. Successful completion of this
project will potentially result in a paradigm shift in the future of metallic AM
for hard-to-manufacture industrial parts. Targeted materials are high
temperature metallic alloys such as iron, steel, or titanium which are widely
used in many industries.