* 1448572
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Footwear Fitting System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Alex Villanueva, Eclo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2015
* USD 149,197.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in addressing one of the most common problems
associated with ordering clothing and shoes online, which is the inability to
know how things will fit. The technology being developed is a virtual footwear
fitting system (VFFS) utilizing a user's own foot geometry. The virtual fitting
experience will give size recommendations based on comfort levels and support
levels for different shoe models. This will reduce the 35% return rate of online
footwear retailers and thereby reduce their estimated $1.5 billion in annual
losses in the US alone. Reducing the risk factor associated with online ordering
will help people benefit fully from the convenience and large selection of
online retailers. The reduction in return rate will reduce the carbon footprint
of some 30 million annual returns. The VFFS will be available to the masses and
will create a large exposure for 3D modeling fields such as computer aided
design, finite element analysis and computer vision. 3D scanning with
smartphones has endless applications, and the virtual fitting technology will
help make computer vision principles more adapted for those applications.
Virtual fitting opens the doors for mass customization, which is the future of
footwear and garments. The technology will help bring our society closer to a
world where things are tailored for us, convenient and
affordable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
the development of a virtual footwear fitting system to reduce the return rate
of online retail. The system consists of a foot scanner, shoe scanner and
fitting algorithm. Online shoppers will use their smartphones to scan their feet
and obtain a 3D model. A photogrammetry algorithm is being developed for this
specific application. It utilizes feature recognition of the foot along with
smartphone acceleration outputs to construct a 3D model with 1 mm accuracy in
different image capturing environments. An adaptive inner volume (AIV) scanner
is being developed to scan the inner volume of shoes that is combined with an
outer scan to give a 3D shoe model with 0.5 mm accuracy along with material
stiffness. The fitting algorithm will compare foot and shoe scans to perform a
comprehensive fitting analysis giving online shoppers a way to know what shoe
size they need and how comfortable their potential purchase will be. By the end
of this project, a basic virtual fitting platform will be developed. It will
allow a user to scan his or her foot with an iPhone and obtain a size
recommendation for a specific shoe within Â±0.5 size of his or her personal
choice based on comfort levels, support levels and fit preferences.