* 1448832
* SBIR Phase I:  Transforming middle school mathematics into a pathway to entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Jody Britten, Metiri Group
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is designed to address a concern that is current and
increasingly significant for the U.S. economy; the decrease in entrepreneurship
in our nation today. According to the Los Angeles Times (9/7/2014), "The image
of the U.S. as bursting with entrepreneurial zeal, it turns out, is more myth
than reality. In truth, the rate at which new companies are being formed has
fallen steadily for more than three decades." There are many factors that
contribute to diminished U.S. entrepreneurial activity, but there is increasing
evidence that one issue that might be addressed through our education system is
a new focus on "soft skills," cognitive skills that are often found under the
aegis of 21st Century Skills. According to Heckman "soft skills predict success
in life" they causally produce that success, and "soft skills" have an important
place in an effective portfolio of public policies. This project intends to
provide an environment for middle school teachers to deeply understand these
entrepreneurial skills and prepare those teachers to integrate the skills into
their math classrooms. Thus, another broad potential impact is the use of the
model to enable teachers/schools to address 21st Century skills (precursors to
entrepreneurship) within the context of the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
I project will provide a proof-of-concept for an innovative, affordable, "next
generation" personalized model for teacher professional learning that leverages
today's technologies to change the way professional development is provided to
teachers. It offers multiple entry points and pathways, personalizes teachers'
learning, increasing the potential for applicability back to that teachers'
classroom. This more affordable, actionable model professional learning
environment could be expanded to include other 21st Century skills and other
STEM disciplines. This project will pilot and refine this new model based on
teachers' usage, satisfaction, and observed impact data. These technical
objectives will be accomplished in three phases. The first is a development
phase to develop multimedia learning resource library that includes high-
quality, practical, useful supportive materials including innovative
demonstration units of practice that demonstrate how teachers can enrich a
traditional unit of study while addressing the precursor skills of
entrepreneurship. These demonstration units will be embedded in a successful,
affordable online learning environment for personalized teacher professional
learning. The second will pilot and conduct research on this "next generation"
professional learning environment. Data related to use, levels of participation
and user satisfaction will be collected and analyzed. Finally, this new
environment and associated resources will be refined based on the evidence
collected in the pilot and research phases.