* 1448113
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Form Winding Insulation System for Motor and Generator Size Reduction and Associated Method of Manufacture
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Russel Marvin, LCDrives Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will enable a new class
of smaller, more efficient, and cheaper motors to be built. Since the motors use
43% - 46% of the world?s electricity, this has the potential to have one of the
greatest impacts on overall electrical energy efficiency due to the shear amount
of power this application uses. These unique windings will be sold to motor
manufactures or be used in house to build motors and generators. By selling
directly to existing motor manufacturers it will accelerate the penetration into
the market. The market for windings is $2B and this approach has the potential
for significant market share. This technology could impact wind generation,
oil&amp;gas drilling, industrial manufacturing, aerospace, mining,
transportation, and any market using motors more than 20hp in
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will develop a process that can be used to make electric motors and
generators smaller, more efficient, and cheaper. This project will specifically
address the ability of electric insulation of the motor windings to have high
voltage capability and high thermal conductivity. This combination will allow
better motor cooling and in turn higher slot current densities. These higher
current densities will allow motors to be smaller which will result in more
efficient and lower cost motors. The research completed in this program will
show exactly how the necessary bending can be accomplished with a complex
mechanical simulation of the bend as well as experimental proof of concept of
the electrical insulating capability of this unique winding. Additionally, a
machine design for accomplishing this winding design will be designed to show a
path to the low cost that will be necessary for widespread adoption in the
industry. This combination should demonstrate a high voltage withstand at a high
thermal conductivity all at a low production cost.