* 1448323
* STTR Phase I:  High Energy Density Non-aqueous Pseudocapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Paul Rasmussen, Vinazene Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research Phase I project is development of novel organic materials
necessary to produce high energy density, low cost pseudocapacitors. The active
material will be a single substance for both oxidation and reduction. This
important property reduces cost and fabrication complexity. The synthetic route
to the active material is short, and makes use of commodity reagents.
Pseudocapacitors capable of delivering more than 10 Watt hours per kilogram at
5,000 Watts per kilogram will have significant impact on vehicle performance,
especially for the heavy vehicles that operate at high power levels getting
started, for intermittent renewable sources, and uninterruptible power supplies.
The low cost and high performance in these new pseudocapacitors will have
important commercial impact in the US manufacturing arena because their
fabrication is readily adapted to the existing infrastructure designed for other
organic electrical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
based on organic compounds with unprecedented voltage and redox stability.
Because this active material can be both oxidized and reduced as a single
substance, it has the unique advantage of not needing an asymmetric design.
Asymmetric or hybrid design is used in capacitors to increase the voltage window
when the redox activity is otherwise confined to a relatively narrow band within
the voltage window of the solvent and electrolyte. This system has a large
voltage separation between the oxidation and reduction half reactions without
the need for balancing mass, and without fabrication of two different
electrodes. The single substance advantage combines the best properties of the
asymmetric design within a symmetric cell. The research group has prepared
materials with high cycle stability and open circuit potentials of 2.8 volts.
Our goal will be to demonstrate that the use of our novel organic electroactive
materials can significantly increase capacitance of high surface area double
layer capacitors.