* 1448456
* SBIR Phase I:  Cavity-Enhanced Direct Frequency Comb Spectroscopy: A Multi-Species Technology for Fingerprinting Fugitive Emissions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Florian Adler, Tiger Optics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 115,082.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will be a pivotal step
towards the development of the first commercial analyzer based on Cavity-
Enhanced Direct Frequency Comb Spectroscopy (CE-DFCS). This new technique
overcomes the traditional divide between narrow-band, highly specific, laser-
based techniques and broadband, low-resolution, multi-species methods. CE-DFCS
offers the advantages of both categories in a single instrument, opening a realm
of possibilities. For the proposed application of fugitive emissions monitoring,
CE-DFCS will help to obtain valuable data to better understand and mitigate
methane emissions from both agricultural activities and natural gas leakage. The
latter issue represents an enormous problem that not only accelerates climate
change, but also causes millions of dollars in economic losses and represents a
risk to public safety. These issues will drive an increasing market for this
type of monitoring technology: the approximately $50 million current market
could potentially double within five years. Beyond this application, the
versatility and capability inherent in CE-DFCS will also make it widely
applicable to other industries, e.g. for real-time process control and
chemometrics, where it can ultimately displace complex instruments such as
Fourier transform spectrometers and gas chromatographs.

The intellectual merit of this project is finding a pathway to making CE-DFCS
sufficiently robust for portable precision measurements in climate research and
pollution mitigation. This technology represents a major change from present day
spectroscopic technologies, such as Tunable Diode Laser, Cavity Ring-Down, and
Fourier Transform Spectroscopy. The resulting instrument will allow researchers
and industry to more precisely identify and quantify emissions from pipelines,
wells, farms, landfills, forests, swamps, and other sources. While experiments
from academia have demonstrated that CE-DFCS has great potential for this
application, little work has focused on robustness necessary for field use.
Phase I research will focus on the critical need for long-term stability in the
coupling between the frequency comb and the optical enhancement cavity, which
must be impervious to vibrations and environmental changes to a much higher
degree than previously demonstrated. Therefore, the research objective is to
properly design, integrate and optimize the electronics with a commercial
optical cavity, for robust and self-optimizing comb-cavity coupling. With the
proposed design and optimized control parameters and feedback mechanics,
excellent long-term stability and vibration resistance is anticipated. The
obtained results will serve as a basis to further develop and optimize CE-DFCS
for commercial applications.