* 1448564
* SBIR Phase I:  Fatigue Measurement Instrument
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Alexander Landau, VeriFax Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will lead to development
of a novel technology for monitoring operator alertness/drowsiness in trucks,
buses, and trains. The device would also be ideally suitable for measuring
fatigue of airport control tower operators and monitoring fatigue of other
mission-critical personnel in civil and military operations. Such automated
alertness/fatigue monitoring technologies are expected to reduce significantly
the 100,000 police-reported highway crashes that result in approximately 1500
fatalities annually as a consequence of drowsiness/fatigue factors. Blink rate
is a recognized putative noninvasive marker of central dopamine activity, so the
novel technology would also provide useful neurophysiologic information on
brainstem function sensitive to changes in brain dopamine concentrations such as
Parkinson?s disease, Schizophrenia, Tardive dyskinesia, Tourette?s syndrome and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to create and test novel measurement device for direct of
eyelid displacement in time to asses operator awareness fatigue status. Operator
fatigue degrades human performance because of lapses in vigilance and attention.
The onset of fatigue remains difficult to detect, particularly in real life
settings. Research shows that the measurement of PERcent of eyelid CLOSure
(PERCLOS) is most sensitive to detecting operator fatigue. To assess operator
awareness/fatigue status we propose to develop and test a novel measurement
device for direct and precise assessment of eyelid displacement in near real
time by means of electromagnetic induction. The development will consist of
proving the proposed concept?s feasibility by means of a "breadboard design."
The production eyelid detection device (Phase II) would most likely use a micro-
electronics Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) which combines the
individual discrete components used in the prototype to miniaturize and reduce
size and weight. The new device is to serve as an alternative to and a
refinement of the existing PERCLOS metric for prolonged precise and non-
intrusive measurement of alertness/fatigue without interference with an
equipment operator?s daily activity.