* 1448305
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Capacitor-less Dynamic Random Access Memory Technology with Energy Efficiency, Manufacturability, and Scalability
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* James Lin, Alacrity Semiconductors Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to disrupt the $35 billion Dynamic Random
Access Memory (DRAM) market. DRAM - an essential memory component of PCs, mobile
devices, and other electronics - has no known substitutes to date. This project
focuses on commercializing a manufacturable, scalable, and ultra-low power
replacement called Ferroelectric DRAM (FEDRAM). Due to its novel architecture,
FEDRAM will unblock many of the obstacles that are currently hindering the DRAM
industry (i.e. density scaling in accordance with Moore's Law). While it remains
difficult for many emerging memory technologies to gain traction, FEDRAM can be
manufactured using existing facilities and equipment; therefore, it benefits
from a relatively short time-to-market, and is cost-competitive with existing
DRAM. Mobile devices enabled by FEDRAM technology will be lighter, sleeker, and
more energy-efficient, while data centers will realize significant savings in
energy and cost of chip ownership.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to de-risk
a Ferroelectric Dynamic Random Access Memory (FEDRAM) technology by
accomplishing several key objectives. First, the team aims to build a physical
FEDRAM memory cell and array technology demonstration; a secondary objective is
to design and simulate refresh and error correction circuits. Specifically, it
will produce memory cells and arrays that demonstrate promising characteristics
in terms of memory retention, power consumption, and read/write speeds. Based on
these results, more advanced arrays with the associated refresh and error
correction circuitry will be designed and simulated. Phase I results will
demonstrate that FEDRAM functions as predicted and that the material can be
integrated in existing fabrication facilities. Completing these goals will
significantly de-risk the technology and encourage commercial partnerships.