* 1448602
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous functionality for HullBUG Underwater Hull Grooming System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Donald Darling, SeaRobotics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,843.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project and the associated
environmental benefits forthcoming from the successful research effort is
immense. With 50,000 ships operating on the world?s ocean every day, and 1 Giga
Tons of Green House Gases emitted every year by the global fleet, a 5-15%
improvement in fuel economy through improved hull efficiency resulting from
proactive grooming is staggering. With a 5% improvement in hull efficiency the
fleet fuel usage will be reduced 15 Million Tons, leading to $9 Billion in fuel
cost savings, while reducing Green House Gases by 45 Million Tons per year!
Additionally the transport of Aquatic Invasive Species from port to port will be
dramatically reduced. Successful development of an autonomous hull grooming
system will stimulate proactive grooming leading to a $Billion commercial
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project, Autonomous functionality for Underwater Hull Grooming System,
seeks to develop, test, and implement the situation awareness sensors,
navigation system, and supporting algorithms required for fully autonomous hull
cleaning operations for proactive grooming of ship hulls. Difficulties
associated with 6 degree of freedom navigation on steel ship hulls with their
intrinsic magnetic field anomalies, in highly turbid water (zero visibility) is
considerably. Cost effective obstacle detection and hull feature identification
must be organic to the system to allow obstacle avoidance behaviors and along
hull navigation fixes based on feature recognition. To aid the system a novel
approach to Ultra Short Baseline Acoustic positioning will be developed, as
acoustic navigation in the severe multipath environment found in close proximity
along a ship hull poses significant challenges as well. Solutions to these
challenges will&lt;br/&gt;SeaRobotics response NSF request for information
related to proposal 1448602&lt;br/&gt;allow a proactive grooming robot to
negotiate the complexities of the hull and provide an accurate coverage model
for the ship grooming operation. The required periodicity of proactive grooming
will allow for the addition of inspection sensors, inspection data mapping and
change detection to further improve ship hull maintenance and efficiency.