* 1448900
* STTR Phase I:  Development High-throughput Screening System for Glaucoma Therapeutics Using a Bioengineered Human Eye Tissue
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Magnus Bergkvist, Glauconix Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of a testing system that will
facilitate glaucoma drug development in a more cost-effective manner. This will
enable better treatment of glaucoma and ultimately prevention of vision loss.
This work will overcome a major limiting factor for glaucoma drug discovery, and
provide scientists and doctors with a unique tool to understand the physiology
of the human eye as related to glaucoma. Commercially, this project will allow
for high-throughput testing of new glaucoma therapies, making this technology
highly desirable to the pharmaceutical industry. Longer term, this technology
has the potential to provide a healthy transplantable tissue that can cure
glaucoma. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to address
the lack of effective in vitro model for testing targeted glaucoma therapies.
This work will be the first-of-its-kind, exploring the feasibility to
bioengineer a physiologically-relevant 3D human trabecular outflow tract
utilizing co-culture and cell differentiation methods along with
microfabrication techniques. It is based on the development of a custom-built
system that will incorporate the bioengineered tissue into a platform that
mimics the flow of aqueous humor and pressure changes in the human eye. At the
conclusion of this project, it is anticipated that the bioengineered tissue will
behave similarly to its in vivo counterpart, and be usable as higher throughput
testing platform for drugs affecting the outflow physiology of the human
trabecular outflow tract. In addition, this project will lead to a platform that
could be used by other scientists to study and understand the biology of the
human trabecular outflow tract.