* 1448701
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a lactate monitoring device to to provde an alert system for organ failure and death due to shock
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* John Weidling, Canary Medical, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a medical monitoring device to greatly
improve treatment and care for critically ill patients in emergency rooms and
intensive care units. This technology continuously monitors levels of lactate in
the blood. Leading clinicians report that a limitation of hospital monitoring is
that vital signs often do not change until a patient is critically ill.
Comparatively, blood lactate levels rise early and indicate worsening health. As
such, a continuous lactate monitor would be transformative in the treatment of
critically ill patients and enable important medical science research leading to
better detection of early "warning signs" that a patient is at great risk of
death. Such medical research using the device also would enable "goal-directed"
treatment based on real-time lactate concentrations. Goal directed treatment
already has been shown to significantly improve outcomes in critically ill
patients. However, lactate guided treatment is rarely practiced due to the
logistical burden of using the hospital laboratory each time a lactate level is
needed. The proposed device will replace the hospital laboratory with a small
chip worn on the surface of the skin.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a continuous lactate sensor. The
subcutaneous lactate sensor will be desgned to automatically and continuously
measure lactate concentrations in critically ill patients. The sensor comprises
an implantable microchip, and an optoelectronic bandage (OEB) worn on the skin.
Research objectives are to integrate a self-reference into each device for
improved calibration stability, improve trans-dermal optical communication of
lactate levels to the OEB, and to finalize the clinical design of the OEB.
Integration of a self-reference will require a new design of the microchip as
guided by mathematical modeling of chemical reactions and implemented by
microfabrication techniques developed during prototyping prior to this award.
Improved optical communication will be accomplished by modification of methods
for immobilizing luminescent molecules onto the microchip. OEB design freeze
will be accomplished by integrating a field programmable gate array into the OEB
that can control optical communication through the skin, convert raw data to
lactate concentration via a calibration algorithm, and wirelessly transmit
lactate concentration data to a base unit. Following completion of these goals,
the sensor will be ready for use in clinical studies.