* 1448764
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel multicolor cell line engineering platform that enables high-throughput microscopy-based screening of living cells for drug discovery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Mary Ludlam, Cairn Biosciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of new tools to study the dynamic
behavior of cellular machinery, especially for applications in drug discovery.
Unraveling the dynamic aspects of cellular physiology that may be targeted
therapeutically requires a new paradigm for screening disease biology in living
cells. Physiologically relevant live-cell models that are compatible with
visualizing and quantifying the spatiotemporal regulation of disease-relevant
signal transduction pathways and cellular machinery will be a key component of
this approach. Such models will enable improved prioritization of potential
therapeutics by virtue of their ability to deliver enhanced mechanistic insights
compared to existing end-point cell-based and biochemical assays, and their
increased throughput and reduced cost compared with animal models used in
preclinical drug discovery research and toxicology testing. These attributes
represent important advances for de novo drug discovery, drug repurposing
initiatives and the identification of productive therapeutic combinations, in
addition to being valuable capabilities for basic cell biology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
novel reporter cell line engineering platform that will enable the rapid
generation of multicolor fluorescent cell lines suitable for kinetic live-cell
high-content screening (LC-HCS). Stable cell line generation using traditional
antibiotic-selection methods is a lengthy and inflexible process ill-suited for
the efficient generation of LC-HCS-compatible cells. The aim is to address these
shortcomings by implementing a novel strategy to deliver cell lines that
incorporate fluorescent reporters of multiple cellular markers under inducible
control, and at well-defined, physiologically relevant, and stoichiometrically
balanced expression levels at a specified locus within 4-6 weeks of
transfection. This will be accomplished through the use of a genome editing
strategy that will yield a panel of cell lines that can be quickly configured to
report on any desired combination of up to 4 fluorescent markers. The multicolor
reporter cell lines generated through this SBIR project will represent valuable
new tools for the next generation of drug discovery in clinically relevant
living cells and contribute invaluable insights into human disease.