* 1448327
* SBIR Phase I:  Polyaniline Epoxy Primer with Related Topcoat: the Anticorrosion Coating System of a Barrier to Cations with a Barrier to Anions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Jianguo Wang, AnCatt Co.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,077.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is in bringing the next generation of anticorrosion
paints to market, with higher protection efficiency and greater environmental
friendliness than the current anticorrosion paints. The direct cost of corrosion
accounts for 3-5% of a country's GDP worldwide. To reduce the huge economic
lost, it is highly desirable to develop more effective anticorrosion
technologies. The most effective anticorrosion pigments in use today are heavy
metal pigments, such as chromates, lead compounds, and zinc/zinc compounds.
Environmental, health, and safety concerns are driving the elimination of heavy
metal pigments. The coating is based on conductive polymer dispersion. The use
of conductive polymers has opened up a range of new applications. But the poor
processibility of conductive polymers has stymied the growth of applications
such as electrostatic dissipation, electromagnetic interference shielding,
static resistant fibers, conductive inks, toners, and adhesives, etc. Successful
development of conductive polymer dispersion in this project may also enable
these broader applications of conductive polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Corrosion of metals is an
electrochemical reaction process that produces both cations and anions, and
accelerates by the aggressive anions in the environment. Generally it is assumed
that organic coatings act as barriers to water and oxygen at the coating -
environment interface. We have determined that the limiting factor in barrier
coatings is their resistance to the ionic current. The present proposal suggests
developing a heavy metal free ion barrier anticorrosion coating system:
conductive polymer nano-particle pigmented epoxy primer with a topcoat. The
combination of the primer and topcoat constructs a barrier to both anions and
cations, that inhibits the electrochemical corrosion reaction, therefore,
provides efficient corrosion protection to the metal. If present proposed
research succeeds, it will demonstrate how an ion barrier coating works, and how
to formulate an ion barrier anticorrosion coating, and lead to the next
generation of anticorrosion coating - the ion barrier anticorrosion coatings.