* 1448886
* Status and perspectives for the hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite-based and -inspired systems as future energy materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Antoine Kahn, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 06/30/2015
* USD 24,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskites are minerals of metal
halides that are relatively inexpensive and composed of elements that are
abundant in the earth?s crust. Recent discoveries have revealed that very thin
films of perovskite materials can convert sunlight into electricity with
efficiencies approaching those of the best available crystalline solar cell
technologies, which are still relatively expensive. This workshop will bring
together active researchers in perovskite based solar cells from two countries
that are leaders in solar energy research, United States and Israel, to discuss
recent advances in this area and propose new and relevant directions for
continued research. These discussions are designed to lead to the development of
collaborative projects between the US and Israel that will leverage the unique
academic research strengths of each country to accelerate the advancement of
perovskite-based solar cells at the global scale. The workshop is scheduled to
take place September 21-22, 2014 at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. The workshop will support the travel costs of 12-15 invited researchers
with diverse backgrounds from the US to visit Israel and interact with an equal
number of Israeli researchers at the workshop
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will support the organization and travel expenses for a focused bi-lateral
Israel-US workshop titled "Status and perspectives for the hybrid organic-
inorganic perovskite-based and ?inspired systems as future energy materials", to
be held on September 21-22, 2014 at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel.
The workshop will gather a group of about 12-15 US researchers from diverse
backgrounds and a similar number of Israeli researchers, with expertise in
perovskite-based systems, energy conversion devices, sustainability, chemistry
and physics of organic and inorganic semiconductor
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid perovskite light absorbers, in
particular the organic amine lead halide materials, have made stunning progress
in the area of photovoltaic devices in a short time, leading to solar conversion
efficiencies of close to 20% to date. Such rapid progress, using materials grown
from solution in a relatively simple manner is astonishing. Yet, relatively
little is known at this point about the factors that allow facile, low-
temperature preparation of films with optoelectronic properties that are mostly
found only for materials made with metal-organic chemical vapor deposition or
molecular beam epitaxy, the nature and role of bulk and surface defects, or even
the role of the organic elements that decorate the lead halide core. In
addition, their stability, especially under illumination, applied voltage or
temperature fluctuations, is not really known. Questions as to what are the
crucial issues in key phenomena of light absorption and charge carrier
separation and collection, as well as long-term stability of the materials need
to be addressed not only per se, but also because formulating them correctly can
open new directions of research. This workshop of experts from both the US and
Israel, with knowledge of inorganic and organic synthesis, solid-state materials
experiment and theory, and sustainability, will be brought together to take a
speculative look at what might be a transformative evolution in the science and
future technologies of devices based on pervoskite materials. This workshop is
designed to delineate the key foundational knowledge to enable constructive and
innovative thinking about the future. This workshop will provide a unique
opportunity at the exact right time to really define key future binational
energy research approaches that could be potentially disruptive. Finally, the
workshop will recruit for a strong participation from underrepresented members
of the US academic community, who through interactions with their Israeli
colleagues will enhance their access to int