* 1448090
* SBIR Phase I:  Economical Fabrication of Bulk Metallic Glass Sheets through Roll-Stretching
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Evgenia Pekarskaya, Supercool Metals LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 124,206.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will provide the metal manufacturing
industry with bulk metallic glass (BMG) sheets. BMGs are fundamentally different
from, and advantageous to, crystalline metals, as they are stronger than most
crystalline metals but at the same time shapeable like plastics. The key to
industrializing BMGs is providing a practical feedstock material, such as BMG
sheets, with which manufactures can use BMGs unique processability to fabricate
complex shapes at highest precision and ease through thermoplastic forming (TPF)
methods. &lt;br/&gt;A successful outcome of proposed research will empower
manufacturers to make use of BMGs much more broadly and effectively, as BMG
sheets will bridge the gap between currently expensive, customized BMG
components of limited geometrical variety, and affordable, standardized BMG
feedstock material in the future. Overall, the proposed work will lay a critical
foundation to enable much broader commercial application of BMGs, such as in
Biomedical, Nano-imprint, Electronic casing, Defense, Aerospace, or Automotive,
and open an opportunity for US manufacturing to be at the center of this new
manufacturing paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
evaluates the recent scientific discovery of TPF based roll-stretching of BMGs
as a low force deformation method. We expect our findings to lead to a better
understanding of TPF-based processes for BMGs. Specifically for TPF-based sheet
fabrication, proposed work will reveal the process stability and how stability
is affected by processing parameters. Proposed research will also determine the
effects of TPF-based processing on the mechanical properties of the BMG and will
help identify suitable BMG types for roll-stretching. At the same time, our
study will provide detailed insights into commercial feasibility of BMG sheets.
Process viability will be evaluated considering processing time, process
robustness and repeatability, dimensional accuracy, surface finish, capital
investment and material cost. The identification of processing parameters and
process requirements such as temperature gradients and deformation conditions
required for a high stability which is quantified in the sheet thickness
variation will build the foundation for the design and realization of a
commercially viable roll-stretch process and apparatus. In addition, proposed
work will also enhance the theoretical understanding of roll-stretching which
lay the foundation for a predictable and quantitative model description of a new
material and processing paradigm.