* 1448206
* SBIR Phase I:  Implementation of an In Silico Antibody Engineering Environment to engineer therapeutic antibodies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Juan Almagro, GlobalBio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 172,987.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide antibody engineers with a user-
friendly computational platform to assist in the design and engineering of
therapeutic antibodies. Antibody-based drugs are becoming the treatment of
choice for diverse diseases such as multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis,
and several types of cancers. The success of therapeutic antibodies with over
forty approved or in review in the United States and Europe is due to their
exquisite specificity, high potency, stability, solubility, clinical
tolerability and relatively inexpensive manufacturing process in comparison with
other biologic drugs. Thus, with a market forecast of over $50 billion in sales
for 2015, the interest in developing faster and more efficient methods for
discovering and optimizing antibodies for therapeutic applications has been
gaining momentum. A user-friendly computational platform that generates more
predictable and robust antibody designs should significantly reduce the
attrition rate in late development, and result in significant cost savings.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes the development of an automated antibody
humanization platform. Humanization methods are key to engineering nonhuman
antibodies for human therapy, and their development has been driven by three
main goals: (1) Increase human content to minimize immunogenic reactions; (2)
preserve binding profile to retain potency and minimize costs in further
engineering processes, e.g., affinity maturation; and (3) secure intellectual
property. The proposed platform aims to maximize all three of these goals as
follows. First, knowledge-based rules will be used to select human germline
genes as framework region (FR) donors for nonhuman Complementary-Determining
Regions (CDRs) grafting. It is expected that the selected FRs preserve binding
and facilitate further development of the therapeutic antibody. Second, the CDRs
will be humanized. CDR grafting protocols typically do not modify the CDRs;
however, based on work published by the PI, it is anticipated that the number of
nonhuman residues in the CDRs can be reduced significantly without impacting
binding. If so, the final product will be indistinguishable from human
antibodies isolated from transgenic mice or phage display libraries. As proof of
concept, the biochemical and biophysical profiles of designs generated by our
computational platform will be assessed experimentally.