* 1448195
* SBIR Phase I: Silk: A New Approach to Developing a Heat-stable Rotavirus Vaccine
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Kathryn Kosuda, Vaxess Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to increase global access to vaccines
and reduce mortality associated with infectious diseases. As an example,
Rotavirus is a major cause of severe gastroenteritis among young children and
lack of vaccination results in 450,000 deaths annually. A thermostable rotavirus
vaccine would create cost-savings for vaccine manufacturers, national
governments, and non-profit vaccine buyers and enable market access in areas of
the world that lack sufficient cold-chain capacity. Successful development of a
stable rotavirus vaccine would not only have significant positive impact on
global rotavirus immunization efforts, but may also revolutionize the general
approach to vaccine delivery and distribution. This Phase I project will advance
understanding of silk-vaccine interactions, which is needed to guide formulation
development. Furthermore, insight into the immunogenicity of silk fibroin
itself, as well as the impact of silk on the immunogenicity of a vaccine
antigen, will be gained in these studies. This technology has significant
commercial potential in that it can be broadly applied to numerous emerging and
existing vaccines in the $24 Billion global market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to leverage the unique properties of silk to meet the
global need for robust, thermostable vaccines. Thermal instability is a long-
standing problem in vaccine development. Despite efforts to improve stability,
current formulation approaches do not allow product storage under ambient
conditions. Temperature excursions during shipment and storage are common and
result in wastage or administration of suboptimal vaccines. The use of silk
fibroin, a low-cost biomaterial, represents a novel approach to vaccine
stabilization. The goal of the proposed research is to demonstrate feasibility
of the silk-stabilization platform to create a rotavirus formulation that does
not require cold storage. In addition to traditional liquid and lyophilized
vaccine formats, development of a dissolvable thin film strip for oral delivery
will be investigated. The proposed research will identify lead candidate silk-
rotavirus formulations with improved thermostability and immunogenicity that is
at least equivalent to the existing commercial formulation, while offering
critical insight into broader issues of vaccine stabilization with silk.