* 1448453
* SBIR Phase I:  Georeferenced Augmented Reality for Knowledge-Based Excavator Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Suyang Dong, PERCEPTION ANALYTICS & ROBOTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from its ability
to transform excavator operation and control from a primarily skill-based
activity to a knowledge-based practice, leading to significant increases in
productivity and safety. This is turn will help realize enormous cost savings
and reduction of potential hazards to the public, improve competitiveness of
U.S. construction industry, and reduce life cycle costs of civil infrastructure.
Such benefits will also accrue in fields such as manufacturing, transportation,
mining, and ship-building where the transition from skill-based to knowledge-
based processes is of value. In the long-run, the accidental utility strike
warning capabilities of the proposed solution also have the potential to save
millions of dollars in liability and opportunity costs for customers, and avoid
disruptions to life and commerce, and prevent physical danger to workers and the
public. The societal benefit and commercial impact of the project are thus
expected to be the significant reductions in construction and underground
infrastructure costs that will be possible through safe and efficient
excavation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will translate fundamental computer-vision based motion-tracking
technology into a transformative solution for tracking an excavator end-effector
(bucket) in field conditions, and demonstrate the capability to meet target
market performance demands. Excavation is a quintessential construction activity
where every operator faces two major problems: 1) The need to maintain precise
grade control; and 2) The need to avoid accidental utility strikes. This project
will overcome these pain points and present operators with a visualization of
excavation job plans, target grade profiles, and the evolving grade profile in
real-time using augmented reality, allowing operators to achieve target grades
with high precision, improved productivity, and safety. The disruptive
innovation is the use of inexpensive computer-vision based tracking to: 1) track
the position of an excavator bucket in a local coordinate system; and 2) track
the position of a cabin-mounted camera in the same coordinate system to
visualize buried utility locations in augmented reality. Extensive field testing
has demonstrated that this technology tracks markers relative to a camera with
an uncertainty of less than one inch, offering significant advantages over
current global positioning system based methods that are expensive and
unreliable for the pursued application.