* 1448214
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Resolution Shop Floor Video-Rate Surface Metrology System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Brad Kimbrough, 4 D Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,902.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will perform the
critical research that ultimately leads to a robust, hand-held, video-rate
surface metrology system to bridge a critical existing metrology gap for
precision-machined surfaces. The broader impact of this project will be to
improve yield, performance, safety, and lifetime of components in a wide range
of critical U.S. industries including automotive, aerospace, and medical
devices. For example, minor surface imperfections on edges or in other critical
areas can have a dramatic effect on performance of components such as turbine
blades, cutting tools, or other high-stress elements. In the turbine industry,
during maintenance inspections, wear scars or corrosion pits that can lead to
catastrophic failures must be quantified to ensure only necessary repairs and
replacements are performed; current inspection technologies lead to high
rejection rates of good parts since lack of good quantification necessitates
conservatism in part rejection. This high-precision, portable, shop-floor gage
will greatly enhance quantification of such features, leading to enhanced
competitiveness across multiple critical U.S. manufacturing industries that
employ a wide range of processing technologies. The total available market for
such an instrument is estimated to be greater than $45 million annually in the
initially identified application spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is the demonstration of a novel instantaneous whole-field
optical method for measuring rough surfaces with micron resolution and
centimeter field of view. Instantaneous whole-field acquisition enables high-
resolution measurements to be made in environments not possible with current
technology. Benefits of this technology range from increased manufacturing
capability in aerospace (for example, production of turbine blades with improved
efficiency), to fields such as medical imaging where motion and vibration are
intrinsic. The research objectives for this program are to develop and/or
demonstrate feasibility of several key components: an efficient method of
generating polarization-based fringe patterns to enable instantaneous
measurement, a state-of-the-art light source, compact optics capable of high-
efficiency illumination and large-area imaging, and robust data processing
techniques. Extensive modeling and experimentation will be combined to ensure
success of each of the technical objectives. Once key components are developed,
a breadboard system will be built and comprehensively tested against a variety
of critical metrology goals. At the end of this Phase I effort, the anticipated
outcome will be a working breadboard capable of vibration-immune, three-
dimensional surface metrology with micron-level lateral and vertical resolution,
applicable to a wide range of precision machined surfaces.