* 1448752
* SBIR Phase I:  Wearable sleep monitor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Maria Merchant, Somnarus Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is a research and
development effort to create a platform technology for wearable sleep monitoring
devices. Currently, there is no miniaturized, user-friendly skin-worn sleep
monitor that combines measurements of the key biomedical parameters necessary
for identifying causes of sleep deprivation. Sleep deprivation is of epidemic
proportions and has several main causes. Sleep apnea stands out as the most
common and often undetected cause. Millions of Americans are sleep deprived and
at risk of sleep apnea with most of them remaining unaware of their condition
and suffering the health, productivity and quality of life consequences. A
successful completion of this project will aim to help to provide diagnoses for
this group, allowing them to seek treatment. The introduction of this new device
will also broaden the utility of clinical sleep monitors. The low projected cost
of this sleep monitor will drive down up-front costs, while the wider use of
sleep monitors will reduce the healthcare expenditure associated with the
treatment of disorders stemming from sleep deprivation and sleep apnea. The
commercial potential for this platform technology is significant with the total
potential market estimated at several billion dollars.

The feasibility of the proposed diagnostic method for sleep monitoring has been
recently proven, and this project aims to implement this method for a platform
technology which can be used for a range of miniature skin-worn sleep monitoring
products both for consumers and healthcare professionals. The sleep monitoring
technology developed during this project will be a combination of the company's
achievements in the area of sleep diagnostics and the best technologies and
materials available for wearable devices. The proposed device includes new and
powerful types of sensors which are not found in competing devices, and which
promise improved performance. The specific objectives of this project are to
integrate the latest electronic components and the most advanced materials with
our proprietary method and to achieve a robust and reliable design. This project
will explore the use of the latest battery technologies, advanced miniature
flexible circuit board manufacturing processes and the latest plastic materials
to create a design that expands the application of wearable devices and sleep
monitors. A successful completion will lead to the development of a cutting-edge
sleep monitoring technology that will serve as a tool for assessing cause of
sleep deprivation in general and sleep apnea, in particular.