* 1448898
* STTR Phase I:  Data-Driven Decision Support Services for Emergency Department Operations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Joseph Tyndall, Roundtable Analytics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is very significant. Suboptimal operational
decision-making in emergency departments leads to inefficiencies that result in
extreme patient wait-times, the diversion of ambulances to other emergency
departments, wasted resources and patients who either leave before being treated
or against medical advice. By connecting modern analytical approaches, including
statistical modeling and systems engineering methods, to real-time data
routinely collected in emergency departments, the proposed project promises to
result in a tremendously valuable analytics platform that will assist emergency
departments in making dozens of operational and staffing decisions each day.
This informed decision-making will not only improve emergency department
efficiency, it will lead to both healthier and more satisfied patients and
simultaneous dramatic increases in revenue and profit. The technology proposed
will have the potential to add significant value to the approximately 5,000
emergency departments in the U.S., often on the order of millions of dollars
annually. Hospitals and health systems now realize the value of effective
analytics, and the analytics platform proposed here will be an obvious
investment for any emergency department whose goal is to provide the best care
to its patients at lower costs.

The proposed project promises to yield a decision-support platform upon which
emergency departments will base their decisions each day. Substantial
investments by hospitals and health systems on information technology, and in
particular, electronic health records, have set the stage for evidence-based,
data-driven decisions. These decisions will effectively leverage real-time data
along with analytical methods such as statistical forecasting and event-
simulation modeling. In particular, this proposed project will create a software
platform, based on these analytical methods and linking to real-time data
sources, tailored to emergency departments. This project will involve 1)
understanding the capacity and real-time availability of data in emergency
rooms, 2) developing a statistical and simulation modeling platform that
maximizes the potential of these data, in real-time, and specifically reflects
emergency departments, and 3) ultimately ensuring that actionable insights are
delivered in a timely and intuitive manner to key stakeholders. These actionable
insights that derive from the data and sophisticated methods must be delivered
to the right decision-maker at the right time and in the right format, but will
then have the capacity to substantially improve both the quality and efficiency
of care-delivery in an emergency department.