* 1448550
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable, Image-Guided, Robotic Device for Fully Automated Venipuncture
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* TIM MAGUIRE, VascuLogic LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,430.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to greatly improve the accuracy, speed, and
safety of blood draws and IV insertions by introducing a portable, fully-
automated venipuncture device. Venipuncture is the most frequently performed
invasive clinical routine in the United States (U.S.), occurring over 1 billion
times per year, yet the success rate of manual phlebotomy depends heavily on the
patient?s physiology and the practitioner?s skill. Failure rates, which can
exceed 50% in difficult populations, may lead to a wide range of complications
including injury to the patient and an increased risk of blood borne
transfection to the practitioner. Consequently, failed venipuncture is the most
common cause of patient and practitioner complications in the U.S., and incurs
nearly $5 billion in material, time, and labor costs to the U.S. healthcare
system each year. The current research aims to address these challenges by
developing the automated venipuncture device to ensure rapid, single-stick
venous access across all patient demographics. The research furthermore enhances
scientific and technological understanding by demonstrating a first step in the
miniaturization and automation of precision robotic systems for routine clinical
interventions.

The proposed project will substantially increase the accuracy and safety of the
automated venipuncture device, while validating the device in animals as a step
toward clinical translation. The technology combines three-dimensional (3D) near
infrared and ultrasound imaging, real-time image analysis software, and a
miniaturized seven degrees-of-freedom robot that steers the needle based on
image feedback. The system operates by mapping in real-time the 3D spatial
coordinates of subcutaneous veins in order to autonomously direct the needle
into a selected vein. By automating the phlebotomy procedure, the device would
offer tremendous value to the medical field by providing healthcare
professionals the ability to draw blood and start IV lines across all patient
demographics with unparalleled accuracy and efficiency. In this way, the device
would drastically reduce the number of needle placement attempts compared to
manual phlebotomy. The device would also improve clinical safety by removing the
practitioner from contact with exposed sharps, thus eliminating the risk of
bloodborne infections. Once commercialized, the device has the potential to
impact areas including pediatric and geriatric use, diagnostic laboratory blood
testing, and emergency care.