* 1448213
* US/UK Joint Workshop on Social and Behavioral Epigenetics
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Connie Mulligan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2016
* USD 48,940.00

Epigenetics (literally, "above the gene") is a field of science which studies
stable alterations in gene expression which occur through modifications which do
not alter the sequence composition of DNA, yet which produce stable alterations
in phenotypes (the physical expression of the genome). There is growing evidence
that these epigenetic factors are responsive to environmental exposures both
pre- and post-natally in animals, including humans; very importantly, these
factors influencing gene expression include aspects of the social and behavioral
environments. Factors such as varying aspects of the nurturing environment for
infants and young children, socioeconomic circumstances, degrees and forms of
stress experienced by individuals, and substance abuse, for example, are
implicated in long-lasting biological and behavioral effects which may be
mediated by epigenetic mechanisms - and these effects may not only persist into
and throughout adulthood, but some may transcend generations, the effects being
seen in offspring and grand-offspring of impacted individuals. As these social,
behavioral, and psychological environmental influences on the epigenetic
programming of biological and behavioral functioning can substantially impact
human well-being and resilience, the science constituting the field of social
and behavioral epigenetics is critically important. The societal benefits of the
research in the field potentially will extend to impacts in areas such as human
development and aging; memory, cognition, neuropsychology, stress, and learning;
nutrition and nutritional issues such as obesity; substance abuse; violence;
human biological functioning/variation and its adaptive/evolutionary
significance; adaptation/maladaptation to rapid social and environmental change;
and 'downstream' impacts on human health.

The complexity of the science, including the need to integrate fields of social
science, as well as those sciences with aspects of the biological sciences,
supports the need for synthesis of a research agenda that can most effectively
advance the field, including both short- and long-term goals. This workshop is
specifically designed to develop this agenda and thereby guide the targeting and
the breadth of funding required to advance social and behavioral epigenetic
research. The international scope of the workshop - bringing together the most
active and influential members of the US and UK research communities developing
this science of global interest and importance - also will provide opportunity
to compare perspectives, approaches, and resources which can be leveraged to
move the field forward.