* 1448986
* STTR Phase I:  Next-Generation Microbial Fuel Cell for Highly Efficient Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Hong Liu, Waste2Watergy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project, if successful, will be to advance the development of a
novel microbial fuel cell (MFC) system that generates energy from the
wastewaters being treated and that could significantly benefit wastewater
treatment for a range of key industries. If successfully developed, the
company's new MFC technology is expected to offer significant economic/technical
advantages for these companies by reducing their disposal costs and waste
volumes, reducing the footprint of treatment facilities, and helping them to
adopt a more-sustainable process for wastewater treatment. Treatment of organic-
rich wastewater is energy-intensive, consuming 15 GigaWatts (GW) or 3% of all
electrical power produced in the United States. However, this water contains
roughly 17 GW of potential energy. Capturing a portion of this energy through
MFC technology would favorably reduce wastewater treatment energy requirements
leading to a more economical treatment process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this Phase I research project are to demonstrate the scalability
of the company's proprietary, low-cost MFC cathode material, its long-term
performance, and the feasibility of the company's MFC design to effectively
clean beverage wastewater. The need to maintain MFC reactor performance during
scale-up and to reduce cathode cost is a major technical challenge for using MFC
for wastewater treatment. The successful completion of the proposed research
will result in the translation of the laboratory cathode fabrication recipe to a
larger-scale manufacturing procedure. Integration of the low-cost cathode
material and the unique MFC modular design is expected to provide breakthrough
performance and cost that will enable the broad-based economically viable and
modular commercial deployment of an MFC wastewater treatment process.