* 1448717
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Microwave Based Plasma System for Analytical Atomic Spectrometry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Jovan Jevtic, Radom Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 177,957.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will generate crucial
analytical spectroscopy data and analytical instrument optimization required for
the successful commercialization of an innovative microwave-induced plasma (MIP)
technology for atomic spectroscopy analysis. This technology promises to have a
significant impact on trace elemental analysis by providing a low-cost,
portable, widely-applicable alternative to the current standard inductively
coupled plasma (ICP). With portable technology now approaching 30% market share,
the $4 billion global atomic spectroscopy market is poised to undergo a major
change. The proposed MIP innovation will continue to drive the growth of this
market by providing the first portable solution with analytical performance
approaching that of a tabletop unit. The new level of flexibility will allow
trace elemental analysis in applications and locations where it would not have
been previously considered. The societal impact of this differentiating
technology empowers end users, rather than large laboratories, with a means to
quantify their environmental footprint through the analytical measurement and
in-situ monitoring of low level of metals in samples. The ongoing introduction
of new and stricter environmental and safety regulations in most developed and
developing nations will ensure that this market need will only grow over time.

The intellectual merit of this project derives from an innovative,
multidisciplinary, and collaborative approach to a long standing technical
challenge of creating a purely inductive plasma at microwave frequencies.
Materials science, electromagnetic fields, plasma physics, and analytical
chemistry all play an important role in the proposed solution where a copper
coil is replaced by a ring made of advanced technical ceramic. The ceramic
material, an almost perfect insulator at low frequencies, is a nearly ideal
medium for microwave dielectric polarization currents. These currents generate a
pure inductive field in MIP, leading to an ICP-like plasma at microwave
frequencies, where lower losses, cost, size, and power requirements make the
portability possible. The resulting toroidal plasma exhibits robustness to
sample loading and analytical zones directly comparable to standard ICP. The
proposed project includes the development, characterization, and optimization of
the new MIP in a collaboration between a small business and a renowned academic
institution. The research is expected to generate reliable MIP performance
metrics for trace elemental analysis and to assess the susceptibility of MIP to
interferences or matrix effects in order to validate the proposed commercial
positioning for a portable MIP optical emission spectrometer product.