* 1448665
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Performance Self-Cleaning, Anti-Reflective Coating for Photovoltaic Glass
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Corey Thompson, WattGlass LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce the cost of solar generated
electricity by increasing the efficiency of panels and reducing cleaning and
maintenance costs. This improvement is created using a multi-functional,
nanoscale glass coating that increases the transmittance of solar photovoltaic
glass and creates a surface that is antifogging and self-cleaning. Current anti-
reflective coated glass has seen market penetration of only 25%, indicating a
need for a top-performing, cheap, high-throughput coating. The implementation of
this coating increase power output and reduce cost per watt. These savings
increase with photovoltaic device efficiencies as well, so as the next
generation of solar cells will see even greater benefit from the proposed
innovation. Reducing the cost per watt of solar generated electricity is one of
the grand energy challenges and has immense societal and governmental impacts.
The proposed project is one component of addressing that challenge.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project investigates the
utilization of thermal and chemical processes to increase the durability of a
anti-reflective solar glass coating. Nanoparticle-based antireflective glass
coatings have been presented in both the scientific literature and commercial
products. However, the only coatings with durability suitable for solar
applications suffer from low performance. In this project, methods to increase
the durability of a low-cost, high-performance nanoparticle coating through
chemical and thermal processing are explored. The effect of chemical and thermal
processing on the durability and reliability will be measured using a battery of
industry standard tests. The failure mechanisms for these coatings will be
investigated to further guide process optimization. A solar panel will then be
assembled using the coated glass and benchmarked against an identical panel with
uncoated glass. The expected outcome of this work is a solar panel that passes
all standard reliability tests and demonstrates a significant increase in power
output over a non-coated panel.