* 1448964
* STTR Phase I:  Innovative Wearable Technology to Facilitate Cognitive Learning Transference
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Dan Kollmann, Koronis Biomedical Technologies Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
neurocognitive training device for the education market which targets executive
function (EF) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and their
impact on learning disabilities, reading comprehension and academic success. As
many as one out of every five people in the United States has a learning
disability (LD) and the cost of educating a student with a LD is 1.6 times the
expenditure for a general education student. Thirty-five percent of students
with learning disabilities drop out of high school, which is twice the rate of
students without LD. This STTR project will benefit children with learning
disabilities through development of a device to train cognitive ability. In a
broader sense, the technology could also be used to aid adults that have a
learning disability. The commercial outcome of the proposed STTR project leads
to a marketable product used initially in the context of school or during other
real-world activities to improve outcomes for children with a LD resulting in
lower overall education costs and higher productivity as an
adult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop an
untethered neurofeedback system enabling students to apply neurocognitive
training within multiple environments including during school and while at home
studying. A key innovation of the proposed work is decoupling of the
neurofeedback system from conventional computerized interfaces which enables
neurocognitive training during real-world activities. It is hypothesized that
this approach will lead to improved transference of the training to new
scenarios rather than only working for a specific training task. To accomplish
this, an alternative wearable based solution will be developed that signals
real-time cognitive status to the user through visual feedback enabling them to
train their cognitive ability. This phase I project will develop a prototype
system capable of real-time electroencephalography (EEG) measurement and
classification which provides feedback to the user through wearable eyeglasses.
The feasibility will be demonstrated during a neurofeedback training pilot
study.