* 1448720
* SBIR Phase I:  Second Skin: 3D Microfluidics-Enabled Fabric for Perspiration Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Siyuan Xing, Atacama, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2015
* USD 149,440.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes the development of a next-generation
high-performance fabric for removing and managing perspiration on human body
using 3D microfluidics. The development of this project enables highly
breathable, lightweight, and never-saturated apparels and fabric products
targeted at controlled moisture management in a wide range of real-world
applications. In the foreseeable future, it can be applied to sports apparel for
professional athletes and intensive exercises, high-humidity protective clothing
for warehouse workers, and special garments for extreme working conditions
(e.g., astronauts, firefighters, soldiers, and miners), contributing to both
performance and safety aspects. Importantly, the 3D microfluidics-enabled fabric
can be manufactured at a reasonable cost and sold for a competitive price in the
high-performance apparel market with enormous advantages over the existing
products, where the gross profit can be at least
50%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at solving the
current problems of moisture-management fabric which utilizes the long-standing
principle of capillary absorption and performs poorly during heavy perspiration.
The saturation of the fabric by moisture lead to uncomfortableness, overheat and
fatigue of body in intensive physical activities. The proposed 3D microfluidic
fabric solves this problem by rapidly directing and removing the sweat from skin
to desired locations using embedded microchannels, while maintaining the rest
area dry and gas-permeable. Research will be conducted on the industrial
scalable manufacture of this fabric, characterization of its performance in
heavy perspiration management compared with conventional products and wear
trials for validation on human body. A functional manufacturing-ready prototype
of the 3D microfluidic-enabled fabric that is more vapor permeable, lightweight,
dry and comfortable under heavy perspiration is expected upon the completion of
Phase I.