* 1448270
* EAGER: Control and mitigation of frost formation using mixed hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Amy Betz, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 88,332.00

1448270&lt;br/&gt;Betz, Kansas State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
formation of frost and ice can have severe consequences on aircraft safety and
reliability, and wind turbine power production. Over a fifteen year period, 20
of 74 control loss airplane crashes were due to icing on aircraft wings.
Additionally, the Environmental Protection Agency estimates that deicing costs
US airports approximately $500,000,000 each year. Surfaces that eliminate or
reduce the amount of ice formed on airplane wings and control surfaces could
make aviation safer and less expensive. This work explores a technique using
hydrophobic (water-repellant) and hydrophilic (water-loving) coatings to change
surface properties and prevent the formation of ice. Already, it has been shown
that these hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces delay surface freezing by twenty
times that of normal, metal surfaces. It is necessary to better understand why
this works in order to make even better surfaces which resist icing. Since frost
formation is a common experience for people living in cooler climates, it is an
excellent project for K-12 activities. This work includes educational outreach
efforts with the Multicultural Engineering Program at Kansas State University,
in outreach programs for underrepresented groups in middle school, high school,
and undergraduate students, as well creating demonstrations and labs at the
Kansas Children's Discovery Center for children ages 5-9.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, most research in frost mitigation is focused on
superhydrophobic surfaces which can decrease the temperature required for frost
formation and increase the required freezing time. However, the mitigation
effects of these surfaces can be extremely sensitive to experimental conditions
and surface structure. The objective of this work is to investigate the
potential of surfaces with mixed hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions to mitigate
and control frost formation. On a mixed wettability surface, frost will
preferentially form on hydrophilic areas, due to the lower energy barrier
required for nucleation. Therefore, by selectively patterning a surface with
various wettabilities, the size, shape, and location of frost nucleation can be
controlled. The hypothesis is that controlling frost nucleation will not only
affect the nucleation temperature and freezing time but also the density, growth
rate, and structure of frost. Surfaces will be tested under varying quiescent
and flow conditions using environmental chambers at Kansas State University. The
surface will be cooled with a Peltier cooler. A confocal microscope will be used
to obtain 3-D images, with 1 micron resolution, of frost nucleation and growth.
The results obtained will lead to the formulation of relationships to predict
the frost formation behavior as a function of the hydrophilic spot size and
orientation. These relationships will be used to update models for designing
more sophisticated frost mitigating surfaces. Additionally, preliminary results
have shown that surfaces with mixed wettability significantly increase the time
required for condensed droplets to freeze on the surface compared to a
hydrophobic surfaces. This may be due to the hydrophobic/hydrophilic interface
changing the orientation of water molecules near the surface, requiring the
input of additional energy to reorient the molecules into the desired
crystalline structure. This work will also investigate surface with an
increasing the number and length of contact lines to determine the effect on
freezing time.