* 1448563
* SBIR Phase I:  Comprehensive Metrology and Control of MEMS
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Jason Clark, Sugarcube Systems
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will establish the
ability to measure key properties in the MEMS fabrication process to help MEMS
foundries and designers build more accurate sensors while shortening the design
cycle and will establish that electrically probed self-calibration has the
potential to replace the current costly and cumbersome physical calibration
approach. Calibration of MEMS devices currently comprises over 20% of the
manufacturing cost structure and has been steadily increasing over time. In
higher performance devices, it can be 80% of the manufacturing cost. Successful
demonstration of self-calibration methods, with accuracy equal to, or greater
than, traditional physical calibration methods will not only enable the industry
to eliminate this rapidly-growing cost driver, but could also enable a new era
of performance-on-demand MEMS devices by that dynamically alter the device?s
effective parameters and properties using electrical signals to adjust the
values measured in the self-calibration process.

The intellectual merit of this project centers on the development of an
electronic means to calibrate MEMS devices. This mew method will deliver equal
or greater accuracy as compared with traditional costly, cumbersome physical
means that are constraining the MEMS industry. The research will take
measurements on many "self-calibrating" MEMS devices fabricated across multiple
MEMS processes, from multiple foundries and multiple runs to provide a robust
data set to provide new process information using self-calibration and also to
establish comparative results (both technical and economics) results with
traditional calibration approaches. If successful, this could usher in a
completely new paradigm in MEMS design and production by relaxing the physical
calibration constraints and potentially enabling an entirely new class of
performance on demand MEMS devices.