* 1448913
* RAPID: Testing the rocky intertidal community consequences of the decimation of purple sea star populations along the Oregon coast by sea star wasting disease
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Bruce Menge, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2016
* USD 74,995.00

This study will investigate the ecological consequences of the decimation of sea
star populations by wasting disease along the Oregon coast. Hallmarks of wasting
disease are the formation of sores on the sea star that progress to cause loss
of arms, and ultimately death of the animal. Wasting disease was reported in sea
star populations including those of the purple sea star, Pisaster ochraceus, in
British Columbia, Washington, and California as early as April 2013. In Oregon,
wasting was first observed in April 2014, and by June 2014 rates of infection
ranged up to 80%, and sea star abundance had declined. At that rate, many
populations may disappear by the end of summer 2014. Prior research has shown
that in the absence of the purple sea star, mid-shore mussel populations
increase, and ultimately overgrow the sea weeds and invertebrates that occur low
on the shore, reducing biodiversity. However, because disease events of this
magnitude have never occurred along the entire coastline, it is unclear if the
small-scale expansion of mussels observed previously will be a general result of
this event. One possibility is that predators unaffected by wasting, such as
whelks and crabs, will increase their predation effects and blunt the expected
invasion of mussels to the low shore. The research in this project will evaluate
this possibility by testing the role of these alternative predators. Broader
Impacts include the training of undergraduate and graduate students, the
involvement of coastal residents and the production of microdocumentaries and
video to document the changing context of this ecosystem.

The research project is designed to test three hypotheses. First, that in the
absence of Pisaster ochraceus, predation by whelks will increase in strength
through increases in whelk abundance and in whelk size, and at least partially
compensate for the absence of Pisaster. Second, the small sea star Leptasterias
spp. will also expand its role as a predator through increased size and
abundance, and expansion of its habitat beyond mussel beds. Although individuals
of this sea star have been observed to suffer from wasting as well, the
frequency so far appears low, and it seems likely this species may persist.
Third, the crab Cancer productus, normally mostly a subtidal species, will
expand its range into the intertidal and help to compensate for the loss of
Pisaster. Tests of these hypotheses will include manual removal experiments
(whelk removal, Leptasterias removal, removal of both and of neither), cage
exclusion experiments (whelk exclusions), cage inclusion-exclusion experiments
(Leptasterias inclusion, Leptasterias exclusion). Experiments will be replicated
with appropriate controls, and done at multiple sites on the central Oregon
coast that vary naturally in population abundances, rates of prey and predator
recruitment, and oceanographic conditions. Results obtained under this
unprecedented set of circumstances will deepen and expand our empirical
understanding of the dynamics of an iconic ecosystem, and will help parameterize
community models.