* 1448727
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Dual Energy Micro-focused X-ray Excitation Beam for Chemical Analysis and Materials Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* Wenbing Yun, Sigray
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,880.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development of a system for generating microfocus x-ray excitation beams for
X-ray fluorescence (micro-XRF) analysis applications. The resulting instrument
will create dual-energy x-rays with high flux in a narrow energy band. Micro-XRF
is a powerful, non-destructive, and widely used technique for the determination
of elemental composition and elemental mapping, which relies on the measurement
of characteristic fluorescent x-rays generated when atoms are excited by x-rays,
electrons or other ionizing particles. This method is used in a broad range of
applications including mining, semiconductor, forensics, materials research, and
even biological research. The project will enable development of Micro-XRF
systems with substantially improved elemental detection sensitivity over a large
range of atomic numbers (Z) and with higher spatial resolution. The proposed
product is expected to significantly impact more than half of the current $900
million x-ray fluorescence market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project is the development of a coaxial dual mirror system which will
focus two x-ray beams of different energies onto the sample at high spatial
resolution and high flux, enabling a substantial improvement in spatial
resolution and enhancing the compositional spot analysis and mapping
capabilities of micro X-ray fluorescence analysis (micro-XRF) applications. The
proposed project will result in three major advantages for users of micro-XRF:
1) high analytical sensitivity to both low- and high-atomic number elements by
the utilization of two x-ray energy ranges, 2) high x-ray flux due to improved
optical design, and 3) a longer working distance which will add flexibility and
ease integration of the new device into existing equipment.