* 1449784
* EAGER PROPOSAL: IceTrendr: An Automated Visualization and Analysis Tool for Mapping Changes in Glacier Extent from Landsat
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Anne Nolin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 179,329.00

Glaciers represent key elements of the cryosphere and of the polar regions.
Remote sensing data can provide information over large areas and in those
regions where it is difficult (if not impossible) to access. In particular,
remote sensing tools are potentially capable of map glacier changes worldwide in
a consistent way and through publicly available data sets. The proposed project
aims at developing a web-based system in which remote sensing data collected for
more than 30 years will be used to estimate properties and characteristics of
glaciers through the bridging of computer science and glaciology expertise.
Users of the system will be either experts in glaciology or remote sensing, and
students or educated citizens interested in exploring glacier changes through
remote sensing tools. The outcomes of the project will benefit society in view
of the impact of glaciers on water reources management, their impact on the
hydrological cycle and the potential contribution to sea level rise and will
provide an open tool for glaciologists, climate scientists, and educators. The
project will produce and test a prototype web-based system called ?IceTrendr?
that would mine and exploit the Landsat Thematic Mapper satellite image archive
(1984-present) to map and analyze changing Arctic glaciers. The proposed
IceTrendr is an automated Big Data mining toolset for Landsat imagery that
captures, labels, and maps glacier change for use in climate science, hydrology,
and Earth science education. A pilot study will be conducted to address the
various challenges, looking at five glaciers in North America: Wolverine,
Gulkana, and Bering Glaciers in Alaska; South Cascade Glacier, Washington; and
White Glacier on Axel Heiberg Island, Canada. Products will include maps of
glacier extent and terminus position from 1984-2012, glacier change
characteristics, time series animations, and a web interface for interpreting
specific types of glacier change (slow melt, abrupt melt, surging, etc.). The
PIs will work in partnership with middle and high school teachers who will
explore and test the IceTrendr system and who will also use IceTrendr to develop
computer-based Earth science lessons for their classrooms and beyond.