* 1449620
* A Multinomial Process Model of Moral Judgment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Bertram Gawronski, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 335,602.00

For centuries, societies have wrestled with the question of how to balance the
rights of the individual versus the greater good (for example, protection of
civil rights versus protection from terrorist attacks). Many currently pressing
debates in our society and urgent challenges have such issues at their root. To
act (or omit acting) in order to protect the individual rights of one person,
independent of any consideration of the broader context or broader consequences,
abides by the moral principle of deontology. On the other hand when the well-
being of a large number of people will be harmed as a result of those decisions
it creates a dilemma, as this violates a moral principle of utilitarianism.
Because both moral principles are intuitively plausible, they can lead to
psychological conflicts within individuals and ideological conflicts in society
when the two principles suggest different conclusions in a particular situation.
To provide a basis for the resolution of such conflicts, the proposed research
will examine the psychological processes underlying people's responses to moral
dilemmas, their situational and individual determinants, and their effects on
moral behavior in different contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the study
aims, the project will test and utilize a newly developed mathematical model
that quantifies the unique contributions of three components that determine
people's responses to moral dilemmas. Two are deontology and utilitarianism; the
third is people's general tendencies toward action and inaction. In a series of
14 studies, the researcher will examine the contribution of cognitive and
emotional processes to moral dilemma responses, the role of neuroendocrine
factors in shaping moral decisions, and downstream effects of these processes on
morally relevant behavior such as cheating and helping. By offering fine-grained
measurements of the components, the proposed studies will provide deeper
insights into the psychological processes underlying moral judgments and
valuable practical implications for the resolution of moral controversies in
society. In addition to illuminating the causes and consequences of moral
judgments, the findings of this project will contribute to the scientific
understanding of human action by identifying the conditions under which moral
thoughts and feelings do and do not result in corresponding moral actions. The
project also makes a valuable contribution to the development of research
infrastructure by offering a novel tool for detailed analyses of moral judgments
that will be freely available to other researchers.