* 1449188
* SAVI: Collaborative Research: Fostering New Collaborations in Open Online Community Data Research: Prototyping an Open Collaboration Data Factory
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Brian Butler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 104,996.00

Open online communities (OOC), such as Wikipedia or free and open source
software (FOSS) development projects, have emerged as significant drivers of
innovation, economic activity and social well-being. OOCs play important roles
in a wide variety of areas, such as software development, knowledge management,
education, health and scientific discovery. With support from both American and
international funding agencies, scholars from diverse disciplines, including
computer science, sociology, mathematics, economics, physics, anthropology,
organization science and communications, have been studying OOCs to build
disciplinary understanding. However, differences in data and method impede the
development of coherent understandings across disciplines. The study of OOCs is
nascent, and as yet not much attention has been paid to the development of
principles and systems for sharing data and detailed methodological approaches.
These gaps limit scientific progress around OOCs even as they are increasing in
importance for organizing and accomplishing work. The goal of this Science
Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) project is to build an international inter-
disciplinary community of scholars who can collaborate to overcome disciplinary
differences in research aims, data and method. The supported collaboration will
enable synthesis of OOC research, which in turn will increase the coherence of
scientific and public knowledge across disciplines that study OOCs, making OCCs
more productive and effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design is based
on the principle that research collaborations among scholars from multiple
disciplines are more likely to develop from actively engaging potential
collaborators in a shared activity, rather than simply getting them together in
a room to talk. Accordingly, the project will involve participants in a series
of working groups, workshops and hackathons focused on the activity of
specifying, designing and prototyping an ?Open Collaboration Data Factory?
(OCDF). The long-term vision for the OCDF includes a common set of easily
accessible and replicable research datasets, and tools and processes that
support research addressing the challenges of OOC systems, such as workflow
tools to encourage creation of high-quality datasets; practice guidelines to
facilitate consistent application of common research methods; documented
research and resource exemplars to support coherent mapping of theory, data-
based measures and available analytic tools; and ethical and privacy guidelines
for processing OOC data. The SAVI funds will support coordination work, meetings
and collocated prototyping among OOC researchers from diverse disciplines in the
USA and Europe to build community through taking the initial steps towards this
vision. The project will also include an initial phase inventorying research
communities and research questions to in order to identify, characterize and
annotate available datasets and software tools and identify strategies for
increasing compatibility between them. All products and outcomes of the project
will be made available under open licenses to further promote the
reproducibility of studies and methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is designated
as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and is co-funded by NSF's
Office of International and Integrative Activities.