* 1449828
* NRT-DESE:  Graduate Training in Data-Enabled Research into Human Behavior and its Cognitive and Neural Mechanisms
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ehsan Hoque, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,965,341.00

Understanding the cognitive and neural basis of human behavior is one of the
most fundamental areas of scientific inquiry for the 21st Century. It will
impact almost every facet of human existence, including commerce, education,
health care, and national security, as well as basic science. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award prepares Ph.D. students at
the University of Rochester to advance discoveries at the intersection of
computer science, brain and cognitive sciences, and neuroscience. Trainees will
be prepared to harness the burgeoning power of data science to make novel
inroads into understanding the neural foundations of human behavior. Trainees
will learn to be equally comfortable applying these skills in industrial and
academic settings. By emphasizing both practical applications and basic science,
this program will prepare trainees to develop research solutions relevant to
today?s societal needs as well as develop research approaches of critical
importance to future needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on understanding the
nature of intelligence, this program will provide students with skills to blend
expertise in data science and computer science with a deep understanding of
experimental approaches to collecting and analyzing neural and behavioral data.
The program will use theories and methods from data science including machine
learning and statistics to provide students with a foundation for theory
development, computational modeling, and data analysis. This foundation will
serve as a conceptual and methodological framework unifying their studies of
artificial and biological intelligence. The hands-on, project-oriented nature of
this program will provide students with the capabilities needed to
conceptualize, design, and implement large-scale research projects from
beginning to end. This traineeship provides a novel model for structuring
interdisciplinary education, based on a modular cross-training course followed
by an interdisciplinary practicum course, which can be replicated in many fields
and universities.