* 1449155
* EAGER: Toward Ethical Intelligent Autonomous Systems, A Case-Supported Principle-Based Behavior Paradigm
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Michael Anderson, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 241,193.00

Intelligent autonomous systems (IAMs) are on the verge of being widely deployed
in domains in which they will interact closely with people (e.g., personal
assistance, healthcare, driverless cars, search and rescue), and they will be
expected to navigate this ethically-charged landscape responsibly. As correct
ethical behavior not only involves not doing certain things, but also doing
certain things to bring about an ideal state of affairs, ethical issues
concerning the behavior of IAMs are likely to elude simple, static solutions and
exceed the grasp of their designers. The PI argues that the behavior of such
systems should be guided by explicit ethical principles abstracted from
particular cases where a consensus of ethicists exists. Laying the foundations
for such technology is the focus of this exploratory research. Project outcomes
will help alleviate concerns with intelligent autonomous systems, since the
behavior of such systems guided by ethical principles is likely to be more
acceptable in real-world environments than that of such systems without this
dimension. Indeed, ethical intelligent autonomous systems capable of functioning
with more autonomy might be permitted to assist human beings in a wider range of
domains. The PI expects that an important byproduct of this work is that a more
thorough understanding of the ethical theory involved is likely to result, as it
is made concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To ensure correct ethical behavior, IAMs
should weigh alternative possible actions against each other to determine which
is ethically preferable at any given moment. The PI will leverage his previous
research in developing and deploying principles that weigh the ethical
preference of actions, and justify action choices for autonomous systems across
multiple domains, to develop a paradigm of case-supported principle-based
behavior (CPB) in which intensionally defined ethical action preference is
abstracted from particular cases of ethical dilemmas and used to order ethically
significant actions. The PI will refine and codify CPB using the domain of
eldercare robots as a test bed by, first employing a virtual component based
upon simulation and then reifying this simulation in a laboratory setting. In
particular, the PI will define a comprehensive set of ethically significant
actions for an eldercare robot. He will then develop and validate via an Ethical
Turing Test an ethical principle that can be used to order this set by ethical
preferences, and use this principle to guide the behavior of a simulated
Unbounded Robotics UBR-1 robot with this set of behaviors situated in a Gazebo
simulation of an assisted-living facility. He will next reify this simulation
with an actual UBR-1 robot in a laboratory setting. Finally, he will refine and
codify the requirements, methods, implementation specifics, and testing aspects
of the case-supported principle-based behavior paradigm. Besides developing and
implementing a general methodology for ensuring ethical behavior in intelligent
autonomous systems, this research will provide evidence that ethical principles
and decision-making can be computed and function effectively in domains where
machines are likely to interact with human beings.