* 1449636
* SHF: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Mapping Software Analysis Problems to Efficient and Accurate Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Elena Sherman, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2016
* USD 75,001.00

Techniques for finding faults in software systems, such as crashes, security
vulnerabilities, and deadlocks, have become increasingly powerful over the past
two decades. This is due in no small part to the development of efficient
automated satisfiability solvers. The interest in applying these solvers to an
ever wider class of software analysis applications has pushed solvers to their
limits. As a result, analysis developers are currently forced to approximate
analysis?s queries to make use of existing solvers. Because of this software
analyses can mistakenly diagnose an error, miss reporting a true error, and
suffer unnecessarily poor performance. This research seeks to establish accuracy
as an important missing dimension of solver support and its success will lead to
broader and more cost-effective use of solvers to produce high-quality software.

This project is the first to systematically explore and link the accuracy
requirements of a software analysis to the accuracy provided by a solver. This
project does this by exploring approaches to specify the accuracy requirements
of solver clients and detect, recover and report solution accuracy for integer
and string constraints. These capabilities are being implemented in an existing
solver interface framework, called Green, which is applied to perform symbolic
execution of Java programs, using Symbolic Pathfinder. The project will evaluate
the extent to this approach simplifies client analysis development, enables
clients to use a variety of solvers - even those that do not perfectly match
accuracy requirements, and improves analysis performance.