* 1449074
* STTR Phase I:  New dwarfing genes to improve yield and abiotic stress tolerance in wheat
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kulvinder Gill, Geneshifters, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the improvement of wheat yields by introducing newly
identified dwarfing genes. The currently used dwarfing genes, which were
instrumental in bringing about the "green revolution", are at least partly
responsible for this bottleneck. These dwarfing genes, present in more than 90%
of the wheat varieties grown worldwide, render most of the wheat crop prone to
losses due to abiotic (non-living) stresses. This research project will use the
products from an NSF-funded academic research to characterize new types of
dwarfing genes for wheat, and commercialize selected dwarfing genes around the
globe. Outcomes and products from the proposed research project are poised to
alleviate the bottleneck created by the currently used dwarfing genes, and have
the potential to significantly increase wheat yields, especially under abiotic
stress conditions. The research project, while creating a viable commercial
product with global appeal, also will contribute positively towards food
security in this changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I
project proposes to further develop and test alternative dwarfing genes to
improve wheat yield and abiotic stress tolerance around the globe. Semi-dwarf
mutants rht1 and rht2 in wheat are credited for the gene revolution, and are
present in more than 90% of the wheat varieties grown worldwide. Their height
reduction is due to a reduced production or perception of a plant hormone,
gibberellins (GA), which plays a critical role in abiotic stress tolerance.
Under abiotic stresses that affect more than 85% of the US and 50% of the
world's wheat growing areas, these GA-dwarfs exhibit adverse effects on various
agronomic traits including abiotic stress tolerance. The project will
characterize newly identified 22 "GA-normal" dwarfing genes for their agronomic
advantage over the currently used genes, especially under heat, drought, and
salinity stresses with the objective to identify ideal dwarfing gene systems for
various wheat growing conditions. The selected dwarfing genes also will be
mapped relative to DNA markers for intellectual property protection, and for
their transfer to wheat cultivars via marker assisted selection.