* 1449314
* SNM: Scalable Volume-NanoManufacturing of Unique Nanoparticles by Nano-templated Printing, Deposition, and Exfoliation for Energy and Bio/Chemical Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Stephen Chou, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

To have the best possible performance in a given application, nanoparticles must
be manufactured with uniform size and precise shape, structure and composition.
This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) award supports an innovative approach to
attaining such uniformity in the manufacturing of a new class of energy
conversion phosphor nanoparticles. This approach, termed "nanoprint by templated
exfoliateable deposition" (n-PrinTED), is fundamentally different from
traditional chemical synthesis. The new method uses a template and potentially
enables the production of a broad range of nanoparticle types applicable to a
wide range of fields and industries, including bio/chemical sensing, solid state
lighting, displays, batteries, and fuel cells. The success of the research will
benefit U.S. competitiveness and leadership in nanotechnology and aid U.S
industry, leading to significant economic impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
overcome the key challenges in nanoparticle fabrication, this new method,
n-PrinTED, fabricates nanoparticles (NPs) by using a template to restrict
material deposition/reaction, which regulates the materials' (hence the final
NP's) shape and location, rather than a "free-form" reaction; and n-PrinTED also
opens up a broad range of new possibilities in deposition methods, materials
choices, and processing/reaction conditions and sequences. Therefore, n-PrinTED
offers many new ways to fabricate NPs with unique shapes, structures, and
compositions (hence properties) that are unachievable by current methods.
n-PrinTED can thus be used for a broad range of new nanoparticles. The project
will focus on the application of n-PrinTED in new NPs for efficient up/down
conversion of energy and will take an approach that integrates a broad range of
disciplines and knowledge.