* 1449744
* Uncovering Hotspot Volcanism: Mantle Melting, Magmatic Plumbing, Explosive Eruptions and Crustal Contamination at Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Andrew Greene, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 363,497.00

Hawaii's Kilauea Volcano is one of the best places on Earth to study processes
within basaltic volcanoes. Its high eruption frequency, easy access to lavas,
distinct geologic setting in the central Pacific far from plate boundaries or
continents, and the extensive knowledge base on Kilauea allows research us to
address fundamental problems related to active volcanoes. The tasks and issues
we propose to address are: 1) Monitoring the magmatic evolution of lavas from
Kilauea's two ongoing eruptions to evaluate mantle melting processes and the
magmatic architecture of the volcano; 2) Documenting the extent and origin of
crustal contamination in its recent lavas; 3) Determining the controls of
Kilauea's effusive-explosive cycles during the last 2200 years; and 4) Creating
an education module to engage students in learning science through studying
active volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii is a superb location for
petrologic and geochemical research on basaltic volcanoes. Prior NSF support has
allowed the Principal Investigator and colleagues to monitor the petrologic and
geochemical variations of lava from the current rift eruption and to witness the
dynamic changes in the melting process and mantle source composition during this
long-lasting magmatic event. Our published work has shown that melt is
transported through the mantle in open channels to the surface without
significant pooling and homogenization, preserving remarkable short-term (~10
years) Pb isotopic variations. The new summit eruption (ongoing since 2008)
provided the first samples from Kilauea's central magma storage reservoir since
1982. These new samples indicate a geochemically distinct mantle-derived magma
was delivered to the summit reservoir in 2009 that has not yet (as of 2012)
erupted at Pu'u 'O'o. If the geochemical differences between these two eruptions
persist, they suggest there are separate conduits to the mantle for each vent, a
major departure from current models for Kilauea's magmatic system. New studies
have shown that explosive eruptions have dominated Kilauea's last 2200 years and
that geochemistry may be a harbinger of explosive eruptions. NSF funding will be
used to: 1. Monitor the magmatic evolution of Kilauea lavas from its two ongoing
eruptions; 2. determine whether the O isotope variations we have observed for
Kilauea lavas are related to crustal contamination or source heterogeneity; and
3. extend our study of temporal geochemical variations of Kilauea's rocks ~2000
years into its explosive past to determine whether enriched magmas are
indicators of explosive eruptions. Our geochemical results have been and will
continued to be integrated with observations from Hawaiian Volcano Observatory's
field, geochemical and geophysical monitoring programs, and interpreted in
consultation with their staff. Our holistic approach to evaluating magmatic
processes at Kilauea is critical for understanding how this and other basaltic
volcanoes work.