* 1449322
* International Engagement and Broadening Participation in STEM from a Family-Friendly Perspective for Women of Color
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,963.00

This project is examining the influence of career life balance on communities of
color by supporting the participation of women researchers and advanced graduate
students from underserved populations in an international experience in Latin
American and a subsequent webinar series with international speakers to discuss
the accompanying challenges and potential solutions for maintaining levels of
career life balance. These activities will be accompanied by online discussions
and wide dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Women researchers will be
attending the July 2014 conference for the Latin and Caribbean Consortium of
Engineering Institutions (LACCEI) in Guayaquil, Ecuador. The graduate students
will be mentored by women who have a long-standing track record for mentoring
graduate students from underrepresented groups. The participants will have
opportunities to meet researchers from other underrepresented communities in
Latin America. This conference will have sessions that will discuss career
choices, life/work balance, and the impact of family and traditions on
advancement decisions. In addition, the conference will provide opportunities to
develop new collaborations with women in the STEM fields from the U.S. and
different Latin American countries (e.g., Mexico, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia,
Argentina and Panama). Following the conference, a webinar series with blogged
discussions will discuss career life balance based on research and experiences
from experts who were invited to participate in the Gender Summit 3 North
America in November 2013 which was co-sponsored by the National Science
Foundation, and sister scientific organizations in Mexico, Canada, and the
United Kingdom. Representatives from each of these countries will participate in
the webinar series and blog discussions. The blog will include both online
discussions via a website, and microblogging using Twitter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The webinar series will feature topics such as balancing
work and family, how family decisions affect career advancement, and
subconscious "imposterism" in the company of males at work and at home. Further,
it will highlight the policies and best practices that are working for women in
other countries such as equal pay for faculty at UNAM in Mexico, and findings
from Europe?s genSET project. The webinars will also include co-host/discussants
from the LSAMP community, who will bring their perspectives as mentors of next
generation of underrepresented minority STEM researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall the project will contribute to understanding
family commitments, family influence, and family challenges on the career
decisions of researchers of color. We will examine child-care, eldercare,
cultural contexts and perceptions of underrepresented minorities abroad, and the
influence of male-dominated societies on current participants. Furthermore, the
project will facilitate development of international collaborative relationships
for students and faculty, an activity important to professional development and
promotion. It will develop a structure that can enhance the international
mobility of a generation of future STEM research communities of color, to
increase their global influence and competitiveness. The online series will
engage researchers to discuss ways to increase global engagement, and
corresponding issues that affect career life balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the International Science and Engineering Section, the
Career Life Balance Initiative and the Division of Engineering Education and
Centers Broadening Participation in Engineering Program.