* 1449815
* NRT-DESE: Flexibility in Language Processes and Technology: Human- and Global-Scale
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2022
* William Idsardi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 01/31/2022
* USD 3,110,938.00

Language learning, in humans and machines, has far-reaching relevance to global
technology, commerce, education, health, and national security. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award prepares doctoral students
at the University of Maryland, College Park with tools to advance language
technology and language learning. The program provides trainees with an
interdisciplinary understanding of learning models from cross-training in
linguistics, computer science, and psychological and neural sciences, and with
the tools to work with multi-scale language data. The training program
contributes to the public understanding of science through a policy internship
program that engages trainees with federal agencies and Washington-area
professional organizations. Moreover, by contributing to the development of a
free public digital linguistic tool, Langscape, it will provide a valuable
resource for researchers, the public, the government, and nongovernmental
agencies to discover geographical and linguistic information about languages of
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flexible and efficient language learning, in
humans and machines, is the research focus of this NRT program. The research
hypothesis is that improvements in learning in machines and in humans will come
from the ability to use training data more efficiently at multiple scales.
Through interdisciplinary team approaches, trainees will explore efficient use
of language data, with a focus on the informativity of data to human and machine
learning. Through a suite of training activities that includes intensive summer
research workshops, engagement with undergraduates and K-12 schools, and policy
internships, trainees will become flexible communicators in writing and speaking
and also learn to apply their research to diverse contexts.