* 1449470
* Collaborative Research: Foundations of Social and Ethical Responsibility Among Undergraduate Engineering Students: Comparing Across Time, Institutions, and Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Stephanie Claussen, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 04/30/2020
* USD 57,222.00

Recognizing the critical roles played by technical professionals in serving the
public and addressing grand challenges, many formal courses and programs have
been created to promote professional responsibility and ethical integrity among
engineering graduates. Other interventions (e.g., service learning programs)
have been developed to more broadly challenge engineering and technology
students to see themselves as engaged citizens and community members. Yet there
has been a lack of research on foundational understandings of social and ethical
responsibility among such students, including how these understandings change
over time and through participation in specific types of learning experiences.
Additional empirical evidence is needed to guide ongoing efforts to cultivate
enhanced social and ethical responsibility among future engineers, including by
identifying and promoting specific interventions that have the biggest positive
impacts on students.

The proposed study responds to these gaps in the existing scholarship by asking
the following research questions: 1) What do engineering students perceive as
responsible (and irresponsible) professional conduct, and what do they perceive
as socially just (and unjust) technical practices?, and 2) How do foundational
measures and understandings of social and ethical responsibility change during a
four-year engineering degree program, both in general and in relation to
specific kinds of learning experiences? To investigate these questions, a
longitudinal mixed-method study design will collect and analyze quantitative and
qualitative data from undergraduate engineering students at four universities.
To improve transferability of results, these schools will represent a variety of
institution types. Each collaborating school also has large numbers of students
in programs of interest, e.g., service-learning and intensified ethics
instruction. Further, the study will give priority to investigating differences
in perceptions and experiences among underrepresented student populations.