* 1449627
* Proposal for a Japan-U.S. Symposium on Risk Communication
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Ann Bostrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2015
* USD 40,246.00

The March 2011 Great Eastern Japan Earthquake (GEJE), resulting tsunami, and
Fukushima Dai-ichi power plant safety systems failures were catastrophic for
Japan, and have influenced risk perceptions and policies globally. The nature of
that influence remains an active area of social scientific inquiry. Early
findings suggest that risk communication and management inadequacies contributed
to the social amplification of events. The symposium will provide a timely
opportunity to synthesize emerging social and behavioral risk research findings
regarding these extreme events, develop a risk communication and management
research agenda to address the challenges identified, and inform ongoing
international risk communication and disaster risk reduction efforts.

Research to date on the nature and consequences of Great Eastern Japan
Earthquake (GEJE) and Fukushima-related risk communications identifies a wide
range of contributory factors, ranging from lack of scientific consensus and
public misconceptions about the risks, to social amplification of risk by the
media, lack of transparency by management, and insufficient public engagement.
Nevertheless, an overarching synthesis and assessment of theoretical
implications and resulting risk communication research questions stemming from
these events is lacking, and would advance the related risk and decision
sciences. Extreme events of the last decade have increased in impact,
heightening the global focus on the necessity of disaster risk reduction.
International efforts to improve the evidence base for risk management include
the Integrated Research on Disaster Risk (IRDR) supported by the United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), the International
Council for Science (ICSU), and the International Social Science Council (ISSC)
and UNISDR activities, including its lead role in developing a post-2015 Hyogo
Framework for Action. Risk Interpretation and Action (RIA) is a key activity of
the IRDR, with the aim of understanding how people, both decision-makers and
ordinary citizens, make decisions, individually and collectively, in the face of
risk, and thereby contributing to an integrated research approach to disaster
risk reduction, to ultimately decrease disaster risks worldwide. The proposed
symposium advances this agenda, as well as integration of this research with
research on the communication and management of extreme technological risks, and
enhances collaboration between Japan and the U.S. in the social, decision and
risk sciences.