* 1449622
* I-Corps:  Investigating the Viability of an Integrated Tool for Content Creation and Aggregation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Marcia Mardis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The move to digital learning is well underway. The instructional materials
market includes both textbooks and supplemental materials; however, this market
is changing as content formats and adoption cycles change, but experts expect it
to remain strong in years to come. Organizations of all kinds and sizes can
benefit from content management strategies as they adapt their practices and
infrastructures away from hastily organized web pages, limited access databases,
or worse--URLs printed on paper. Each year, millions of high quality digital
learning resources are created but only a tiny fraction of those materials are
found and used by American teachers and school children. With growing pressures
to transform classrooms into 21st Century education spaces, desperately needed
is a tool to improve identification and organization to help "great piles of
stuff" on the Internet become "piles of great stuff" for innovative and engaging
educational experiences. The proposed Web2MARC technology has the potential to
strongly impact current and future markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a tool
like the Web2MARC,, these organizations can simultaneously retain learning
assets, realize the advantages of digital content, and break the cycle of
redeveloping content from the ground up at great expense every time curriculum
needs to be updated or new content is created. The Web2MARC is a database plug-
in that can be installed in repositories of educational content. The plug-in
will allow users to download information about the content in the form of
metadata records that can be tailored with information such as Common Core State
Standards linkages and imported into many types of content management systems.
Web2MARC is an easy-to-use tool that will allow users to quickly and easily
create descriptive records for pieces of digital content that can be tagged with
keywords that make them easily findable and usable. The Web2MARC will allow
users and to easily and efficiently group contents such as blog posts, status
updates, presentations, articles, tweets and other multimedia content into their
favorite compilation site: an organization website, a personal website, a
library catalog--any place users choose to organize and promote information.