* 1449702
* I-Corps Sites:  University of Pittsburgh - Advancing Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Opportunity Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Sanjeev Shroff, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This is a project that creates an I-Corps Site at the University of Pittsburgh.
NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to further Pitt's entrepreneurial competencies by creating an
I-Corps site directed through the University of Pittsburgh Innovation Institute.
This award builds on University efforts to instill innovation and
entrepreneurship across the entire organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of Pitt I-Corps include the following:&lt;br/&gt;-Increase the number
of entrepreneurial minded individuals by education, training and outreach to
disciplines and individuals underrepresented in current commercialization
processes;&lt;br/&gt;-Enhance a recently deployed commercialization process
focused on supplementing viable innovations from the laboratory with key steps
required to move them to the market; and&lt;br/&gt;-Improve connection to the
regional entrepreneurial ecosystem for enhanced integration of Pitt
opportunities into the local early-stage environment and similar networks beyond
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pitt Ventures is a new multi-step program that
was created in the Innovation Institute to provide an experiential learning
program enhancing the rate of commercial outcomes of Pitt discoveries. It is a
lean launchpad engaging faculty, students, and local mentors in idea discovery
and entrepreneurship as a means of turning concepts into
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through support provided in an I-Corps program,
Pitt Ventures will be enhanced through a focus on disciplines and individuals
that have been underrepresented in current innovation activities. With this
outreach, the breadth of commercialized University innovations will be increased
as its pipeline will contain a more diversified set of opportunities from a
broader group of individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given Pitt's collection of
resources and opportunities, Pitt I-Corps will play an important role in
strengthening the entrepreneurial ecosystem in the Mid-West by providing more
inventions for the region to work on. Through enhanced engagement with this
network, the University will be better positioned to utilize the set of
capabilities resident in the region that can help to convert Pitt ideas to
marketed products. As such, the proposed I-Corps effort will aid the University
in more effectively converting intellectual value conceived by its innovators
into economic value realized through commercialization. The end result is more
new job creation, increased local investment, enhanced economic growth and more
products benefiting society reaching the market.