* 1449489
* Cultivating Responsible Wellbeing in STEM: Social Engagement through Personal Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* William Frey, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2020
* USD 493,159.00

Although engineering is commonly understood as a "technical" enterprise -- many
associate it with electronic devices, high performance materials, and modern
infrastructure, for example -- equally important is an understanding of the many
social contexts in which engineering is practiced, and the related social
impacts. This project engages students (both undergraduate and graduate) and
faculty in deep experiences in which they directly consider social, ethical, and
global issues (SEGIs) as essential aspects of their educational, research, and
career development activities. As a result, it empowers participating students
and faculty to function in novel and non-traditional settings and roles, using a
combination of traditional and non-traditional skills and sensitivities. Example
outcomes include: an undergraduate student choosing a service-learning elective
to enhance her engineering design project; a graduate who works as a
professional engineer playing the role of honest broker to mediate between a
community and a large developer; a graduating student founding a non-profit
organization to create new technologies for use in a "developing country" a
researcher deploying his or her knowledge and skills to design a research
project that addresses a specific social, regional, or community need. In these
and other ways, this project engages traditionally under-represented populations
and marginalized communities, particularly from Puerto Rico, Haiti, and several
other countries from Latin America. And, reflecting this international
orientation, this project deploys four languages: Spanish, English, French, and
Haitian Creole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of Responsible Wellbeing (RW),
particularly as articulated by Robert Chambers, combines with a virtue approach
to ethics to unify, philosophically and normatively, this project's activities.
Essentially, this approach holds that both personal happiness and societal
wellbeing converge at a point between scarcity/poverty and the extreme/unlimited
pursuit of material and monetary wealth. Reaching such a point requires
exercising self-imposed moderation. In the context of engineering it can be
realized through making conscious choices in engineering design and research
applications while drawing on key principles such as Appropriate Technology
(AT), Value Sensitive Design (VSD), and Human Capabilities (HC). The four
activities sponsored by this project integrate RW throughout the educational and
research missions of the College of Engineering through (1) development of new
teaching materials, case studies, and strategies for intermediate and capstone
courses in the College of Engineering; (2) delivery of a series of seminars,
workshops, and conferences that introduce participants to the principles of RW,
AT, VSD, and HC, all of which are encapsulated in a general reader made
available to all participants; (3) support of several independent research
projects that respond to a specific societal or community context, and embed the
concepts of RW, AT, VSD, and/or HC, together with alternative career fairs that
assist participants with their pursuit of opportunities that meaningfully engage
with SEGIs; and (4) execution of an innovative developmental assessment plan
that guides and tracks overall project progress, using a framework of five
stages: awareness, evaluation, integration, anticipation, and value realization.
The PIs are collectively experienced with several prior projects in engineering
ethics, engineering education, and appropriate technology upon which this
project builds.