* 1449187
* EAGER: Understanding and Strengthening STEM Faculty Engagement, the Institutional Environment and Transformative Research
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Mack Shelley, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,991.00

The project proposes a research study and a workshop, both aimed at bringing
together theory, practice, and evidence-driven discussion. It will be guided by
two objectives: (1) understanding faculty engagement, and (2) strengthening
faculty engagement. These will be considered in relation to institutional
environment support and the capacity for transformative research. Key activities
will include an integrated analysis of faculty and institutional data within the
context of a self-determination theory of motivation, and a holistic envisioning
of academic research careers by experts and stakeholders. A distinctive
exploratory aspect of the research study is the use of statistical modeling to
investigate questions that have not been addressed before in large-scale surveys
related to faculty satisfaction and retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will include a focus on career-life balance to better understand faculty
engagement and persistence in academic STEM careers. The study team will plan
and convene a workshop to synthesize recent work encompassing career life
balance and broader impacts (BI) infrastructure, share and stimulate promising
practices, and develop recommendations for institutional action. The project
will influence institutional opportunities to enhance faculty engagement, career
life balance, gender equality in STEM careers, and BI infrastructure. The use of
COACHE data may inform cross-institutional policies and practices to support
faculty and potentially benefit hundreds of colleges and universities. Open
access to research and workshop results will be provided using Iowa State's
Digital Repository.