* 1449542
* Impact of Materials on Society (IMOS) Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Kevin Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2015
* USD 25,233.00

NON TECHNICAL The Division of Materials Research is supporting a one-day
workshop in December 2014 at the Boston meeting of the Materials Research
Society to discuss and disseminate an interdisciplinary engineering-humanities-
social science course entitled the "Impact of Materials on Society" which seeks
to improve simultaneously the scientific and social literacies of undergraduate
students. This meeting will contribute to the educational infrastructure of
materials science, and engineering more broadly, by providing a model for
building broader bridges at institutions around the country between research in
materials science and engineering, the humanities, and social sciences to
examine how to create successful technologies that address critical social
issues in ways that respect human values and belief systems. There is a pressing
need, at this moment in particular, to bring these fields into productive
dialogue with materials science and engineering. Such a dialogue will strengthen
faculty research and undergraduate and graduate learning by marrying technical
and scientific knowledge with contemporary research into social life and human
experience. Such a dialogue will also feed demands for interdisciplinary,
entrepreneurial, innovative, and creative curriculum foundations around the
country.

TECHNICAL For the past 20 years, engineering educators have sought teaching
strategies that move beyond the traditional lecture format of the engineering
classroom. This search is particularly important in the context of a need to
"change the conversation" about engineering by demonstrating that engineers, or
more specifically material scientists and engineers, are not simply people who
"like math and science", but who are also "creative problem-solvers" that help
"shape our future" by improving our "health, happiness, and safety". This
emphasis on the important social role of engineering seeks both to improve the
scientific literacy of the broader public, as well as to educate future
engineers about the global, environmental, and social contexts in which they
work. To address these goals, an interdisciplinary engineering-humanities-social
science course was developed entitled the "Impact of Materials on Society" which
seeks to improve simultaneously the scientific and social literacies of
undergraduate students with one curricular endeavor. Through formal and
independent evaluation, the course has been demonstrated to increase
significantly three variables: the social literacy of engineering students, the
scientific and technical literacy of non-engineering students, and the awareness
of students of any major to the interconnections between scientific and social
literacies through exposing them to the role, values, and importance of material
science and engineering throughout human civilization. To date the course has
been developed and taught only at the University of Florida. The Division of
Materials Research is supporting a one-day workshop in December 2014 at the
Boston meeting of the Materials Research Society to disseminate the course
design and evaluation tools to other pilot institutions to disseminate the
results of the course, to broaden the impact of the course, and to collect
additional data on how social and scientific literacies can be taught to diverse
student groups.