* 1449383
* SNM: Physics Guided Innovation of Integrated Flash-Light-Sintering, Continuous Nanomaterial Synthesis and Roll-To-Roll Deposition Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Rajiv Malhotra, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,510,000.00

CBET-1449383&lt;br/&gt;Chang, Oregon State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous and patterned thin-films with
controlled geometries are poised to make a disruptive impact in applications
including pervasive sensing and communications, wearable health-monitoring,
environmental sensing, energy efficient buildings and transportation, renewable
energy and energy storage. In this project, the PIs will address the current
bottleneck of high manufacturing costs for large-volume production of such thin-
films, to enhance U.S. manufacturing competitiveness on the global stage and
enable improved quality of life via widespread deployment of corresponding thin-
film devices. The primary research scope will focus on investigating the
fundamental multi-physical phenomena over multiple length scales that underlie a
transformational and highly-scalable nanoparticle-ink sintering process, i.e.,
Flash-Light-Sintering. This will enhance understanding of the interaction
between optically induced nanoparticle heating and nanoparticle fusion in a
collection of nanoparticles, leading to a better understanding of the
implications of these phenomena in scalable nanomanufacturing. This fundamental
knowledge will lead to the innovation of advanced high-throughput and low-cost
methods for industrial scale manufacturing of thin-films. As part of this
project, The PIs will train graduate students to develop hands-on educational
modules based on this research, requiring the students to analyze and summarize
results, extract the underlying principles, create demonstration experiments,
and use these modules to teach parts of graduate courses. The PIs will also
engage undergraduates via existing undergraduate mentoring programs as well as
high school students via the Apprenticeships in Science and Engineering (ASE)
program. The primary focus group of ASE has been traditionally underrepresented
students. The use of focused hands-on experimental projects as a teaching tool
will allow these students to develop a deep appreciation and interest in the
multiple physical phenomena and processes associated with scalable
nanomanufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposal are
to investigate the fundamental multiscale and multiphysical phenomena underlying
a transformational and highly-scalable Nanoparticle-ink (NP-ink) sintering
process, i.e., Flash-Light-Sintering (FLS), and to use this knowledge to guide
the creation of novel, scalable processes that combine FLS with equally scalable
Microreactor-Assisted Nanoparticle Synthesis (MANS) and Roll-to-Roll (R2R) NP-
ink deposition. These advanced processes will possess unmatched capabilities for
low-cost, high-throughput, multi-materials capable manufacturing of patterned
and continuous thin-films with controlled nano-scale density over large-area
flexible substrates. In FLS, sintering times can be up to 100x faster while
operation and equipment costs can be several orders lower than conventional NP
sintering methods. The PIs will overcome key scientific and technical gaps
including poor understanding of the physics of FLS, limited multimaterials
capability, costly and discontinuous NP-ink synthesis, and costly tooling for
patterning NP-inks that have limited the full utilization of highly scalable
integrated FLS-R2R processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop multi-
scale, multi-physical models to understand the link between the optically-
induced nanoparticle heating and densification of nanoparticles. These models,
along with extensive experimental characterization will uncover new knowledge on
the effects of FLS process parameters and NP-ink characteristics on the
characteristics of the sintered thin-films. This new knowledge will guide the
design of a novel dual-band FLS-R2R process for high-throughput FLS of
semiconductor NPs that typically have low optically induced heating effects.
This process, along with novel methods for controlling FLS by tailoring the
chemical composition of the nanoparticles, will enable significantly expanded
multimaterials capability of FLS. The design and integration of scalable MANS
processes with these novel FLS and R2R processes will enable additional degrees
of multimaterial flexibility and reduced costs for the use of integrated FLS-R2R
systems. The above efforts will also guide the design a new gravure-less FLS-R2R
process to minimize the tooling costs associated with fabrication of patterned
thin-films using NP-inks.