* 1449079
* STTR Phase I:  Low-Cost Instrument-free Point-of-Care (POC) Platform for Infectious Disease Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Deborah Dean, Diassess Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,881.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the development of a widely deployable, inexpensive
and accessible diagnostic platform that can rapidly detect infectious diseases
in clinical and non-clinical locations, including settings with minimal
infrastructure. While the platform technology itself is applicable to the
detection of a wide number of pathogenic agents such as viruses, bacteria, and
parasites, this proposal optimizes, evaluates, and demonstrates functionality
and feasibility for Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs). The development of
this technology will aid widespread screening efforts involving early diagnosis
of infectious diseases, inform optimal patient treatment, and potentially act as
a test-of-cure. The accessible and rapid DNA-based diagnostic platform proposed
in this project, bypasses centralized laboratory testing, and eliminates
systemic inefficiencies within traditional healthcare infrastructure.
Potentially, this would expand the reach of the medical community and improve
access to healthcare. Nowhere is this ability needed more than in the global
infectious disease diagnostic market, which generates $12.4B and currently
dominated by outdated technologies that have poor performance. A consumer-
oriented, rapid DNA diagnostic test would be a disruptive paradigm shift, and
would address many of the current challenges in infectious disease management
and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop
a rapid, accessible, and inexpensive DNA-based diagnostic test for the detection
of infectious diseases. Current nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) rely on
immobile benchtop equipment that is constrained to centralized diagnostic
laboratories, often necessitating experienced technicians to operate, and a
period of at least 24 hours to report results. Consequently, the prolonged time
for results leads to the presumptive diagnosis of at-risk individuals, excessive
administration of antibiotics, and patient loss due to lack of follow up. A
rapid NAAT, deployable at the point-of-care with results reported in less than
45 minutes, would represent a paradigm shift in the diagnosis of several
infectious diseases. To this end, the proposed platform has been miniaturized,
and all the necessary steps required to perform NAAT have been integrated into a
disposable, self-powered, and instrumentation-free platform. The proposed
approach operates in settings with minimal resources such as a public clinic,
yet has advanced capabilities for the multiplexed detection of strain variants
and genomic markers of drug-resistance, while providing highly sensitive and
specific detection in less than 45 minutes. In this proposal, we will further
develop the sample preparation module, integrate the nucleic acid amplification
reaction into the platform, and validate instrumentation-free readout
capabilities.