* 1449577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Accessing Social Geographies in Late Glacial Franco-Cantabria
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Randall White, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2016
* USD 25,200.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Randall White and John O'Hara of
New York University will advance understanding of the social behavior and inter-
relationships of the hunter-gatherer groups which recolonized Northern Europe
towards the end of the last Ice Age. The peak of the last glacial period, known
as the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), occured approximately 26,500-19,000 years ago
(26.5-19ka BP). At this time, most of Europe was depopulated save for sheltered
parts of southern Europe known as refugia, where the sheltered local environment
made survival possible. The subsequent period from 19-11.5ka BP was
characterized by severe climatic oscillation before ultimately ameliorating to
near present conditions. This period also witnessed the expansion of human
populations, with large swathes of Europe recolonized by a cultural complex
known as the Magdalenian. Although a gradually ameliorating climate undoubtedly
played a role, the rapid expansion rates of these societies, particularly in the
period 18-16ka BP, indicates highly mobile groups actively moving into
unfamiliar landscapes while contending with severe climatic instability. Despite
the apparent adversity, these small groups of Late Glacial hunter-gatherers
established the demographic base for all successive populations across huge
swathes of Northern Europe: the Late Glacial recolonization is therefore a
process of importance in the demographic history of modern European and
European-descent populations. This project examines the personal ornaments
recovered from this period to gain insight into the social geographies, exchange
networks and mobility strategies of hunter gatherers in the Franco-Cantabrian
refugium - a demographic source region comprising south-western France and
northern Spain - prior to and during the period of recolonization. Analysis of
Magdalenian social networks will enhance understanding of how these prehistoric
societies managed erratic environmental flux, suggest the potential implications
of climate change on the social organization - or reorganization - of small-
scale, non-industrialized societies, and add an archaeological dimension to
contemporary scholarship on climate science.

This project will construct a typological synthesis of all ornaments recovered
from Magdalenian sites in Franco-Cantabria, with the resulting database
interrogated for regional or chronological patterning in ornament preference.
This will be followed by direct, in depth technological analysis of techniques
of modification, decoration and use of a number of ornaments from twenty
Magdalenian sites, housed at institutions in the U.S., France and Spain.
Finally, analysis of source of a number of decorative perforated teeth will be
undertaken using stable isotope geochemistry. Background strontium (87Sr/86Sr)
and oxygen (ä18O) values will be established by analysis of modern geological
samples and Magdalenian-period dietary faunal remains, after which analysis of
Magdalenian perforated teeth will allow the identification of the geographic
origin of these objects. The movement of ornaments across the landscape is
closely tied to both personal mobility and to the down-the-line exchange of
objects; contextualized analysis of ornament movement will allow these issues to
be addressed, thereby advancing understanding of the social geographies of
Magdalenian Franco-Cantabria, and the social structures which precipitated
demographic expansion.