* 1449548
* Engineering Research Center for Power Optimization for Electro-Thermal Systems (POETS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2025
* Kenneth Goodson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 07/31/2025
* USD 32,554,291.00

Nearly all modern electronic systems are hitting a power density wall where
further improvements in power density pose significant challenges. The NSF
Engineering Research Center for Power Optimization for Electro-Thermal Systems
(POETS), aims to enhance or increase the electric power density available in
tightly constrained mobile environments by changing the design. The management
of high-density electrical and thermal power flows is a safety-critical societal
need as recent electrical vehicles and aircraft battery fires illustrate.
Engineering education conducted in silos limits systems-level approaches to
design and operation. POETS will create the human capital that is explicitly
trained to think, communicate, and innovate across the boundaries of technical
disciplines. The Engineering Research Center (ERC) will institute curricular
reform to train across disciplines using a systems perspective. It will develop
pedagogical tools that allow greater stems-level understanding and disseminate
these throughout the undergraduate curriculum. POETS will target undergraduate
curriculum modifications aimed at early retention and couple it with
undergraduate research and K-12 teacher activities. POETS' research will
directly benefit its industry stakeholders comprised of power electronics
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) and Small to Medium sized businesses in
the OEM supply chain. An Industry/Practitioner Advisory Board will help direct
efforts towards ready recipients of POETS research developments. POETS will
harness the outputs of the ecosystem and drive research across the "valley of
death" into commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;POETS uses system level
analysis tools to identify barriers to increased power density. Design tools
will be used to create optimal system-level and subsystem-level designs. Novel
algorithm tools will address the multi-physics nature of the integrated electro-
thermal problem via structural optimization. Once barriers are identified, POETS
will cultivate enabling technologies to overcome them. The operation of these
systems necessitates development of heterogeneous decision tools that exploit
multiple time scale hierarchies and are not suitable for real-time use.
Implementation of these management approaches requires new 3D power electronics
architectures that surpass current 2D designs. The thermal management will be
tightly coupled with new 3D electronic systems designs using topology
optimization for power electronics, storage, etc. The new designs will tightly
interweave elements such as solid state thermal switches and modular multi-
length scale elements; i.e. spreaders, storage units, phase change and mass flow
system interacting with convection units. Fundamental research advances will
support development of the 3D component technologies. New materials systems will
be developed by manipulating nanostructures to provide tunable directionality
for in plane and out-of-plane thermal power flows. These will be coupled with
micro- and nano-scale thermal routing based on new conduction/convection
systems. Buffers made from phase change material will be integrated into these
systems to augment classes of autonomic materials with directed power flow
actuation. Novel tested systems will integrate the system knowledge enabling
technologies and fundamental breakthrough into modular demonstrations.