* 1449397
* SNM: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Metasurfaces &amp; Plasmonic Opto-Mechanical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Marc Madou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,297,672.00

Nanoarchitectures with subwavelength-sized metallic building blocks arranged on
surfaces manipulate light matter interactions. These nanoengineered materials
basically lay the foundation for a new, engineered way of controlling light, and
pave the way for novel functional devices, unattainable with conventional optics
benefitting applications including sensing, energy, imaging, and light guiding.
Yet the lack of scalability for large-scale and low-cost production of these
nanoarchitectures limits impact. This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) research
program will provide disruptive manufacturing solutions to create
nanoarchitectures embedded in micron scale surface to foster a breakthrough in
scalable fabrication. The investigators will work closely with an industrial
advisory board to tailor research that addresses scientific studies to the
benefit of a broad range of technology sectors that includes medical and
industrial diagnostic systems to optical communications as well as the precision
manufacturing equipment needed to achieve the goal of scalable
nanomanufacturing. The research program is closely integrated with a diverse
educational plan and robust industry outreach that is designed to train students
(high school to graduate level, STEM educators/learners and industry
practitioners) to be future leaders in science and technology to benefit
innovation and strengthen manufacturing in the United States. This plan includes
creation of movies and demonstrations in collaboration with the UC Irvine School
of Education "From Lab to Lesson Plan" that train high school teachers from the
Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement (MESA) program serving
underrepresented students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM).
Undergraduate students will be recruited from The Louis Stokes for Minority
Participation in STEM, a statewide initiative funded by the National Science
Foundation, to train a diverse group of students in advanced research
activities. Interdisciplinary training will be provided for graduate students
involving fundamental science and engineering as well as technological
applications and scientific communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synergistic
experimental and theoretical studies involve understanding driving forces that
direct assembly of nanoparticles from colloidal solution into predefined surface
patterns, physical mechanisms of direct writing of periodic and aperiodic
nanowire arrangements using elecromechanical spinning technology, and needed
precision in process control. These studies when integrated with existing
lithographic techniques will produce multi-length scale complex architectures
using high throughput manufacturing methods that afford tunable properties at
infrared and optical frequencies while retaining low cost. Test bed applications
of these systems include sensors exhibiting low detection limits over large
areas, non-linear optical devices, and optical antennas and actuators to
demonstrate the benefit to technological applications. Advancements to the
research field will be threefold: 1) studies of fundamental mechanisms in
nanofabrication will allow researchers to conceive new and robust
nanofabrication methods that will benefit research beyond optics, 2) the
understanding of defect tolerance in the development of optically responsive
surfaces and optomechanical systems will provide guidelines for geometric
tolerances in nanomanufacturing, and 3) new insights into the physical mechanism
of multi-length scale electromagnetic interactions will improve understanding of
novel light-matter interactions and produce improved functionalities for future
optical devices.