* 1449630
* EAGER:  Dose-Response Disinfection Curves for Human Norovirus with Novel Mouse Model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Christiane Wobus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 63,405.00

1449630&lt;br/&gt;Wigginton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Dose-response
disinfection curves for human norovirus with novel mouse
model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human norovirus causes approximately 20 times more
gastrointestinal illnesses than any other pathogenic agent in the U.S., and the
annual cost associated with these illnesses is estimated to be in the billions
(US $). Despite this, human norovirus is not included in most drinking water and
water reuse regulations. This is largely due to the fact that Human Norovirus
cannot be cultured in vitro, that is, no cell line is available to count the
number of infective viruses in samples. As a result, the scientific community
does not know the extent of disinfecting treatments necessary to inactivate
human norovirus. Our current understanding of necessary disinfection doses and
disinfection kinetics relies primarily on surrogate virus studies; this is
despite the fact that research has indicated that the surrogate viruses respond
differently to disinfectants than human norovirus. The drinking water and water
reuse fields are in desperate need of accurate human norovirus disinfection data
so that water treatment guidelines and compliance levels can be established.
Deaths caused by human norovirus are especially common in the developing world;
improved human norovirus disinfection would therefore have positive impacts on
impoverished populations. Ultimately, the research will lead to improved
disinfection strategies, which could ultimately prevent millions of norovirus
cases and save thousands of lives. The PIs will incorporate this project into
their ongoing broader impact activities, including summer research activities
for underprivileged students and drinking water projects in developing
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs propose to establish
the first disinfection curves of human norovirus based on infectivity. Dr.
Christiane Wobus of the University of Michigan recently discovered an immune
deficient mouse strain that is infected by human norovirus, and thus represents
the first small animal model for human norovirus. This mouse model allows us for
the first time to develop dose-response curves for the human norovirus with
disinfectants (chemicals commonly used in water and wastewater treatment). These
disinfection dose-response curves are critical; however, routine monitoring
cannot be based on the mouse model, and must instead rely on cheaper techniques
available to a much larger group of scientists and practitioners. Once
disinfection curves of norovirus have been established in this project, we will
use them to calibrate a method that estimates human norovirus inactivation based
on quantitative PCR (qPCR). Scores of studies have reported that qPCR cannot be
used to determine virus infectivity; however our research has overturned this
notion by showing that qPCR analysis can, in fact, accurately measure virus
inactivation, provided that the results are analyzed within the correct
theoretical framework. Coupling the mouse model disinfection data with the
extrapolation method will lead to a simple and robust qPCR assay that
effectively tracks human norovirus infectivity levels without the need for cell
cultures or the mouse models. This project aims to increase the safety of our
nation's water and food supplies and reduce the associated economic burden of
human norovirus illnesses. In particular, results from: Task 1 of this project
will, for the first time, define specific UV doses necessary to achieve desired
levels of human norovirus inactivation. Task 2 will introduce a simple and
inexpensive qPCR assay to track human norovirus inactivation. The PIs are
confident that the outputs from this project will be transformative for a number
of industries for which human norovirus is a major concern including drinking
water, wastewater, food, and hospital.