* 1449717
* EAGER: Development of a Novel MRI Compatible Shock Tube and Method for the Study of Blast Induced Traumatic Brain Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Michael Moreno, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 140,000.00

Proposal Number: 1449717&lt;br/&gt;PI: Moreno, Michael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF EAGER project is focused on the development of a novel imaging compatible
shock wave technology and experimental method to investigate the effects of
blast induced traumatic brain injury (bTBI). TBI has been called the signature
injury of the recent wars in the Middle East, with estimates of as many as 40%
of returning veterans suffering from some kind of TBI. Research in the field of
bTBI is poised to enable better prevention, detection, and treatment of bTBI in
the future, benefiting the armed services as well as injured soldiers themselves
and even the civilian population by a better understanding of TBI that may
translate into non-blast TBI. Additionally, this project will support unique
educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students and Texas
A&amp;M University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF EAGER project is potentially transformative in that (1) it could provide a
diagnostic method to predict potential long-term effects of exposure to mild to
moderate bTBI, (2) it will allow unprecedented access to time sensitive bTBI
data, using a novel MRI compatible experimental device to produce blast-like
pressure waveforms. bTBI research has increased due to the prevalence of blast
related brain injuries in the recent Middle Eastern wars. Of particular interest
to this project are the long-term effects of exposure to mild and moderate bTBI,
as it is difficult to diagnose when problems might develop following exposure ?
which often leads to repeated exposure. Our preliminary data shows a single
exposure to a mild blast can produce adverse effects that manifest six months
after exposure. In order to study the effects, bTBI is often induced in animal
models using shock tubes and similar devices. An important limitation of this
approach is that the pressure profiles produced by conventional shock tube
designs do not correspond well with the pressure profiles associated with
military ordnance. In this project, computational modeling will be used to
identify the effects of varying shock tube design parameters such that the
design can be optimized to produce pressure profiles that are more
representative of those associated with explosive devices. Furthermore, the
shock tube design will incorporate materials that are MRI compatible. This is
important as little is known about the immediate structural/mechanical changes
in the brain during and/or immediately following blast wave exposure. Due to the
mechanical nature of the injury, it is hypothesized that shock wave exposure may
produce a deleterious effect on the mechanical properties of brain tissue.
Elastography and diffusion tensor imaging can then be used to quantify any
mechanical changes in the brain immediately following blast wave exposure.
Changes in mechanical properties will then be correlated with the long term
effects observed in future animal studies and a model of the effects of the
interaction between the blast wave and the brain tissue will be developed.