* 1449393
* I-Corps EAGER:  UC Biomedical Research Acceleration, Integration, and Development (UC BRAID/CAI) I-Corps Hub Proposal
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Michael Palazzolo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,999.00

The proposal seeks support for a UC Biomedical Research Acceleration,
Integration, and Development (UC BRAID/CAI) I-Corps Hub consortium, a
coordinated effort among the UC medical campuses with the goal of facilitating
translation and accelerating promising technologies at the UCs. The campuses
include: Davis, Irvine, Los Angeles, San Diego and San Francisco. The program
will implement a training and education curriculum in order to train
entrepreneurs on the UC BRAID campuses by leveraging the infrastructure of the
UC Center for Accelerated Innovation (UC CAI) housed at UCLA, along with the
NSF-approved LLP curriculum - through accessing the experience and knowledge
that helped draft the initial Lean Launch Pad for Life Science/Healthcare (that
was hosted by UCSF). The course will provide real world, hands-on education and
training on what it is needed to start a scalable company.

The I-Corps Hub will leverage UC CAI's training and education emphasis and be
able to provide: 1) world-class scientific and clinical research that generates
a flow of technologies which are potentially on the brink of commercialization;
2) leadership in NSF I-Corps education for life science/healthcare that will
help deliver a strong offering to its component campuses; 3) utilization of the
infrastructure built by the UC CAI to deliver education and training components
across the UC campuses (as well as across departments and schools) to attract
entrepreneurs at all levels; and 4) robust and proven curriculum that encourages
entrepreneurship, networking, interdisciplinary team building and world-class
teaching and mentorship to all levels of interested entrepreneurs.