* 1449275
* Numerical Modeling of Earthquake Motions: Waves and Ruptures
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Ralph Archuleta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2015
* USD 38,006.00

NSF support for ?Numerical modeling of earthquake motions: waves and ruptures?
will allow scientists, particularly those who are students and early career, to
communicate their results with researchers from Asia and Europe who use
numerical simulations to investigate earthquake rupture processes and wave
propagation. Simulated ground motions are being used to guide the development of
ground motion prediction equations?the basic tool used in earthquake engineering
design as well as seismic hazard maps. This workshop will focus on the most
recent research concerning our understanding of the earthquake rupture and the
effect of the Earth?s structure on the radiated seismic waves that result in the
shaking that is experienced during an earthquake. The four-day workshop combines
oral presentations and posters that highlight the most recent developments in
numerical simulations of earthquakes, constitutive laws for friction and wave
propagation in complex media.

Numerical simulation of rupture propagation and seismic waves is an essential
tool for investigating earthquake physics and refining the velocity structure of
the Earth. The physics of earthquake ruptures is a complex phenomenon involving
the constitutive law for sliding friction (with many different processes, e.g.,
temperature, pressure, slip and slip rate, affecting the friction) along with a
medium that may behave elastically or plastically. The fault itself has an
inherent roughness at all scales. There is simply too few data by which one can
constrain the physics of an earthquake rupture. The earthquake rupture, being
complex, produces a complex radiated field which is poorly sampled by the arrays
of seismic instruments. Because one cannot directly observe an earthquake ? the
complex evolution of slip on a fault, which is buried within the Earth to depths
of 100?s of kilometers ? a primary question is what data can constrain the
numerical models? Thus the participants in the workshop will be considering both
forward modeling of earthquakes and inversion methods by which properties of the
earthquake source are inferred. The approaches are complementary; both depend on
the elastic and attenuation properties of the Earth. Because of uncertainties in
the properties of the Earth as well as the spatial-temporal distribution of
stresses on the fault, there are tradeoffs between what is considered a property
of the source and what is a property of the Earth. The discussion in a focused
workshop allows those who have experience with these problems to discuss how the
different methods might lead to better constraints on the source and
propagation. This would lead to better numerical simulations and hence more
realistic ground motion estimates from future earthquakes.