* 1449610
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Community Organization In Capital Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Elizabeth Arkush, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 17,338.00

Cities are at the center of political, economic, religious and social life. A
key way to understand how they function is through the investigation of their
social and spatial organization, seen in the way neighborhoods, districts and
ethnic groups form and interact. Compact and highly centralized cities function
in different ways when compared to garden cities with more dispersed layouts.
Cities that are capitals of large states provide unique information on political
organization and the nature of rulership since they are home to a society's
leaders and central institutions. A capital city may be dominated by a
centralized single governing institution, or may contain several, suggesting a
more segmented form of rulership. Archaeology is particularly well suited to
study social relations in capital cities as it can trace long term trajectories
of city formation and change and their relationship with political power and
statecraft. Under the supervision of Dr. Elizabeth Arkush, the doctoral
candidate Gabriela Cervantes will study the social organization of the Sican
capital city in Peru, with emphasis on urban organization and interaction,
domestic economies and subsistence practices, economic differentiation and power
relations and statecraft. This project will provide training to US and Peruvian
students from various universities in contemporary archeological techniques. The
information obtained, which will provide the basis for Cervantes' dissertation,
will also be presented in a public talk in the Sican National Museum in Peru for
the local community; detailed data will be made available through the Center for
Comparative Archaeology of the University of Pittsburgh
webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will examine how urban
patterns and city life involve social relations, economy and power. The Sican
state in Peru was one of the most developed societies in metallurgy technology
and long distance trade in the Americas. The research will involve a program of
full coverage survey, systematic surface collection and mapping of the city. The
data obtained will be used to address the residential nature of the capital, its
size, density and urban layout and the socioeconomic differentiation and
economic occupation of its residents. The research will expand current views of
urban variability and neighborhood formation and compact versus dispersed
settlements in cities. Further, the research will investigate how power is
structured and practiced, and use this information to refine and compare current
constructs of statecraft and sociopolitical trajectories.