* 1449016
* STTR Phase I:  Enhancing plant genetic transformation by Agrobacterium
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Stanton Gelvin, Edison Agrosciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the improvement of plant genetic transformation (the
introduction of new genes via biotechnology approaches). The past two decades of
research and commercialization of genetically modified plants have resulted in
crop species with improved agronomic traits, such as herbicide tolerance and
pest resistance, which have benefitted both farmers and consumers. Whereas the
vast majority of corn and soybeans currently grown in the US is genetically
modified, transformation of cotton and many other crops, including sunflower,
remains difficult. In addition, it has been challenging for scientists to
introduce desirable genes into plants without the concomitant introduction of
extraneous DNA, resulting in both technical and regulatory complications. These
technical problems have limited production of important products, including
rubber, in transformation-recalcitrant plants. Technology developed in this
proposal will enable widespread transformation, and thereby commercialization,
of a greater number of minor and industrial crop species by reducing product
development costs and regulatory barriers. These transformation techniques will
be applied toward the expression of industrial products including the
sustainable domestic production of natural rubber in non-traditional crops, as
well as enabling the creation of more efficient food
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a
novel Agrobacterium-based plant transformation platform to improve the
efficiency and quality of transformation events in recalcitrant crops. This
technology combines the use of plant histone genes or proteins, which increases
transformation efficiency, with "launching" Agrobacterium T-DNA from the
bacterial chromosome, which decreases integrated transgene copy number and
eliminates integration of extraneous vector sequences that present regulatory
problems. Specially designed Agrobacterium strains will be tested that can
transfer a histone H2A cDNA or protein simultaneously with T-DNA containing
selection and reporter genes. Transformation will be conducted on Arabidopsis
(because of the ease of obtaining large numbers of transformants to analyze) and
on tomato (a transformation-recalcitrant but agronomically important crop
species). The goal is to determine whether these novel Agrobacterium strains are
able to double the transformation frequency. In addition, the plan is to analyze
the genomes of hundreds of transgenic events, using qPCR and DNA blotting
strategies, to determine whether transformation by these bacterial strains
results in a high percentage of transgenic plants containing a single copy of
the introduced transgenes without extraneous DNA sequences flanking the T-DNA
(vector backbone or chromosomal DNA sequences). The best strain will be advanced
for additional testing in Phase II.