* 1449785
* NRT-DESE: Computational Materials Education and Training - Bridging Methods and Applications (COMET)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Kristen Fichthorn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 03/31/2021
* USD 3,006,000.00

NRT-DESE: Computational Materials Education and Training - Bridging Methods and
Applications (COMET)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new materials offers
solutions to pressing technological problems facing our society. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award prepares Ph.D. students at
Pennsylvania State University with the skills to contribute to national efforts
to discover and develop advanced materials with greater efficiency and lower
cost. Density functional theory, a theory based in quantum mechanics that can
accurately predict materials properties, is a core pillar of the effort.
Addressing a need for density functional theory literacy across science and
engineering, the program will bridge a gap between fundamental advances in
density functional theory and its application for materials design. As capstone
projects, trainees will learn to develop online teaching materials that will be
available worldwide. Through internships with industry, interdisciplinary team
projects, and international workshops, trainees will develop the combination of
fundamental and applied research on a variety of tools that will promote
collaborative innovation---across industry and academia, and across the globe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program involves faculty from three colleges and six
departments focused on interdisciplinary research on oxide interfaces,
nanomaterials, organic electronics, and force-field development. The research
and training will provide graduate students with a firm foundation in density
functional theory based computational materials science in all its aspects,
ranging from the development of density functional theory methods to its direct
use to solve problems in materials science, to its integration into multi-scale
modeling involving theory, empirical force-field development, and simulations.
Additionally, this program will develop new coursework as well as a
Computational Materials Science track within the Computational Science graduate
minor and establish a professional development seminar series that will
ultimately be available to all science and engineering graduate students.