* 1449554
* PBO H2O: GPS Reflection-Based Climate Products for 2007-2017
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Kristine Larson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2019
* USD 511,798.00

The goal of this project is to produce a decade-long dataset of soil moisture,
snow depth, snow water equivalent (SWE, derived from snow depth), and vegetation
water content at many of the stations of the EarthScope Plate Boundary
Observatory (PBO). The PBO is a geodetic network with 1,100 GPS stations
covering the Western US, designed to study the geology of the boundary zone
between the Pacific and North American tectonic plates. Although the GPS
receivers were installed to monitor plate movements, the PIs showed under an
earlier award (EAR-1144221) that the measurements can also be used to produce
estimates for the above surface hydrology variables through a method called GPS
Interferometric Reflectometry (GPS-IR). GPS-IR uses interference between GPS
signals received directly from the transmitting satellite and signals which are
reflected from the ground before arriving at the receiver. The reflected signal
is sensitive to the moisture content of the soil and surface vegetation, as well
as the change in effective surface height due to snow cover. Work under the
previous award produced a dataset with data beginning in 2011.

Work under this award augments the existing dataset by extending the period of
record back to 2007 and by increasing the sampling rate at each site to daily or
sub-daily frequency. The key to accomplishing these goals is the use of the L2P
"legacy" GPS signals. Because the L2P signals are encrypted and thus more
difficult to use, the existing dataset was developed using the unencrypted L2C
signals, which have been tracked at the PBO sites since 2011. The backward
extension of the dataset will be accomplished by developing more sophisticated
algorithms which can be used with the L2P signals, available in the PBO archive
starting in 2007. A further issue is that the algorithms initially developed by
the PIs were limited to use on signals transmitted from satellite positions in a
somewhat narrow wedge of the sky to the south of the receiver. Improvements to
the algorithms now allow the use of transmissions from a much wider range of
directions, enabling an increase of the sampling rate to daily or sub-daily
frequency. Funds under this award support the development and application of new
algorithms to augment the dataset, validation of the augmented data against in-
situ measurements, comparisons between data generated from the L2P and L2C
signals, generation of decade-long climatologies, and continued data collection
throughout the period of the award.

The primary motivation for funding this work is the value of the dataset for
researchers, policy makers, and stakeholders concerned with surface hydrology.
Surface hydrological variables like soil moisture, snow depth, and vegetation
water content are essential for understanding the water cycle, yet they are
difficult to make and only sparsely available. The GPS stations of the PBO
constitute a remarkable opportunity, given that the PBO is already fully
established and funded for other purposes. The hydrological data thus
substantially enhances the value of the network with minimal additional field
costs. Beyond its scientific value, the data has high societal relevance given
concerns in the western states regarding water resources. In addition, the
project will support a graduate student and a postdoctoral associate, and will
also support student interns through the NSF-supported Research Experiences in
Solid Earth Sciences for Students (RESSES) summer program. Algorithms and data
developed under the project will be freely accessible online.