* 1449582
* EAGER: Novel Catalyst Design Using Hierarchical Hybrid Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Sharmila Mukhopadhyay, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 107,995.00

Novel catalyst design by tailored integration of nanomaterials with larger
porous scaffolds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysts are an enabling technology
critical to key industrial sectors such as water, energy, chemicals, and
pharmaceuticals. The effectiveness of any solid catalyst strongly depends upon
the availability of surface reactive sites. Nanomaterials (that have dimensions
in 1-100 nm range) provide significant advantages in this regard because they
offer exceptionally higher surface area per unit mass compared to conventional
materials. However, nanocatalysts are generally deployed as loose powders or
colloids that can easily disperse into the surroundings, posing serious health
and environmental risks. The goal of this EAGER award project made to Professor
Sharmila Mukhopadhyay at Wright State University is to explore if this dilemma
can be resolved by combining the advantages of nanomaterials with the structural
integrity of robust solids. In natural biological surfaces such as intestinal
and bronchial linings, an extremely high level of interaction in a compact space
is enabled through "hierarchical" and "hybrid" architectures, in which larger
scaffolds provide mechanical support and progressively smaller specialized
attachments offer additional functional properties. This project will explore if
and how the same concept can be adapted to catalyst design, starting with porous
solid scaffolds and enhancing them with controlled sequence of strongly adhered
nano-scale catalytic materials such as carbon nanotubes, oxide coated nanotubes,
and metal nanoparticles. The payoff can be very high, since it will enable
creation of innovative surface-driven devices including catalysts, sensors and
energy storage components. Another benefit from this project will be educational
components relating nanotechnology with catalysis and environmental
sustainability. All participants in this project are involved in student
mentoring as well as development of K-12 educational modules. Outreach programs
that will benefit from this project include pre-college offerings for
disadvantaged students and training camps for STEM
Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide in-depth
understanding of processing and properties of hierarchical hybrid materials, in
which well-tailored distribution of nanoscale components of varying dimensions
are anchored on larger porous scaffolds. Scaffold support materials envisioned
are foams or fabric of carbon, whose specific surface areas are increased by
several orders of magnitude through controlled attachment of carpet-like arrays
of carbon nanotubes. These nanotubes may be coated with oxide layers for
increased surface wettability and/or improved catalyst-support interactions.
Finally these nanotube-enhanced scaffold surfaces will be functionalized with
catalyst nanoparticles such as palladium. The materials synthesized will be used
to degrade a model water-borne pollutant, trichloroethene (TCE), which is widely
used by industry and known for its toxicity and persistence in ground-water.
This project will answer three very basic questions relevant to surface-active
devices: (i) Is it possible to attach multiple nano-catalysts to a single robust
solid with sufficient control? (ii) Would the integrated hybrid material retain
or improve the benefits of each component? If so, how does the integrated solid
compare with its components and with conventional catalyst pellets and powders?
(iii) Are these structures suitable for prolonged use? The answers to these
questions can provide the groundwork for integrating advanced nanocatalysts into
larger solid devices.