* 1449667
* EAGER: Gender And Archaeological Research Grant Submissions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Barbara Mills, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,376.00

Gender bias, whether purposeful or inadvertent violates basic American
principles and the goal of this project is to determine whether in one aspect of
archaeology such bias exists and if so how it may be remedied. In Spring 2013,
the Society for American Archaeology (SAA) created the Task Force on Gender and
Rates of Research Grant Submissions because of an apparent disparity in the
rates of senior (post-Ph.D.) proposal submissions by males and females to
archaeology programs at both NSF and the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
Anthropological Research. Although success rates of men and women to NSF over
the past few years (2009-2011) were roughly equal (35% of applications submitted
by women were successful, compared to 33% from men), the number of submissions
from women were half that of men (270 women submitted applications over this
three-year period compared to 542 men). Given the documented increase in the
proportion of women in academic archaeology among early and mid-career
academics, this 33% representation of women in the applicant pool seems low.
Moreover, submissions for doctoral dissertation improvement grants at NSF are
evenly divided between men and women. Statistics for Wenner-Gren funding note
the same disparity in their post-Ph.D. funding in archaeology, though not in
other anthropology sub-disciplines. Statistics for NSF funding in biological
anthropology and cultural anthropology similarly show no difference in
submission rates by men and women. This project will examine and integrate a
variety of data sources to determine: 1) whether or not there is a real problem
in research grant submissions, and 2) if it is a problem, whether there are
recommendations that will address the problem(s).

This project uses multiple sources of information, including demographic data
from the American Anthropological Association and member surveys conducted by
SAA; detailed data from publicly available records of funded proposals from NSF
and NEH; data on funded and unfunded proposals collected by Wenner-Gren and
National Geographic Society, as well as a sample of submission data from NSF;
and interviews with post-PhD women in academic archaeology to determine their
strategies for funding archaeological research, as well as the kinds of research
they undertake. Intellectually, the project will contribute to research on women
in archaeology, and more broadly, to research on women in science. Although this
project focuses on a trend that initially appears unique to archaeology, the
trend may in fact reflect wider research concerns on gender disparities in
science. Based on the project results, broader impacts include potential policy
change recommendations to professional organizations and research funders. Women
who may not have applied or have not reapplied for grant funding may feel more
confident in applying/reapplying for grants, therefore expanding the pool of
proposals considered for funding. The planned project website will allow wider
dissemination of the research results in a user-friendly format. Finally, a
series of reports and publications will be prepared to share the project
findings in detail.