* 1449006
* STTR Phase I:  Microwatt-scale GPS Tracking and Timing Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* David Wentzloff, Isocline Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 224,973.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide more
efficient GPS-based location awareness for next-generation devices. Within the
last 20 years, GPS devices have shrunk from brick-sized receivers to cell
phones, wrist-watches, and pet collars. This project introduces a transformative
approach to GPS tracking that will greatly lower the average power consumption.
This will allow for GPS tracking devices that can last weeks on a single small
battery. There would be a tangible societal benefit in many aspects of commerce
and day-to-day life: compact freight tracking tags can ensure shipments do not
get lost; embedded merchandise and asset tags can track stolen items and alert
authorities to its location; hikers and search and rescue can rely on portable
navigation devices that lasts weeks on a single charge; personal fitness devices
can track fitness goals over days and weeks instead of hours; law enforcement
can use GPS tags to safely track suspects from a distance; cell-phones can
provide always-on background GPS positioning, allowing apps to expand their
capabilities. All of these benefits, and more, are realizable with the proposed
100 uW GPS platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project establishes the feasibility of a Global
Positioning System (GPS) receiver microchip that provides continuous real-time
positioning and timing at 100 uW average power - a 10x improvement over the
current state-of-the-art. The proposed techniques leverages state-of-the-art
advances in radio-frequency (RF) and baseband hardware design that can benefit
many aspects of receiver research and design. The microwatt-scale crystal
oscillator allows more for accurate timekeeping in an RF system when the RF unit
is off. This can lead to smarter RF protocols that wake-up exactly when needed
to transmit or receive. The fast start-up front end technology can also benefit
devices that employ time-multiplexing frequency sharing schemes. The platform
could allow for a clocks that are synchronized to microsecond accuracy across
all devices in a geographic area. This opens new avenues of research in wireless
sensor network synchronization and communication protocols. Further research
could investigate a non-GPS source of synchronization as well for indoor use:
the proposed approach would work if a local node were instead broadcasting a.
These local nodes could themselves synchronize with GPS through an external
antenna, leading to complete indoor and outdoor synchronization of a wireless
sensor network.