* 1449159
* EAGER: Accountability Through Architecture for Decentralized Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Richard Taylor, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,960.00

Advancing the ability to create trustworthy computing systems demands
fundamental advances in many technologies and at many levels of abstraction.
Creating trustworthy applications requires more than a set of excellent building
blocks, however. It demands an architectural understanding; one that shows a
viable approach to utilizing many contributions in mutually consistent and
supportive ways. This project springs from a focus on achieving security through
innovative software architecture, wherein novel combinations of technologies are
applied and the essential mechanisms of security and accountability are built
in. In particular, the security concerns of prevent, detect, isolate, mitigate,
and blame demand an architectural solution wherein systemic accountability is an
architectural consequence, rather than an option.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this
end the proposal offers a novel alternative architectural style, COAST, for
constructing secure, large-scale, decentralized systems, coupled with a focus on
capability accounting. A capability is an unforgeable reference whose possession
confers both authority and rights to a principal. Capability accounting is the
practice of producing and maintaining a record or statement of the generation,
transfer, or use of capability relating to a particular period or purpose. The
approach facilitates the fine-grained use of capability accounting to prevent
security problems, isolate them, mitigate consequences of problems, and, if
necessary, assign blame for use in subsequent actions. Target applications are
typified by SOAs (Service Oriented Architectures), such as those found in
e-commerce, where there are multiple interacting parties but no single
overarching authority. Our approach is inspired and informed by the daily use of
broad accounting principles in other industries, notably Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points (HACCP), a systematic preventive approach to hazards in
production processes, and the generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) of
finance and business. Our immediate focus is assessing the viability of this
approach in a notional Internet-of-Things application, where we rely on careful
measurement and engineering analysis to guide future larger-scale projects.