* 1449060
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Wearable Long-term Monitor for Cardiac Arrhythmia
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Xiaoguang Liu, Cardiac Motion, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is far-reaching. A preliminary market study
indicates that 1.5% to 2.5% of the developed world?s population suffers from
heart arrhythmias while the WHO reports ~0.5% of the global population. For
Atrial fibrillation, in the USA alone this disease will afflict ~7.7 million
people by 2015, afflicts ~460,000 new patients every year and the patient load
is projected to grow to 12.1 million by 2050 (CDC). Atrial fibrillation and its
complications (stroke, congestive heart failure, seizures, death, etc.) add $26B
to the nation?s annual healthcare costs and kill nearly 80,000 people/yr. The
global load of Atrial fibrillation patients is a staggering 33.5 million with 4
million newly diagnosed every year which equates to ~$100B to treat the disease
and its complications worldwide. Fully 25% of these patients have paroxysmal
Atrial fibrillation so their % burden needs to be diagnosed in order to guide
and monitor therapy. Together with reducing the economic impacts, it would also
be enormous benefit to human health to create an easy-to-wear for long-periods
device that guides individual therapy, thus substantially improving the quality
of life and medical outcomes for arrhythmia patients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has the following
intellectual merits: A detailed model and validation methods will be developed
to understand how ultra wideband (UWB) radar signals interact with human tissue;
a prototype UWB radar sensor will be developed to validate the modeling effort;
an optimization of the UWB radar sensor will be carried out to improve the
operational characteristics of the radar motion detection system in order to
enable robust heart motion monitoring; This project is expected to enable the
development of a radar-based, non-invasive, low-power, long-duration-wearable,
heart motion monitor that can sensitively diagnose and detect intermittent
arrhythmias including paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter as well
as numerous other arrhythmogenic heart motions; This will provide an alternative
and much desired means to monitor patients for extended periods of time (&gt; 2
weeks and up to 1 year), something not feasible or practical to accomplish with
existing electrical or EKG monitoring systems like the Holter or other
externally-mounted cardiac event monitors.