* 1449035
* EAGER: Novel Rare Earth Metal Oxysulfate (RE2O2SO4) for Upconversion
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Hongmei Luo, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This project is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM)
and the Ceramics Program (CER).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:
This project focuses on an inorganic material system, oxysulfate (RE2O2SO4)
doped with metal elements, in the form of nanometer spheres and explores its
potential for converting low-frequency light to higher-frequency light
(upconversion). Upconversion is used in various photonic applications including
biological imaging. The project offers students the opportunity to acquire
skills in nanoparticle synthesis, functionalization, structural
characterizations, and optical property measurements. The research activities of
this project are integrated with an educational mission in terms of course
development and special seminars. As a Hispanic-Serving Institution, New Mexico
State University offers significant opportunities for outreach and educational
activities that involve K-12 students and underrepresented minorities including
those at the NMSU community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Bulk glass and crystalline materials are usually used for
upconversion, but bulk materials are often not suitable for certain applications
such as biological imaging. Upconversion materials on nanometer scales are
desirable. However, synthesis of small nanocrystals that exhibit high
monodispersibility and excellent upconversion properties remains a challenge.
The goal of this project is to establish a scientific basis for the design of
small monodisperse rare-earth-metal-doped oxysulfate nanospheres for
upconversion. The research team aims to develope an effective synthesis route,
biomolecule-assisted hydrothermal method, to control the size and shape of
nanospheres, as well as to tune the upconversion properties to enable their
practical applications. The research activities are designed to develop a
fundamental understanding of the formation mechanism of the nanospheres with
controlled size and shape; to investigate the energy transfer mechanism between
the sensitizer and the activator; and to reveal the relationship between the
composition, particle size and shape, crystal structure, and luminescent
properties.