* 1449893
* The Development Of Extensive Geographic Networks And Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Kenneth Sassaman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 122,070.00

Researchers have long sought to understand how and why interaction among widely
dispersed and mobile communities coalesced into larger and more complex and
stationary sociopolitical entities. Previous scholarship on this topic has
focused on the ecological and demographic factors that necessitated a more
sedentary lifestyle. Population growth and the adoption of agriculture, in
particular, have been frequently cited as key factors in this evolutionary
process. Archaeology is now well positioned to achieve a more nuanced
understanding of this critical transition by focusing on the actual movements
and convergences of people and artifacts across ancient landscapes. In this
project, Dr. Kenneth Sassaman and Dr. Zackary Gilmore, of the University of
Florida, examine the shift from broadly distributed social and economic networks
to relatively circumscribed place-based communities by tracing the circulation
and accumulation of vessels representing North America's oldest pottery
technology. Key questions guiding this research are: Was the shift to place-
based communities anticipated by the spatial organization of existing regional
networks? Or, alternatively, were existing regional networks contradicted or
superseded by the organization and structure of place-based communities?
Although geared explicitly toward past societies, this research bears relevance
to the understanding of communities affected today by large-scale processes,
such as globalization, neoliberalism, and global climate change, that challenge
local autonomy and the persistence of tradition. Arising out of modern networks
of communication, for instance, are virtual communities of practice that enable
local access to knowledge hitherto restricted to those with the political and
economic capacity to channel and control access to nonlocal information.

Sassaman and Gilmore use chemical and mineralogical sourcing techniques to
investigate how the organization of preexisting interaction networks enabled and
constrained the emergence of durable place-based communities (i.e., villages).
Neutron activation analysis (NAA) and petrography will be conducted on large
samples of pottery sherds from Early (5150-4100 B.P.) and Classic (4100-3800
B.P.) Stallings period sites in the Savannah River valley of Georgia and South
Carolina in order to test alternative hypotheses on pottery and clay variation
as a function of changes in community scale and organization. To the extent that
variations in Early Stallings pottery was differentially distributed in space,
the place-based communities of Classic Stallings times likely emerged out of
existing social distinctions. Conversely, inasmuch as Early Stallings pottery
lacks detectable subregional variations, place-based communities emerged as
novel social arrangements. In addition to helping to address a fundamental
anthropological question, this research will create an educational and training
opportunity by supporting a post-doctoral research position. It will also have
an immediate positive impact on the research value of collections housed at six
different repositories in the southeastern U.S., perhaps bolstering public and
government commitment to the long-term curation of archaeological collections.
In addition, the NAA and petrographic data collected will be made available to
other researchers and thus enhance the capacity for comparative and synthetic
research in the future.