* 1449621
* EAGER: Experimental Investigation of Forced Convection on Hierarchical Micro/Nanoporous Conducting-Lubricating Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Krishna Kota, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 55,211.00

CBET-1449621&lt;br/&gt;Kota (New Mexico State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forced convection heat transfer has
a very wide application base. It is inherent to numerous processes and equipment
that affect our day-to-day lives such as heat exchangers and heat sinks in power
generation, thermal management, space transportation, water purification and
defense sectors. In forced convection of liquids in channels/pipes, due to the
analogous dependence of flow friction and heat transfer performance on fluid
flow velocity and wall/surface characteristics, it was found by prior
researchers that any attempt to lower friction at the walls inevitably results
in decreased heat transfer rate and efforts to augment heat transfer almost
always result in increased frictional flow resistance. While enhanced heat
transfer is beneficial, increased friction at the walls demands more electricity
consumption in the form of pumping power required to overcome it. This proposal
aims to resolve this important and arduous problem that has attracted much
research attention in the last few decades i.e., it enables friction reduction
near the walls for fluid flow but for the first time, with negligible impact on
heat transfer performance by employing liquid-saturated hierarchical
micro/nanoporous surfaces. The focus will be on forced convection of liquids
without phase change. The proposed work has broader impacts on science and
society, which will be demonstrated through curriculum integration and state-of-
the-art research/classroom opportunities at the undergraduate and graduate
levels at the New Mexico State University. This activity will directly help in
developing a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce that would understand
and address critical issues of national interest in
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For achieving the project goals and objectives,
robust hierarchical micro/nanoporous surfaces of various roughness topologies
will be fabricated on internal surfaces of flow channels using a novel etching
technique, and their wetting, aging, and robustness aspects will be
characterized using precise weight measurement and fluorescence microscopy
techniques. To verify the theoretical predictions that showed substantial
potential of the concept, experimental investigation of forced convective heat
transfer performance of common coolants will be carried out in
mini/microchannels with water saturating the micro/nanoporous wall surfaces. The
recorded data of pressures, temperatures and flow rates will be post-processed
to obtain an energy-efficiency metric, which will be the increased Nusselt
number for the same pumping power required to pump the same liquid through a
same sized channel with regular/smooth surfaces. Outcomes as a result of
successful completion of the project will generate new knowledge base for
realizing significant energy efficiencies in forced convective transport by
providing novel fundamental insights on surface -philicity and robustness, flow
stability and thermal transport, and their dependence on surface topology.