* 1449199
* INFUSING ETHICS INTO THE DEVELOPMENT OF ENGINEERS
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Simil Raghavan, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 04/30/2017
* USD 184,936.00

Ethical practice in engineering is crucial for ensuring public trust in the
field and in its practitioners, especially as engineers increasingly tackle
international and socially complex problems that combine technical and ethical
challenges. The primary goal of this project is to raise awareness of the
variety of exceptional programs and strategies for improving engineers'
understanding of ethical and social issues. Despite the importance of ethics for
developing responsible engineers, there is not much information on the scope of
programs in use at the nation's colleges and universities. Recent research on
ethics development in science and engineering shows a variety of approaches;
some activities focus on ethical decision making, others on awareness of ethical
and social issues, and still others on professional standards, rules, and
regulations. Some are primarily based on campus; others emphasize off-campus
learning and engagement. To address this shortage of information, the National
Academy of Engineering Center for Engineering, Ethics, and Society (CEES) is
calling for nominations to identify and classify engineering ethics programs in
the United States. Based on the selections of a distinguished committee of
experts, the project is preparing a report recognizing a selection of
exceptional programs. The report is a resource for institutions and educators to
strengthen and expand their ethics programs and thus improve the ethical
capabilities of practicing and future engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
call for nominations, the project (1) reviews the variety of ways that ABET and
Federal funding agency requirements for ethics preparation are fulfilled both on
and off-campus at the undergraduate and graduate levels in engineering and
engineering technology; (2) categorizes the types of ethics initiatives offered
to engineering and engineering technology students, thus illustrating multiple
strategies that can accommodate different learning styles and levels of
experience and preparation; (3) highlights exemplary programs and activities;
(4) requests and summarizes comments from the engineering ethics education
community on the challenges and potential solutions for implementing such
activities; and (4) disseminates results broadly. A distinguished committee of
experts evaluates nominated ethics programs and selects a broad range of
exemplars. Faculty members, administrators, and institutions are actively
engaged, nominating ethics activities for review, providing comments about
challenges and potential solutions in the implementation of such activities, and
promoting strategies that develop skills to address ethical and social issues in
engineering. The resulting report classifies the nominated activities,
highlights exemplary programs, and summarizes the comments on challenges and
solutions.