* 1449601
* EAGER: Lateral Heterojunctions: Fabrication &amp; Characteristics of a Novel Concept in 2D Materials Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 07/31/2016
* USD 258,342.00

Non-technical Description: Two-dimensional materials such as graphene and
molybdenum disulfide have attracted considerable attention because they may
offer a facile way of fabricating electronic devices at the ultimate limit of
miniaturization, i.e., based on an inert, stable atomic sheet that is only a
single layer thick. Within this framework, this EAGER research project intends
to develop the concept of lateral continuous transitions between different
single-layer materials, in which the composition of the material is controlled
by chemical means to transition rapidly, e.g., from molybdenum disulfide to
molybdenum diselenide. The ultimate goal is to develop a procedure by which
well-defined patterns of material composition and ensuing electronic properties
can be "woven" into a single atomic sheet like a pattern in a plaid cloth. If
successful, this approach will provide for significantly more facile fabrication
of device structures than the conventional approach. This project is conducted
at a Hispanic Serving institution and directly benefits multiple Hispanic
undergraduate and graduate students in the lab. It synergizes with a Research
Experience for Undergraduate students site directed by the principle
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project intends
the development of methods for the preparation of lateral compositional
heterojunctions in transition metal dichalcogenide single-layer films utilizing
a modified chemical vapor deposition approach. It builds on findings in the
principle investigator's lab that permit the preparation of alloys between
molybdenum disulfide and molybdenum diselenide at any composition. Preliminary
data show that compositional gradients on the meV/micrometer scale can be
fabricated. This research project investigates whether these gradients can be
made sufficiently sharp and controlled so that they can set up quantum wells or
other functional elements for single-layer devices. To this end, researchers
apply both dedicated control of the chalcogen injection during the film growth
and post-growth processing of films by sulfur-selenium exchange.
Characterization proceeds primarily by optical spectroscopy augmented by
electrical testing where promising results are achieved. If the project has
success, the resultant structures will permit transfer of many materials and
device concepts of current GaAs/GaAlAs heterojunction technology, which is the
base of much of modern optoelectronics, to the world of two-dimensional films.