* 1449358
* SNM:  Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing of Films and Laminates Based on Cellulose Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Alexander Wei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,477,970.00

While the potential applications of nanocomposites have stimulated much
research, many practical barriers exist in production scale-up, and their
environmental issues have raised significant concerns. These factors are driving
a growing demand for nanomaterials that are produced from renewable sources that
are also highly processable. Cellulose nanomaterials represent one promising
class of materials. However, the scalable manufacture of these materials has yet
to be established, due to scientific and engineering challenges that are unique
to their dispersions. At present, cellulose nanomaterials based nanocomposite
films are prepared by casting methods that can only produce small-area samples
with limited quality control, or by press/filtration methods that produce sheets
with a high density of structural defects. This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM)
award will study continuous casting methods for the roll-to-roll fabrication of
these films and laminates. The research will result in a capability of producing
sufficiently large areas for practical vacuum- and thermo-forming applications.
Breakthrough technologies and approaches to scaling up production of these films
and laminates, large area continuous manufacturing, and new algorithms in
process control can revolutionize many applications in packaging and structural
materials. The interest expressed by industrial partners in this technology
attest to the potential impact of the project in industrial innovation. Moreover
developing scalable production of cellulose nanomaterial films and laminates
will allow replacement of fossil fuel-derived materials, thus lowering
environmental footprint and lead to a more sustainable economy.

The scalable production of cellulose nanomaterial enhanced laminate materials
will be supported by sustainable and eco-friendly approaches for surface
modification and particle dispersion, by fundamental advances in controlling the
rheology of complex fluids for uniform film deposition, and by a cross-
disciplinary approach toward process monitoring and control during continuous
roll-to-toll nanomanufacturing. Multi-scale modeling of cellulose nanomaterial-
polymer interfaces and process optimization will deepen our understanding of the
interplay between structure and materials properties at different length scales.
The simulation tools and computational models developed in the course of this
project will be widely applicable to the development of other types of
nanocomposites as well as continuous processes for film manufacturing.
Specifically, the following barriers will be addressed: scalable production of
cellulose nanomaterial-derived films and laminates, process monitoring and
control, and understanding the effect of interfaces and microstructures on film
processing and mechanical properties.