* 1449466
* Ethical Standards and Practices of Environmental Science Teams: Does Team Diversity Matter?
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2021
* Georgina Montgomery, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2021
* USD 608,632.00

Today, most scientific research is done by scientists working together in teams,
and many current social problems are so complicated that they require large,
interdisciplinary teams of scientists. But, it is not always obvious who the
best scientists are to include in a team and whether teams with certain types of
scientists have different behaviors or practices than teams with other types of
scientists. This project is studying whether teams with different team
composition have different behaviors and practices. Some research shows that
team composition (such as the gender, ethnicity, or discipline of the team
members; also called team diversity) influences science outcomes such as
effectiveness and productivity. But, there is little research that examines how
team diversity affects scientists' ethical behavior, which is the focus of this
study. The ethical behavior of scientists matters because it can determine the
quality of the science that gets done, and it can influence the trust that
society places in scientists. To answer this question, the awardee will measure
team diversity and determine how it affects ethical behaviors related to
materials sharing, authorship, and mentoring. It is expected that scientists who
work in more diverse teams (e.g., those that include women, members of racial or
ethnic minority groups, or individuals from different disciplinary backgrounds)
may promote team cultures that include social sensitivity and ideals of
community welfare. Therefore, higher team diversity may advance science's
effectiveness by promoting more ethical standards and practices.

This project will conduct both qualitative and quantitative surveys of
individuals who are part of teams in three NSF programs that fund highly
collaborative research: Dimensions of Biodiversity, Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems, and Macrosystems Biology. The project will first perform
qualitative interviews on a subset of individuals working in teams funded by
these three NSF programs to develop more precise hypotheses about the
relationships between team diversity and ethical behaviors. Then, those
hypotheses will be tested using a quantitative survey administered to the
remainder of the funded teams. The quantitative survey responses will be
analyzed using multilevel mediation modeling that accounts for the nested nature
of the data (i.e., individuals nested within teams) and that can determine
relationships between team diversity and ethical behaviors as well as the
factors mediating those relationships. In addition to sharing study results, the
project team will develop and facilitate workshops to help interdisciplinary
environmental scientists recognize the effects of diversity on ethical standards
and practices and facilitate increased diversity within teams.