* 1449309
* SNM: Three-Color Photolithography for Scalable, Large-Area, Low-Cost Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Daniel Falvey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,500,000.00

The ability to create devices with finer features over larger areas is crucial
to technological innovation in both mature and emerging industries. In the
semiconductor industry, progress in increasing circuit density has been
maintained by using light of ever shorter wavelengths to produce circuit
patterns, but this method is expensive and further improvements are nearing
their limit. This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) project will use three beams
of visible light of different wavelengths to produce nanoscale features with the
improved resolution required to produce high density integrated circuits.
Because visible light is inexpensive to produce, propagate and manipulate, the
method promises to lower the cost of cutting-edge nanomanufacturing by a factor
of 10 or more. The project team will collaborate with major industrial
developers and end-users to transfer the technology to practice, providing a
major boost to American competitiveness in scalable nanomanufacturing. The ever
more compact and powerful devices that this technology will produce have the
potential to impact virtually every imaginable aspect of technology and every
member of our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team has researched and
proven 2-color approaches to photolithography that have made possible the
creation of high-resolution features using visible light. The basis of these
techniques is that one color of light is used to initiate chemistry and a second
color is used to inhibit it. However, these methods are not yet capable of
producing the resolution needed to satisfy the requirements of the next node of
the Semiconductor Roadmap. The stumbling block for 2-color approaches has been
that initiation of chemistry competes with deactivation. The proposed 3-color
approaches circumvent this problem. One color of light pre-activates chemistry,
a second color of light deactivates the molecules, and a third color of light
transforms pre-activated molecules into activated molecules that then undergo
chemistry. This approach provides a viable path to attaining sub-20-nm
resolution for scalable nanomanufacturing in 2 and 3 dimensions. The project
team combines expertise in photolithography, photochemistry, spectroscopy and
pattern transfer to realize this vision. The team will work closely with
industrial collaborators who have expertise in commercial photoresists,
photolithographic tool components and photolithographic simulation methods to
ensure that the research methods and materials used are compatible with the
needs and processes of the semiconductor industry and other consumer product
industries.