* 1449559
* CRI II-NEW: MM-SISTR - Infrastructure for Enabling Mobile-Manipulation Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (MM-UAV) Research and Design
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Paul Oh, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2017
* USD 255,999.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are often used for surveillance and
reconnaissance missions. They typically fly high above the ground to avoid
obstacles. As such, they execute such missions passively. This project adds
dexterous arms to a UAV. This would yield paradigm-shifting missions; the arms
could then be used for near-Earth environment tasks like infrastructure repair,
agricultural crop handling and border inspection. The critical gap preventing
the realization of such UAVs is the lack of data on reaction forces and torques.
When the arms on such vehicles (dubbed Mobile Manipulating UAVs or MM-UAV)
interact with objects like building edifices, trees and common objects on the
ground, these reactions can upset vehicle stability. The new infrastructure
built by this project fills this gap. Robotic arms/hands is retrofitted and on
existing 6-DOF gantry that is configured to mimic the UAV?s lateral and
longitudinal dynamics. The net effect is a hardware-in-the-loop system that
enables capture and study of reaction forces and torques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from such infrastructure
include: data to analytically design MM-UAV to yield a new class of unmanned
aircraft suitable for near-Earth missions; international collaborations that
spinout results to industrial partners; hands-on lab components to complement
robotics courses; and Girl Scouts outreach programs to inspire and motivate
young girls to science and engineering. Dissemination includes the open sharing
of data and publishing in the literature. The outcome of the project is a new
class of UAV for field and service robotics with a wide range of missions.