* 1449860
* EAGER: US Ignite: Mobility-Enhanced Public Safety Surveillance System using 3D Cameras and High Speed Broadband Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Eugene Kwatny, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2017
* USD 199,995.00

The goal of this US Ignite project is to develop and demonstrate the utility of
3D cameras on police cars connected to cloud-based computing via high-speed
wireless networks. Camera-based surveillance systems play an important role in
helping law enforcement manage public safety but existing systems have several
drawbacks. The first limitation is that most current systems rely on static
cameras, which limits the flexibility for law enforcement to deploy the cameras
to targeted areas as needed. The second limitation is that most surveillance
cameras do no work well in environments with poor visibility such as nighttime
or fog. By combining back-end (or cloud-based)video processing with 3D cameras
the project addresses both of these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will install 3D cameras on police cars belonging to the Temple University campus
police department and back-haul the video data via the Temple University GENI
WiMax and campus WiFi infrastructures to a campus computing cluster for analysis
with the results being relayed back to the police officers as alerts or other
status. The project extends existing work on target tracking and detection to
deal with 3D video feeds. The project in being run in conjunction with the
Temple University campus police department which is providing domain expertise
and facilitating testing of the prototype system.