* 1449446
* RAPID: Cyberdata Privacy Concerns by Organizations at the Canada-U.S. Border
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Keith James, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 68,286.00

Organizations in the U.S. and Canada collaborate extensively in collecting and
sharing various types of cyberdata for purposes of border security,
environmental management, economic production, health protection, and other
shared goals. Organizations of all major types--governmental, private-sector,
and non-profit (or NGO)--have responsibilities that involve major coordination
with cross-border network partners. Recent revelations about privacy breaches
have led to concerns on both sides of the border about cyberdata privacy and
security. The extant turmoil over cross-border cyberdata privacy makes this
project a fit with the timeliness key element of the RAPID program. This
research aims to examine how Canadian and U.S. workers in all major types of
cross-border organizations handle cyberdata in their efforts to achieve both
cyberdata privacy and security, and important inter-organizational (especially
cross-border) goals. The study provides information about data privacy and
security strategies useful to organizations, governments, and individuals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the study have broad implications for
theory and research, not just for knowledge of influences on cyber data privacy,
but also for the broader national- and organizational culture, identity, and
values lines of scholarship. On the practical side, the findings have bearing on
education, policy-decision making, and training about cybersecurity practices
and privacy protections at the cross-national, national, and organizational
levels. The results may provide security, border-management, and border-spanning
organizations with information and ideas relevant to creating technologies and
systems that successfully integrate cyber-data collection and sharing by
organizations, with privacy concerns and rights of individuals.