* 1449137
* I-Corps Sites:  University of South Florida: Catalyzing Research Translation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2024
* Valerie McDevitt, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 359,646.00

This project establishes an I-Corps Site at the University of South Florida
(USF). NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established
at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. II-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. The site at USF
institutionalizes the Lean LaunchPad training process at the Center for
Entrepreneurship (CFE) and transforms processes in its Technology Transfer
Office (TTO) to facilitate faculty and students to transfer STEM research into
commercially viable ideas and prototypes. Faculty and students are recruited for
this Site using pro-active processes such as: visits to classrooms, capstone
design courses, research projects on campus, undergraduate and graduate research
displays, individual contacts with faculty with STEM related research grants,
and invention disclosures. The TTO also helps teams connect with business
mentors by leveraging current contacts. They also are a resource for finding
non-NSF funds for innovation-related activities. Faculty from CFE, representing
the Colleges of Business, Engineering, Medicine and Sustainability, deliver the
NSF training program in a one-week, intensive boot camp format. Beyond the
prototype stage, USF CONNECT, which is the business arm of USF and at the
epicenter of Tampa Bay's innovation ecosystem, supports the I-Corps teams
throughout the business life cycle, providing facilities, partners, and
resources for business development and access to technologies, workforce
programs, technology commercialization, critical research equipment, and
incubator facilities. The I-Corps program results in an institutional impact by
addressing a crucial gap in the USF innovation ecology in creating prototypes
and enhancing design. With an I-Corps site, the potential for increasing STEM
technology transfer that feeds Tampa Bay's growing innovation ecosystem is high
and contributes to transforming the region through high-technology startups. USF
is an economic anchor for the Tampa Bay region and a node of the Florida High
Tech Corridor that spans a 23-county region in Florida. Most of the state's
medical device manufacturing, defense, aerospace, informational technology, and
life sciences companies reside in this region. USF's diverse student population
are also targeted in the I-Corps Sites program. NSF/USF supports the Bridge to
the Doctorate and Sloan Minority PhD programs that have enabled USF to be ranked
as a top-10 producer of minority (African American/Black, Hispanic/Latino)
engineering doctorates. The I-Corps site also nurtures innovation among students
who are military veterans, as more than 2,100 veterans and their families are
enrolled as students at USF.