* 1449024
* U.S.-Based Student Support to Attend ACM SIGSPATIAL 2014
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Yan Huang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 29,625.00

This grant supports travel awards for 25-30 U.S.-based graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the 22th ACM SIGSPATIAL 2014
Conference, held in Dallas, Texas, USA, November 4-7, 2014
(http://sigspatial2014.sigspatial.org). The ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS conference was
originated in 1993 and has established itself as the world's premier conference
to foster research in the areas of Spatial Data and Analysis and Geographic
Information Systems (GIS). The conference provides a forum for original research
contributions covering all aspects of GIS. The participation of US graduate and
undergraduate students fosters intellectual stimulation of young minds to pursue
advanced research and development activities in an area with significant
technical and societal impact. Specific student activities include spatial data
competition "2014 ACM SIGSPATAL Cup", presentation and discussion of students'
work and mentoring. In addition, the students greatly benefit from attending
conference sessions featuring current state-of-the-art results in the area of
geospatial systems and applications, and potentially making connections for
research collaborations and research mentoring. The total number of ACM
SIGSPATIAL participants in the past has been in excess of 300 participants, with
a majority of the participants from the U.S., followed by Europe and Asia. A
strong representation of U.S.-based students at ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS is useful in
maintaining U.S. competitiveness in the important research areas crucial for
U.S. infrastructures and applications that critically depend on geo-referenced
information. Applications of spatial and geographical information contribute to
a wide-array of societal contexts: improving the lives of ordinary citizens
through advanced transportation applications, increasing the security of the
nation through better intelligence gathering using geospatial knowledge, and
developing applications that will have a positive impact on the global
environment. Educating and training the next generation of scientists,
engineers, and practitioners in the area of spatial and geographical information
systems will have a significant impact and will enhance the continuation of the
competitive edge of the United States in this important
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS 2014 Conference brings together
researchers, students, and professionals interested in research, development,
and deployment of solutions to spatial information handling and spatial
knowledge extraction problems, including conceptual, design, and implementation
issues ranging from applications, user interfaces, and visualization to storage
management and indexing issues. Spatial data and applications pose novel
research challenges in a wide variety of sub-areas, which include (but are not
limited to), spatial information acquisition, modeling, data structures and
algorithms, analysis, querying and integration, human-computer interaction and
visualization, and systems and architectures. From these sub-areas deep research
questions emerge that are motivated by a broad range of applications (e.g.,
emergency and crisis management, environmental monitoring, global positioning
and location detection, geosciences, location-based and mobile services,
navigation and route planning). The meeting is fostering interdisciplinary
discussions and research in all aspects of GIS. The conference seeks to
continuously advance the state of-the-art in spatial data management and spatial
data analysis and broaden its impact.