* 1449550
* Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education 2 (CADRE 2)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Barbara Berns, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,537,797.00

This award will continue and enhance the resource center (titled the Community
for Advancing Discovery Research in Education, or CADRE) for the Discovery
Research K-12 program. The project builds on the experience and expertise that
evolved over six years in the development and implementation of CADRE. With this
award, CADRE2 will maximize the individual and collective potential of DR K-12
awards by fostering collaboration and cross-sharing, and promoting the
generation of new knowledge and products. CADRE2 will provide technical support
to the awardees through communities of practice, a strong virtual presence, and
an annual PI meeting; professional growth opportunities targeted particularly to
early career researchers and developers; and aggressive outreach and
dissemination to the DR K-12 community and beyond. CADRE2 will establish
connections with other networks to leverage each other's strengths and services.
The evaluation will focus on components that have promise for adaptation by
future endeavors and by other networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
focus on support for early career researchers and developers, looking at
interests and needs for professional growth. The network will also contribute to
the knowledge base on capacity building, and provide a lens on dissemination of
DR K-12 resources, materials, and tools within and external to the research and
development community. The DR K-12 portfolio includes an estimated 300 projects
that are driven by the field yet respond to parameters established by the
National Science Foundation. Understanding the scope of the portfolio is
important because collectively, the awards produce resources, models, and
technologies that can influence the field. Convening the awardees in virtual and
person-to-person venues, and promoting collaboration and interaction among the
projects, maximizes the collective potential of the projects. With an emphasis
on early career researchers and developers, CADRE2's impact extends into the
building of the next generation of scholars. With an emphasis on communication
and dissemination of the project findings and experiences, the knowledge related
to STEM research will create a more evidence-based understanding of STEM
education.