* 1449772
* I-Corps:  Walking Crutch/Cane for Enhanced Assistance, Balance, and Control of Walking Dynamics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Kyle Reed, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Six million Americans use crutches, canes, or walkers for mobility assistance
due to chronic conditions and more than 10 million Americans use crutches due to
temporary injuries. Users who commonly require walking assistance using crutches
or a walking cane include individuals with cerebral palsy, stroke and other
neurological diseases, a fractured leg, sprained ankle, limited balance, and an
exoskeleton. Although crutches and canes are imperative to walking assistance
and rehabilitation for many individuals, the designs have not significantly
changed in the past century. Users frequently report problems with comfort and
the inability to walk long distances. The discomfort and lack of long-term
walking partially stems from the rubber point tip that is unstable and does not
provide any assistance propelling the person forward. A point or constant radius
tip cannot assist or resist the user during swinging or rolling over the crutch
tip, and all forward progression forces are generated by the users pushing
themselves forward over the crutch. The aim of this project is to develop
advanced and low-cost walking crutches/canes that are able to passively and
effectively assist users during level ground or up-hill walking, while also
enhancing control and balance during standing or down-hill
walking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Placing a properly designed kinetic shape on the
crutch/cane tip can generate a rolling force based on the vertical force applied
by the user?s weight. These crutch/cane roll-over shapes can either be passive
and predetermined or actively changing shapes, which can accommodate different
walking environments and user preferences. An actively changing crutch/cane tip
also allows for the crutch/cane to stand up on its own as needed so users are
able to free their hands for other everyday motions, for example shaking
someone's hand or pushing an elevator button. Having a crutch/cane be able to
stand up independently is a feature that several chronic users of canes are
excited about.