* 1449668
* EAGER:   Repository Cross-Linking for Open Archiving and Sharing of Scientific Data and Articles
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Don Middleton, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2016
* USD 72,553.00

The open availability and wide accessibility of scientific articles, data sets,
and other digital resources is becoming the norm for 21st century science.
Growing numbers of repositories of scientific resources enable researchers to
discover, understand, and build upon previous work at greater scales than was
previously possible. Many interrelationships exist between research articles,
data, software, and other services used to produce scientific findings.
Repositories for these resources, however, typically only supporting one
particular kind of resource, or at most will support a couple of resource types,
such as data and software. This has led to the siloing of information in a vast
number of repositories. Producers and users of scientific resources would
benefit from repositories with different specializations and user communities
working together at a technical and process level to provide greater services
than any one repository can provide. Through developing common workflows and
information exchange protocols, this project will demonstrate how repository
interconnections can be built in ways that establish connections between related
resources (e.g. data, software, services, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a model for how multiple repositories of diverse resources
can exchange&lt;br/&gt;and connect related information via complementary
workflows and metadata sharing. The project&lt;br/&gt;will consider two
different cases: 1) connecting resources that are already hosted by
repositories,&lt;br/&gt;and 2) connecting resources as they are newly deposited
into repositories. These are common&lt;br/&gt;cases among data, articles, and
software repositories. Case #1 looks backward in time, and&lt;br/&gt;case #2
looks forward in time. This project will produce a pilot implementation of
repository cross-linking, using two repositories provided and managed by the
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) / National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) as the development bed: 1) the OpenSky repository,
which hosts and provides access to the record of scholarship produced by UCAR
and NCAR staff, and is the platform for publishing the NCAR Technical Notes
series, and 2) is the Earth System Grid (ESG), which is a NCAR-hosted
infrastructure for the distribution and access of climate models, data, and
software. Building connections between repositories increases public access to
geosciences information and data by increasing the visibility of data and
information across previously unconnected systems, thereby increasing
discoverability, and by increasing the utility of data through explicitly
linking data to important documentation. Theproject outcomes will be shared and
explored with the relevant stakeholders communities through a workshop, and with
the communities brought together through EarthCube, namely, the geosciences,
informatics experts, scientific publishers, and data repositories.