* 1449238
* CAREER: Authentic Modeling and Simulation Practices for Enhancing Model-Based Reasoning in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Alejandra Magana-de-Leon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

An important component for producing successful outcomes in engineering design
and innovation is individuals' analytical problem solving abilities. These can
be greatly enhanced by means of modeling and simulation processes. Yet,
educational strategies for incorporating modeling and simulation skills into
undergraduate disciplinary courses have not kept pace with equipping
undergraduate engineering students with computational skills needed to solve
problems in existing or new application fields. This CAREER project seeks to
understand and enhance modeling and simulation practices in undergraduate
engineering education. Specifically, this project will identify and validate
pathways that students may follow as they progress toward mastery of modeling
and simulation skills now needed for workplace engineering readiness. Outcomes
will also include factors that contribute to, or prevent, effective teaching and
learning with modeling and simulation. As part of the effort, the project will
explore the following research questions:

(1) How do students experience model-based reasoning in the context of modeling
and simulation practices? (2) How do students experience problem solving in the
context of modeling and simulation practices? (3) How the observed patterns of
students? use of computational tools support or hinder student model-based
reasoning when problem solving (derived from Q1 & Q2)? 4) What are different
trajectories and levels of sophistication of modeling and simulation practices
in engineering as evidenced by student performances and understandings?

The broader significance and importance of this project is in the way it can
increase the chances for engineering discovery and innovation success, helping
the nation take advantage of the role of modeling and simulation sooner, better,
and with greater confidence. The project engages engineering faculty,
undergraduate and graduate students in classroom design-based research and also
provides outreach and dissemination through professional development of K-12
teachers and instructors at community colleges. The project overlaps with NSF's
strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an
engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally, NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by supporting the development of
innovative learning theories and systems.