* 1449122
* EAGER: Biochemical Mechanism of Oomycete RXLR Effector Binding to PI3P
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Shiv Kale, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Beneficial and pathogenic microbes have major impacts on plants, animals, and
humans, and on natural and managed ecosystems. Microbes that establish close
interactions with plants and animals use a wide diversity of molecules to
suppress or negotiate with their hosts' immune systems, including effector
proteins that can enter host cells to directly re-program metabolism. Some
microbes cause destructive diseases of plants, while other species provide major
benefits. In all cases, it is poorly understood how effector proteins from
microbes cross the membrane surrounding host cells to enter the cell interior.
Although substantial progress has been made on this question, the technical
challenges of the studies have slowed progress and have resulted in conflicting
findings and controversy. This project will focus on solving the most severe
technical challenges in this area, namely the question of how effector proteins
interact with host membrane lipids, in order to reduce controversy and advance
the field.

More specifically, the investigators will carry out detailed biochemical
experiments aimed at resolving conflicting findings regarding the binding of
oomycete effectors to the lipid phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate. The work will
focus on the two effectors from oomycetes for which the most structural and
biochemical information is currently available, namely Phytophthora sojae Avh5
and Phytophthora capsici Avr3a4.

The project has three objectives.

1. Refine the effector protein expression and purification methods in order to
identify the precise details required for obtaining preparations of the proteins
that are active in host cell entry and lipid binding.

2. Identify at a very detailed level the biochemical conditions required to
reproducibly observe binding of the effectors to
phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate.

3. In order to identify residues involved in binding, use precise and
quantifiable methods to assay lipid binding by the purified effectors and their
mutants, including Surface Plasmon Resonance and Isothermal Calorimetry, and
circular dichroism spectroscopy.

In addition to advancing understanding of how microbes interact with plants,
animals and humans, the broader impacts of this project will include the
training of a postdoctoral scholar and several undergraduate researchers, and
the mentoring of a junior investigator.