* 1449958
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Towards Understanding Smartphone User Privacy: Implication, Derivation, and Protection
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Jerry Cheng, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 146,000.00

This project aims to address privacy concerns of smartphone users. In
particular, it investigates how the usages of the smartphone applications (apps)
may reshape users' privacy perceptions and what is the implication of such
reshaping. There has been recent work that investigates privacy leakage and
potential defense mechanisms. However, so far there is only limited
understanding on the consequences of such privacy losses, especially when large
amount of privacy information leaked from smartphone users across many apps. The
project seeks to investigate how the mobile technology (i.e., smartphone and
smartphone apps) can reveal users' personal information and identify the
consequences of privacy violations, by taking users' social relationships into
consideration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project facilitates a deep
understanding of user privacy in the age of mobile devices and further develops
appropriate protective mechanisms. Smartphone user privacy across different
levels are analyzed including individual, social and community relationships
based on different levels of information leakage. Statistical models, such as
Bayesian networks and hidden Markov models, are developed to understand users'
temporal privacy leakage patterns based on large-scale trace-driven
investigation and experimental study. Data visualization tools are developed to
capture and display the spatial-temporal patterns and summary statistics of
different types of privacy leakage in real time, which helps users gain better
insights on potential privacy losses. The statistical modeling and the data
visualization techniques further enable the social scientists to study the
psychological or social consequences of privacy violations, and identify factors
encouraging attention or inattention to smartphone user privacy.