* 1449247
* RAPID: Toward anIimproved Understanding of Reactive Organic Carbon Sources and Arsenic Mobility in Reducing Aquifers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Natalie Mladenov, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 44,447.00

CBET-1449247 &lt;br/&gt;Mladenov &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAPID: Toward an improved
understanding of reactive organic carbon sources and arsenic mobility in
reducing aquifers &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arsenic is a world-wide issue in
groundwater when used as a source of drinking water. A study in 2007 suggests
that over 137 million people in more than 70 countries, including the United
States, are affected by this poison. A challenge is to better understand the
chemistry of arsenic in groundwater in order to inform engineering decisions in
treating that water to make is safe for drinking. One of the important
considerations is the presence of dissolved organic matter, often referred to as
DOM. There is some controversy over the source of this DOM, as to whether it is
the result of the discharge of wastewater or is from natural sources. Both are
possible; however it appears that in most cases it is naturally occurring
organic matter that is present in the ground waters. In turn, this DOM can react
naturally with microorganisms, which in turn can affect the chemistry of the
arsenic. The challenge of identifying the sources of reactive organic carbon
(DOM) driving microbial reduction continues to limit our ability to predict the
distribution of arsenic in reducing aquifers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is a concerted effort to correlate analytical methods for dissolved
organic matter (DOM) characterization and reactivity to fluorescence spectral
acquisition of DOM collected from uncompromised sediment pore-water. This will
provide new information about the potential and limits of fluorescence
spectroscopy for characterizing DOM in reducing environments that often have
high metal content. In addition, via this coordinated drilling effort at sites
with and without large-scale pumping, DOM chemical characterization and large
volume sampling for radiocarbon dating will test the hypothesis that, in the
absence of massive irrigation pumping, sediments may provide labile DOM to drive
microbial reductive dissolution of arsenic. Samples will be collected and
analyzed to provide key information regarding DOM source and age under scenarios
that are generalizable to other aquifers. With the unique freeze-shoe sampling
technology and availability of a mobile laboratory, this effort will allow for
the optimization of techniques appropriate for large volume sampling,
uncompromised pore-water sampling, and rapid DOM characterization. The proposed
research takes advantage of multiple datasets being collected by scientists and
students from 16 different countries in the summer of 2014. The drilling effort
utilizes novel freeze-shoe sampling technology to collect uncompromised
sediments and adjacent pore-waters from the arsenic-containing Mahomet Aquifer
(Illinois) for immediate analysis at a mobile laboratory at the site. The
proposed RAPID project will support sample collection at the Mahomet Aquifer
field site and preparation of samples for radiocarbon dating and determinations
of proteins, carbohydrates, and fulvic acids. The next large sampling similar to
this will not be for three years.