* 1449946
* Cosmogenic surface exposure dating of southern Laurentide ice retreat and eastward Lake Agassiz routing: relationship to the Younger Dryas cold event
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2018
* USD 234,949.00

Cosmogenic surface exposure dating of southern Laurentide ice retreat and
eastward Lake Agassiz routing: relationship to the Younger Dryas cold
event&lt;br/&gt;Anders E. Carlson &lt;br/&gt;College of Earth, Ocean, and
Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Younger
Dryas (YD) was an abrupt climate change event during the last deglaciation that
cooled the North Atlantic region 12,900-11,700 years ago. Ever since its
identification over a century ago, the cause of the YD has been widely debated.
YD climate cooling was likely caused by a reduction in the strength of the Gulf
Stream/North Atlantic current, but what caused this weakening of ocean
circulation? This project will test one of the leading hypotheses as to the
cause of the YD; that eastward meltwater discharge from the Laurentide Ice Sheet
(LIS) freshened the ocean surface and slowed ocean circulation. Given the
heightened awareness over tipping points in the climate system, the findings of
this project will provide insight into the possible effects of current and
future changes in the Arctic freshwater budget. In particular, can only small
changes in the Arctic freshwater discharge to the North Atlantic drive
significant changes in ocean circulation leading to North Atlantic cooling?
Results will also have implications for the field of archeology and geobiology
as they will help assess potential underlying causes of Pleistocene large mammal
extinction and adaptations of early North Americans, garnering popular
attention. How have past abrupt climate change events affected humans? This
project will support a postdoctoral researcher, who will be trained in the field
of glacial geology, geochronology, geochemistry and paleoclimatology. Under-
represented groups in the geosciences will take precedent in recruitment of the
postdoctoral researcher. Because of the reduced number of permanent positions in
paleoclimatology at present, support of recent PhDs is a significant broader
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine if the
opening of eastern Lake Agassiz outlets occurred at the start of the YD, which
would support the hypothesis that this routing caused the YD. The northward
retreat of the southern LIS margin and opening of the eastern glacial Lake
Agassiz outlets will be directly dated with boulder 10-Be surface exposure ages
along the western shores of Lake Superior (the eastern outlet). If one or more
of the eastern Lake Agassiz outlets opened at the start of the YD, then eastward
runoff routing likely provided the freshwater forcing that drove the reduction
in Atlantic meridional overturning strength. A later opening of the eastern
outlets would suggest that northwest Lake Agassiz routing or another forcing was
the trigger of the YD. Resolving the cause of the canonical abrupt climate event
will have important implications on the underlying mechanisms that give rise to
nonlinearities in the climate system and will provide a critical target for
assessing climate model sensitivity to freshwater forcing. Likewise, the 10-Be
chronology can be readily incorporated into glacial systems models that are
simulating the last deglaciation of the LIS. Results will be disseminated to the
scientific community through publications and presentations at international
meetings. Carlson will continue to write popular science pieces, which will
incorporate the results of this research project.