* 1449305
* SNM: Scalable 3D Nanomanufacturing Combining Ultrafast Laser Processing and Directed Self-Assembly
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Xiang Zhang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

Nanomaterials and nanotechnology offer unique opportunities for fabricating
devices of novel architecture and enhanced performance and can overcome system
integration issues challenging current nanomanufacturing methods that are suited
to planar geometries and are confined to top-down architectures. The central
motivation of this Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) project is to develop a new
manufacturing paradigm that offers scalability and flexibility enabling
nanoscale device fabrication and integration in truly three-dimensional
architectures over large areas and with arbitrary densities. A robust, fully
proven and scalable platform for building nanosystems of unprecedented
sensitivity and functionality will be developed. The research will have an
impact on education and the development of transformational and sustainable
nanomanufacturing technology while broadening our understanding of the
fundamental science. Applications include advanced optical materials, high
sensitivity sensors and nanomaterials for tissue engineering. Therefore, the
research will benefit the United States industry, economy and society. The
project will provide new opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
and in particular underrepresented minorities to have research experiences and
state-of-the-art training in nanoscience and engineering. Seminar courses on
nanomanufacturing and materials processing will be developed and an on line
course program in nanomanufacturing will be broadcast. A set of outreach
activities aiming at local high school students and transfer students from
community colleges will be implemented.

The core research strategy takes advantage of ultrafast laser beam processing
for generating the scaffold multi-scale structures with sub-50 nm feature
resolution. Two-photon polymerization will be used to fabricate structures of
tunable properties that are sensitive to pressure, light, heat and electrical
stimulation. This technique, together with ultrafast laser micro/nanomachining
will be adapted to multiple beam configurations in order to increase the
processing throughput. Once the template is constructed, the directed self-
assembly of block copolymers will be used to produce three-dimensional materials
with tailored functionality where pattern amplification will be used to push the
length scale to the sub-10 nm regime. The directed self-assembly of block
copolymers is a parallel process and, as such, particularly over the fundamental
length scales of concern in these studies, is quite rapid. Direct laser writing
will be used to create structures of the desired structural properties,
including optical waveguides, fluidic channels and conductive circuitry. The
following examples of functional structures will be demonstrated: i) highly
sensitive three-dimensional multi-plexed sensor devices, ii) large area complex
three-dimensional metamaterials and iii) nanostructured tissue scaffolds. The
impact of materials and chemicals, consumption of energy and other resources
during manufacturing, as well as product end-of-life and recycling will be
evaluated in a sustainability analysis.