* 1449270
* EAGER: Electrical Properties of 2D Phosphorene
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2016
* Peide Ye, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 01/31/2016
* USD 135,000.00

Award Abstract Title: Electrical Properties of 2D Phosphorene

PI: Peide Ye, Purdue University

Non-technical: The PI has coined the name Phosphorene for a new 2D single-layer
material derived from black phosphorus. Phosphorene, unlike graphene, has an
inherent, direct and appreciable bandgap and, unlike MoS2 or other transition-
metal dichalcogenides, can have carrier mobility on the order of 10,000 cm2/Vs.
Thus, phosphorene can potentially overcome the challenges of all other 2D
materials for ultra-scaled thin-body transistor applications thereby
transforming the electronics industry. His group is the first in the world to
successfully exfoliate single-layer phosphorene from black phosphorus and to
demonstrate promising transistor performance on few-layer phosphorene. Since the
PIs initial work, there is a great deal of interest that has been generated on
exploring the properties and applications of phosphorene. In this EAGER project,
the PI will focus on the exploration of phosphorene by exfoliation and
investigate the electrical properties and device integration aspects of the
research.

Technical: Being the only other elemental material that can be exfoliated like
graphene and with an inherent, direct and appreciable bandgap and high carrier
mobility, phosphorene represents a unique opportunity as the basic material for
next generation devices. The PI's initial exploration through exfoliation will
guide the development for high-quality, defect-free materials and processes that
enable safe and easy integration into device architectures. Additionally, the
highly puckered structure of phosphorene dictates that each single layer
comprises two tightly bonded atomic layers a property that can be exploited to
develop a large-scale vapor-phase-deposition manufacturing process in future.
The puckered structure also makes phosphorene highly anisotropic a property that
can be exploited for electrothermal applications. To reduce the environmental
sensitivity of phosphorene and to explore other novel architectures and
properties, heterojunctions between phosphorene and graphene, h-BN, MoS2, or
other chalcogenides and oxides will be explored. For example, unlike most other
2D materials, phosphorene is naturally p-type, and p-type phosphorene
transistors can be combined with n-type MoS2 transistors to form energy-
efficient CMOS circuits and 2D tunneling field-effect transistors. The PI will
not only promote diversity in the human resources engaged in the proposed
project, but will also expand on the diversity of thought, ideas, and approaches
in defining and solving important research questions concerning phosphorene. The
PI is committed to integrating research and education, and has detailed plans to
enhance diversity in engineering. The PI plans to integrate research with
curriculum development on 2D materials and devices to broaden the impact of the
research.