* 1449113
* Workshop: PFI: BIC Smart Service Systems Grantees Meeting and Workshop toward Building a Rigorous Research Agenda for Service Systems.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Richard Larson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 04/30/2015
* USD 130,000.00

This award will provide support to conduct a three-day workshop at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) on November 20-22, 2014. The MIT-
based intellectual home of the workshop will be the Sociotechnical Systems
Research Center in the School of Engineering. Sixty researchers from around the
country in fields such as systems engineering, computer science, and cognitive
engineering/human factors will participate. Technology-based innovations in
service systems could have enormous economic importance for the U.S. Service
systems contribute to 75% of the U.S. GDP and provide close to 80% of
employment. Innovative services involving smart technologies have the potential
to become the conduit for social innovations addressing major societal problems.
To achieve this goal, they are to be designed with the human user or beneficiary
in mind. Engineering the systems of the future will require interdisciplinary
work involving disciplines that understand human factors (such as cognitive
engineering and behavioral science) together with those that understand the
technology and appropriate engineering design (such as computer science and
systems engineering).

Already, NSF is contributing to the realization of this vision through its
initial investments in translational research by the 2014 PFI:BIC program
solicitation (NSF 13-587) focused for the first time on the integration of smart
technologies into service systems requiring a human factors engineering
component. However, to accelerate innovation in smart service systems with major
societal impact, it is essential that investments be made not only in the
technologies that can enable smarter systems, but also in understanding the
behavior of the socio-technical systems and how different design alternatives
can generate different system behaviors. This is clearly an interdisciplinary
fundamental research challenge that involves several disciplines to generate
knowledge at the intersection of those fields.

The Workshop will convene experts from multiple scientific fields in academe,
industry, and government: 1) To provide a venue for potential PFI:BIC proposers
as well as for current PFI:BIC awardees to exchange ideas and interact with
industry representatives in the interest of enhancing success in the program.
Invited industry representatives will bring their service innovation research
challenges to the table and will present the types of research problems that
lend themselves to academe-industry partnerships in smart service systems. (2)
To present the state of the art in the fields related to service science and
modeling/designing complex service systems, thus providing context for the
identification of fundamental research problems that will cross disciplinary
boundaries. This is the starting point for identifying the gaps that need to be
filled in order to advance the frontier. (3) To elicit fundamental research
challenges (basic understanding and modeling) that need to be addressed to
enable human-centered and technology-based smart service systems; and
engineering and computer science research challenges that need to be addressed
to advance technologies with potential for broader societal impact in the
context of social innovation based on service systems. (4) To develop a vision
and a well-defined fundamental research agenda that includes research goals,
research objectives, and a research plan for service systems. The research plan
should delineate roles for the different disciplines and a clear motivation to
work together; including engineers, cognitive or behavioral scientists and
computer scientists.

Several scientists from underrepresented groups will be invited to the workshop,
and students at MIT will have an opportunity to present their research work on
service systems topics.