* 1449723
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Removing Bottlenecks in High Performance Computational Science
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Charles Sherrill, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

Computational chemistry has become ubiquitous throughout the fields of science
and engineering. Among the many uses of computational chemistry codes are to aid
in the design of new materials with specific properties, to understand protein
folding dynamics related to the human body, to understand the mechanisms of
enzyme catalysis to produce biofuels, and to identify and characterize gaseous
species in the atmosphere. Because computational chemistry simulations can
require large amounts of computer, memory and disk space, one focus of this
research is to reduce the demands on computer resources by exploiting methods
that can efficiently fragment large molecules into smaller pieces and at the
same time take advantage of computers that have many thousands of computer
cores. The principal investigators are developers of several computational
chemistry programs, each of which has unique functionalities that have taken
multiple person-years to develop and implement. In order to minimize further
development efforts and to maximize the utility of the unique features, a second
key focus of this research will be to develop the ability of each program to
access the unique features and data of the other programs. A major bottleneck in
the effort to construct high performance computers with more and more compute
cores is the power that is required to drive such systems. One way that the
research team will address the power issue is to explore the utility of low
power architectures, such as graphical processing units for computational
chemistry calculations. All of the newly developed codes will be made available
to the user community by web download at no cost.

This project presents an integrated computational science approach to very high
quality electronic structure and dynamics calculations that will (a) be broadly
accessible to both the development and applications communities, (b) have the
capability to address problems of great interest, such as the properties of
liquids and solvent effects, and photochemical/photobiological dynamics with
high accuracy, (c) provide interoperability and sustainability into the
foreseeable future, and (d) solve bottlenecks including power consumption using
accelerators. A primary goal is to provide to the broad community new, accurate
approaches that may be easily used, with a clear path forward to further code
improvement and development. As part of the proposed effort, in addition to the
usual outlets of journal articles and public presentations, the investigators
will organize workshops at prominent national meetings, so that the expertise
and software developed will be available to as broad a group of users as
possible. All of the developed codes will be available on the web for easy
downloads. The proposed research will develop new paradigms for
interoperability, with a focus on the highly popular program suites GAMESS,
NWChem, PSI4 and the AIMS dynamics code. Also included will be a cloud-based
client-server model, a common quantum chemistry driver and novel data management
approaches. The integration of the codes will be accomplished by making use of
the combined expertise of the PIs in developing interoperable methods and data
interfaces in computational science. In addition, several new methods will be
developed, including novel explicit (R12) correlation methods that will be
integrated with the most accurate levels of theory: multi-reference and the most
accurate and novel coupled cluster methods, as well as the derivation and
implementation of analytic derivatives. Applicability to large molecular systems
will be made feasible by drawing upon novel fragmentation methods that scale
nearly perfectly to the petascale.