* 1449699
* Water Diffusion in Olivine: Experiments and Application to Phenocrysts
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Elizabeth Ferriss, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/28/2017
* USD 222,017.00

Measurements of water in the mineral olivine and its melt inclusions provide
constraints on fundamental Earth processes such as the occurrence of plate
tectonics, planetary melting, and volcanic explosivity. However, interpretations
of these measurements are highly debated because of the possibility that water
may exchange rapidly with the surrounding environment during transport from the
earth's interior to the site of collection. The extent of this exchange depends
on how fast water diffuses in olivine. Water diffusion in olivine can occur by
several different mechanisms, some of which are orders of magnitude faster than
others at the same temperature, resulting in considerable uncertainty about
which diffusion rate to apply. This project aims to resolve that ambiguity while
supporting an early-career female scientist; undergraduate students will also
contribute to the investigation. The research results will be shared with the
general public and the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will include targeted dehydration experiments as well as measurements of natural
samples to elucidate the role of different diffusion mechanisms as a function of
oxygen fugacity, temperature, and time. Oriented single crystals of olivine will
be first completely dehydrated and equilibrated at the temperature of interest,
then fully hydrated at high pressure, and finally placed in a 1-atm gas-mixing
furnace and heated in steps until fully dehydrated. After each step, infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements will be taken along profiles in each dimension
of the sample to quantify the internal water concentration and extent of
diffusion. This approach takes advantage of a new numerical technique for
interpreting infrared spectroscopic measurements through uncut crystal blocks,
allowing for the first time a time-series of hydrogen diffusion data on the same
sample in multiple orientations. These laboratory experiments will be
complemented by FTIR measurements of various sized olivine phenocrysts from
Fuego Volcano. This study will be the first attempt to identify and apply site-
specific diffusivities in samples that are well-characterized for their
degassing and ascent history.