* 1449499
* Workshop to Address Changing Practices Around the Publication of Biological Data, Washington, D.C., December, 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Richard O'Grady, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 22,844.00

The American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS) will convene a meeting to
identify productive ways in which more journals could encourage sharing of
research data. AIBS member societies represent the breadth of the biological
sciences, including organismal, comparative, ecological, and evolutionary
biology. Currently, scientific societies and their journals have taken varied
approaches to publication of data. By enacting coordinated policies, societies
and their journals could play a key role in ensuring a smooth transition to
greater public access to research data. Key stakeholders will gather with
scientific publishers, government officials, and biologists to discuss possible
models for journal policies that could help to improve public access. AIBS will
also involve graduate students interested in conducting research with publicly
available data, as well as science policy, communications, and publishing.

In February, 2013, the Office of Science and Technology Policy(OSTP) put forth a
memorandum on "Increasing Access to the Results of Federally Funded Scientific
Research," which is serving as a guide for government agencies now developing
plans to improve public access to scientific publications and data. In this
context, participants will make preliminary assessments of the implications of
current and expected changes in data management practices and essential elements
of model policies for journals. Among the issues are 1) concerns about
attribution of published data and about how professional credit will accrue to
researchers who publish them; 2) ensuring adequate quality control and
application of standards (for example, what authorities should be consulted on
species names?); 3) the identification of legal constraints on publication; 4)
The consideration of ?data papers? that describe a data set but do not offer
analyses; and, 5) the time and expense that might be involved in publishing
primary research data in a way that will be useful to others. The workshop will
be broadcast by Webcast and available for future viewing; an online discussion
forum will be established to enable public comment. To extend the benefits of
the workshop, an advisory working group will be established to sustain awareness
and engagement by the editors of the biological journals, their readers, and
society members.