* 1449043
* STTR Phase I:  Carbon capture and high-value isoprene production by fast-growing cyanobacteria
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Toivo Kallas, Algoma Algal Biotechnology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to develop cyanobacteria (blue-green
microalgae) and photobioreactor (algal culture) systems that efficiently use
sunlight, nutrients from wastewater, and waste carbon dioxide (CO2) to produce a
sustainable, carbon-neutral source of isoprene. Isoprene is a high-value
component of thousands of terpene products including synthetic rubber,
pharmaceuticals, flavors, fragrances, oils, and biofuels, and has an annual
market of $2 billion. Ingredients for flavors and fragrances, of which
isoprenoids are a large part, are expected to reach $10 billion annually by
2017. Currently, almost all isoprene is produced from petroleum. Because of
growing awareness of the dire impacts of climate change, the development of
"carbon neutral" bioproducts and biofuels has become a global economic and
security imperative. Renewable isoprenoids will be in demand as companies seek
to mitigate their carbon footprints and improve their "green" credentials. Some
bio-isoprene is being produced by microbial fermentation, but this still
releases CO2, and no company currently produces isoprene photosynthetically.
Thus, "photo-isoprene" produced by microalgae with energy from sunlight and
carbon captured from the atmosphere or industrial flu gases will offer
significant benefits for society and the environment as well as important
potential for business development.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002
cyanobacteria that use CO2, sunlight, and wastewater to efficiently produce a
sustainable, "green" source of isoprene (C5H8), a volatile, high-value precursor
for numerous terpene products. Cyanobacteria capture rather than produce CO2.
Synechococcus 7002 is among the fastest growing algae on earth, tolerates
extreme light intensities that are lethal to many algae, grows in saline waters
at temperatures up to 45°C, and is readily amenable to bio-engineering. These
features make Synechcoccus 7002 an excellent platform for growth on wastewaters
in arid regions unsuitable for crops, and cost-effective carbon capture and
"photo-isoprene" production. The plan is to use a modified 2-C-methyl-D-
erythritol-4-phosphate (MEP) pathway of Synechococcus and optimized genes for
isoprene synthesis to develop strains that continuously produce isoprene for
weeks at rates much higher than any published for cyanobacteria.
Commercialization will require further bio-engineering and photobioreactor
design to maximize production and develop efficient isoprene capture. Phase I
will: 1) integrate further genetic modifications to increase isoprene production
5-fold to convert 10% of captured carbon into isoprene 2) optimize
photobioreactors for CO2 capture and isoprene production, and 3) develop a
prototype system that captures at least 50% of the isoprene from the culture gas
effluent.