* 1449410
* Information Technology, Automation, and the U.S. Workforce
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 380,480.00

Recent publications and media reports have revived longstanding concerns about
the potential negative effects of automation and other applications of
information technology (IT) on the U.S. workforce, and prompted new discourse
about implications and potential responses. Substitution of technology for labor
where cost effective is not a new phenomenon. Today though there are indications
that IT's growing scope and scale of use and the discovery and use of new
computing techniques such as machine learning is changing what can and will be
automated. The ultimate limits to automation and how the workforce--and the
nation--will adapt are not clear. To the extent that IT can assume some or all
of the responsibilities of existing jobs, it reduces the number of workers
required and changes the nature of the work that remains, e.g., as people
increasingly work with automated assistants. The phenomenon is of great
consequence for individuals, who must make decisions about their own education,
training, and career development; for businesses and other institutions whose
labor needs will change; and for policy makers, who must understand the
implications for productivity, the economy, unemployment, the social "safety
net," and future education and training needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A National
Academies study will consider the possible impacts of automation and other
applications of IT on the U.S. Workforce. It will consider current knowledge and
open questions about the drivers of increased automation; the types and scale of
jobs that might be affected; the societal implications of these changes; the
time frame for impact; and implications for education, training, and workforce
development. Through testimony, discussions convened by the committee, a
literature review, and committee deliberations, the committee will examine
currently available sources of information, consider how different disciplines
could contribute knowledge, explore where additional data would help, and frame
research questions aimed at better understanding the phenomenon. The committee's
consensus report will set forth a research agenda and describe types and sources
of data and analysis that would enhance our understanding of the workforce
impacts of IT and automation. The project will thus provide a more nuanced
understanding of the workforce impacts of information technology, stimulate
interdisciplinary research to improve our understanding, and provide information
to inform future policy making.