* 1449604
* RAPID proposal:   Site characterization cruise to document the active and extensive subsurface biosphere in the Guaymas Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Andreas Teske, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 57,979.00

The Guaymas Basin in the central Gulf of California is an active tectonic
spreading center overlain with thick, organic-rich sediments. In contrast to
typical deep-water, mid-ocean ridge spreading centers that have very focused
magmatism and little or no sediment, magmatism in the Guaymas Basis is more
broadly distributed. This broadly-distributed magmatism significantly expands
the fraction of organic-rich sediments that may be subject to alteration by the
magmatic heat and thus it greatly expands the range of environments that support
hydrocarbon generation and microbial populations in the sediments. Recognition
that magmatism is not confined to the spreading axis, but instead is distributed
throughout Guaymas Basin, suggests that models for the natural sequestration of
carbon, the formation of oceanic crust, and life in the subsurface in marginal
rift basins should be reconsidered as this has implications for the long-term
removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide (and hence potential climatic
implications). The Principal Investigator of this RAPID proposal is a lead
proponent on an International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) proposal to study
this system in depth through scientific ocean drilling. To properly plan this
expensive IODP expedition, additional site characterization gained from sediment
sampling and seismic data is required. This proposal requests funds for the
Principal Investigator to participate on an already planned site survey cruise
aboard the Mexican Research Vessel (RV) El Puma. The results from this cruise
will provide valuable data, at an exceptionally low investment, to guide
decisions about potential future scientific drilling in the Guaymas
Basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID proposal requests funds for the Principal
Investigator to participate on a Mexican site survey cruise in October 2014 on
RV El Puma to collect five-meter gravity cores of an extensive sediment transect
across the Guaymas Basin and to integrate sequencing-based microbial community
analyses of subsurface bacteria and archaea with biogechemical characterizations
of these subsurface sediments. Gravity coring and microbial community analysis
will target cold non-hydrothermal sediments as well as off-axis hydrothermally-
influenced sediments. The gravity coring campaign and the
geochemistry/microbiology studies are coordinated with heatflow measurements and
extensive 2D seismic analysis and high-resolution 3D seismic mapping by other
planned Mexican and German cruises. This multi-pronged strategy will deliver the
additional data and complete the site characterizations that are required to
properly plan a potential IODP drilling expedition by the JOIDES Resolution.