* 1449019
* STTR Phase I:  Advancing Beyond the Photodiode - Deep Sub-micron Pixels for Next-generation Image Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* David Ferry, PixelEXX Systems, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2016
* USD 246,250.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project centers on revolutionizing medical endoscopy.
Advantages of minimally invasive surgery are becoming broadly appreciated. In
particular, its effects on both the time and end-points of patient recovery are
strong incentives to develop new, minimally invasive tools. Today, a broad range
of complex surgeries allow for treatment of a wide variety of pathologies, yet
there are still many procedures that are limited by the size and flexibility of
the surgical visualization tools. A chip-on-the tip endoscope built around a new
imaging sensor will dramatically expand the range of minimally invasive surgery
by significantly reducing the size of the entire optical train. Smaller imaging
devices with higher resolution will extend the reach of the surgeon to currently
inaccessible areas of the body. Such a device will also give rise to increased
scope maneuverability and allow the addition of other operating tools within the
endoscope. This combination of improvements will enable more complicated
procedures within challenging surgical corridors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at developing
the world?s smallest endoscopic cameras. Medical practitioners continuously push
for smaller, smarter visualization tools. Existing imaging technologies are
approaching fundamental barriers with pixel sizes hovering at one micron because
noise increases as pixel size decreases for traditional pixel architectures. As
a result, with the miniaturization of cameras there is a sharp decrease in image
quality. This proposal investigates deep sub-micron imaging pixels that function
using a novel mechanism where light drives transitions between ballistic and
diffusive carrier transport. Reducing these image sensors to practice requires
an understanding of the ballistic transport mechanisms that drive the devices
and the feasibility of integrating deep sub-micron pixels with compatible
supporting technologies. Computer simulations will be used to probe external and
internal driving forces that affect carrier transport. Using this semiconductor
technology, the size of the image sensor pixels can be shrunk to hundreds of
nanometers, enabling a new class of ultra-thin ?chip-on-the tip? endoscopes that
overcomes performance barriers of size, image quality and functionality.