* 1449854
* I-Corps:  Develop chemical markers for rapid and system-level sewer deterioration condition assessment
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Tao Yan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Currently, sewer maintenance (repair, replace and rehabilitation) is conducted
largely in a responsive fashion, which is usually driven by sewage spills and
complaints. Recently, many sewer system owners have started to implement system-
level sewer condition assessment, in order to conduct preventative maintenance
and rehabilitation. However, the only technology available is based on direct
flow measurement, which can be erroneous due to the complex sewer environments
and limitation of the flow measurement technologies. Since making such large
investment decisions based on data from a single data source can introduce
significant systematic risks, it is crucial that an alternative and independent
sewer assessment approach is available.

This I-Corps project aims to develop chemical markers in sanitary sewage for
rapid and system-level sewer deterioration condition assessment. A previous NSF-
funded project discovered that total nitrogen (TN) in sanitary sewage exhibited
characteristic and stable daily flux pattern, and changes in TN concentration
due to rainfall derived infiltration and inflow (RDII) can reliably estimate
RDII level and hence sewer deterioration severity level. The flux stability of
TN and its ability to predict sewer deterioration represents a new sewer
condition assessment strategy that can complement and augment the current
approaches.