* 1449465
* Cultivating Ethical Practices for Implementing The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* April Sievert, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2016
* USD 194,685.00

The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 43 CFR 10)
enacted by Congress in 1990 establishes the rights of federally recognized U.S.
tribes to ascertain the whereabouts of culturally affiliated ancestral human
remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural patrimony,
and to request repatriation of these items. The law requires scientists in the
archaeological, anthropological and museum sciences to consult with tribes on
matter of research, documentation, and repatriation. Even after 20 years
scientists in many cases remain unsure how best to proceed in order to comply
with the regulations and still use materials subject to NAGPRA in research. This
project will build a NAGPRA training toolkit by bringing interdisciplinary
stakeholders together to study training and build curriculum. During the initial
phase of the project funded by the award the team will conduct a survey to
assess current training, will develop a database of contact information and
extant training materials, produce a white paper on the alignment of NAGPRA
requirements with the Code of Conduct of the Register of Professional
Archaeologists, distribute a newsletter to tribal entities, colleges, and
cultural resource personnel, and conduct the first of several planned Collegium
meetings at which faculty, consultants, and students will participate in open
and equitable dialogue and joint research to ascertain how the ethics of their
fields of study are taught and learned with respect to NAGPRA including direct
exposure in the classroom as part of undergraduate or graduate coursework, and
through mentorship of students via faculty research committees, advising, and
lab or field supervision and instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NAGPRA mandates
interpolating multiple ways of knowing about peoples of the past. Implementation
of NAGPRA has brought scientists into close interaction with descendent
communities who may reckon, view, and understand their past in ways that seem at
odds with the epistemologies of Western science. Indigenous worldviews may use
origin narratives, oral histories, cosmologies, and cultural traditions as
sources of knowledge about the past. The ethical principles that come to play
with NAGPRA require increased understanding and appreciation of multiple ways of
knowing by both scientists and adherents to alternative views. Hence, analyzing
how scientists learn about and cope with NAGPRA targets core values and
philosophies held by scientists and juxtaposes these with indigenous impressions
both about the past and about what scientists do. The collegium convened to
study and improve on training materials takes a practical problem and uses it to
address fundamental distinctions made between scientific and alternative world-
views.