* 1449653
* EAGER: Monolithic 3D Integration of Resistive Random Access Memory (ReRAM): A Technological Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Shimeng Yu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 258,000.00

With the rapid growth of big data, next generation non-volatile memory
technologies are needed to enable a large capacity and fast bandwidth. The
resistive random access memory (ReRAM) technology is one of the emerging
candidates beyond the scaling limit of today's FLASH technology. The research
and development of the ReRAM technology will benefit nearly every digital device
available today from consumer electronics to enterprise electronics. It may also
spawn new applications involving the computation on the exascale of data, e.g.
data mining, machine learning, and bio-informatics etc. thus benefitting the
semiconductor industry at large. Student summer internships are planned with the
industrial partners, which will be invaluable for broadening the knowledge and
skills of the students. The tools and techniques developed in this research will
be used in the newly developed seminar course on memory design at ASU. The PI
will make simulator tools available for use by other educators, researchers, and
industry practitioners. Dissemination of research findings will also be carried
out through conference tutorials, panel discussions, and workshops. A concerted
effort will be made to involve underrepresented groups and undergraduate
students in this research, and also to promote the K-12 students to major in
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to tackle the
fundamental technological challenges for the monolithic 3D integration of ReRAM.
Although the ReRAM technology shows very attractive characteristics at single
cell level, at the array level its lower integration density limits its
economical competiveness over the mainstream NAND FLASH technology. The project
examines the use of monolithic 3D integration of ReRAM as a promising approach
for enabling ultra-high density cross-point memory architecture. The proposed
research activities focus on the device-level engineering with the design
targets from the circuit-level array modeling, aiming at enabling the large-
scale integration of 3D ReRAM technology. Array macro model that can assess
integration density, cost per bit, read/write margin, access latency, and
power/energy consumption will be developed and calibrated by SPICE simulation.
Device prototypes for 3D ReRAM will be fabricated and optimized towards the
desired targets given by the array macro model. All device engineering
activities will leverage the existing knowledge of the electrode/oxide interface
engineering and oxide/oxide interface engineering and further contribute to new
understandings of relevant issues.