* 1449282
* Monitoring Changes in Seismic Velocity Related to Magmatism at Augustine and Veniaminof Volcanoes, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Ninfa Bennington, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2018
* USD 95,636.00

This study will focus on improving the detection of precursory activity prior to
active volcanism at both Augustine and Veniaminof volcanoes, Alaska. The
researchers in the study will carry out seismic interferometry using ambient
noise recorded at these volcanoes, specifically pre- through post-eruption for
the 2002 through 2013 eruptions at Veniaminof and the 2006 Augustine eruption.
This method is able to resolve small temporal changes in seismic velocity
between station pairs, thus allowing the detection of subtle changes in the
volcano over time. A natural extension of this work will include spatial mapping
of these temporal changes in seismic velocity from pre- through post-eruption at
Augustine volcano. Spatial mapping of these changes in seismic velocity at
Augustine will help visualize pre- through post-eruptive structural changes at
the volcano. Some important questions related to magma storage and transport at
Augustine will be examined including if an inflating shallow magma reservoir
exists, and at what point in the eruptive cycle does the shallow magma reservoir
inflate. The work will look for indications of magmatic fluid from a shallow
magma reservoir, and perturbations to the upper crustal velocity structure
serving as an early indicator of eruption. At Veniaminof, they will examine
questions related to the progression of magmatic activity leading to eruption,
including if there are indications of an inflating magma reservoir prior to
eruption, and if inflation of the magma reservoir is followed by the migration
of magmatic fluids to shallow depths.

Augustine volcano is one of the most active volcanoes in the Cook Inlet and
Veniaminof volcano is one of the most active volcanoes in the Aleutian Arc. As
such, both volcanoes pose major hazards to local people, air traffic, oil
production facilities, and shipping activity. This study will improve our
ability to detect precursory activity leading to active volcanism at both
Augustine and Veniaminof volcanoes. The proposed study will also fund an early
career female scientist, Dr. Ninfa Bennington, at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. The researchers will create an online website that displays near-real
time changes in seismic velocity for both Augustine and Veniaminof volcanoes.
This website will be available to both to the general public as an educational
resource and to the AVO as a near-real time monitoring tool to assess volcanic
activity at Augustine and Veniaminof volcanoes.