* 1449319
* EAGER: Acoustic Differentiation of Northern Red-legged Frog Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Randy Zelick, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 61,997.00

A major question in understanding the natural world is how each species is able
to successfully identify a mate to assure persistence of the species and how
changing environmental conditions might influence its reproductive success. In
many species male advertisement calls are essential for attracting a female to
mate with as well as being used for species recognition when more than one
species co-occurs within an area. The researchers have identified a novel system
to quantify how male advertisement and recognition calls are altered when the
calls are performed underwater among populations of northern red-legged frogs in
the Pacific North West. This research on sound transmission and mating will be
complemented by an investigation of the genetic differentiation among
populations of this frog species throughout its geographic range. The research
will be shared via an outreach initiative at Portland State University's "Better
Know a Lab" that brings together the surrounding community and research labs to
jointly conduct data collection all the way through to the presentation of their
findings. Furthermore, networking is planned with local teachers to help design
interdisciplinary curricula highlighting the role of communication, ecology, and
the science of sound to engage students in learning about mating strategies and
the important role animal communication plays in species successful persistence
in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensory drive hypothesis asserts that
sensory conditions (environmental biophysics) and sensory systems drive
divergence in mate signaling in a particular direction, one that optimizes
signal propagation ultimately through resultant reproductive success. This
research is unique in testing the sensory drive hypothesis with a terrestrial
anuran that (1) calls underwater and (2) calls in shallow ponds that may
dramatically alter "normal" acoustic attenuation. Attenuation of acoustic signal
components is generally proportional to the square of sound frequency; higher
frequencies attenuate much more quickly. However it has been shown that in
shallow ponds, substrate and depth can dramatically increase the attenuation of
lower frequencies. Because the energetically dominant frequencies upon which
female choice is based fall in the lower range of the signal, a system where low
frequencies may be dramatically attenuated is far more likely to create
reproductive isolation among frog populations than the previous systems studied.
The project will test the acoustic and genetic differentiation of allopatric
northern red-legged frog populations compared across ponds with significantly
differing acoustic profiles across a large geographical scale. How well male
advertisement calls are matched to the frequency profile of the breeding site
should determine reproductive success and create directional selection on
spectral characteristics, and provide a first test for the sensory drive
hypothesis through the utilization of underwater calling.