* 1449658
* I-Corps:  Self-adherence and Self-motivated Training for Dealing with Post-Traumatic Stress: A Smartphone Solution
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Karen Wolford, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 03/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) started out as a practice to reduce
stress in patients with pain and illnesses. Research into MBSR and its benefits
go beyond stress reduction. Practicing MBSR has been shown to provide better
focus, possible regulation of cortisol levels, quality of life improvement to
name a few. Historically, during cognitive therapies it is important for the
patient to practice the tools taught when away from therapy; however, ensuring
adherence and correctly applying the tools are often left to the patient, their
interpretation, and their memory. This team proposes to take the current online
MBSR intervention program and turn it into a mobile application product that
will assist clinical treatment and cognitive therapy. The proposed mobile
application may be used by therapists to supplement cognitive therapy training
for their patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MBSR is useful for invention on PTSD
and other anxiety disorders. The proposed app will help the therapist to connect
to clients and track the progress. It will also ensure that the clients receive
sufficient guidance in their daily monitoring and improvement. The app will also
be designed into an open system to continuously update and incorporate effective
intervention components identified from research. Many people due to stigma,
societal perception, or perhaps lack of access will not come forward for
assistance for mental disorders; thus, this mobile application may provide new
tools to cope and open the door to further treatment. The core client app
development will be built on an agnostic mobile software development platform.
Utilizing an agnostic platform build will align the app to be able to be
released quickly and seamlessly on multiple mobile operating systems (OS) at or
near the same time. This type of development opens access to a larger customer
base.