* 1449469
* Cultivating Leaders for Ethical STEM
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Don Howard, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 12/31/2019
* USD 410,340.00

The University of Notre Dame will undertake a project that addresses the
question: Since cultivating cultures for ethical STEM requires effective
leadership, what training content and methods most successfully turn students
into ethical leaders? The literature tells us that ethical leaders are role
models to their peers, colleagues, mentees, and students. The leadership
programs at the University of Notre Dame will thus provide training in a manner
that empowers the trainees to mentor others with the expectation that, as
mentors, they will perform scientific and technological research with an eye to
the implications for society and pass this approach on to their own students and
peers. The research team will assess and compare two different leadership
training programs, the first grounded in research on business and management
ethics, the second in research on ethics training for STEM students. While the
primary goal of these two lines of research is the same - cultivating ethical
leaders - the theories behind them and methods used by trainers are often quite
different. Both leadership programs build from previously gathered assessment
data, methods, and tools, and are imbued with ethics; both train STEM graduate
students using an immersive and cumulative service-learning model. The two
educational programs evaluated by this project are train-the-trainer programs
that have the power to create exponential change rather than simply incremental
improvements - both at Notre Dame and beyond. A primary outcome of the project
will be the creation of a blended program that combines the best features of
each program and appeals to both the business and research ethics approaches.
Through the compilation, analysis, and dissemination of this blended program
broadly, we will be promoting the most successful content and methods that turn
STEM students into ethical leaders, thereby cultivating cultures for ethical
STEM.

Over three years, 93 STEM students will receive leadership training. Our
research project will: (1) assess these two programs' effectiveness in training
ethical leaders, and (2) by comparing the results across the programs, identify
the training components that will best equip students to grapple with ethical
research dilemmas, helping to establish an ethical lab and workplace culture. By
assessing participants before, after, and one-year out from their respective
programs, we will evaluate content retention, ethical decision-making, and the
effectiveness of training methods and materials, and create an overarching
program.