* 1449197
* RAPID:   Gauging the impacts of California's 500-year drought on aeolian inputs to mountain soils and ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Emma Aronson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2015
* USD 29,985.00

Mounting evidence shows that California is currently experiencing the most
severe drought since 1580, yet it is likely that droughts such as these will
become more common as the climate changes. Any drought, particularly one of this
magnitude, can elevate dust transport, from fallow croplands and bare natural
ecosystems, to sometimes distant locations. The dust being transported may bring
nutrients and microorganisms, with unknown, but potentially transformational,
impacts on the ecosystems where the dust is deposited. This project proposes to
take advantage of the unique extremity of the current drought by measuring the
ecosystem impact of increased dust to the Sierra Nevada mountains. The
investigator will measure the amount and microbial composition of dust
transported to the Sierras. Collaborators will determine the origin (using
isotopic chemistry) and chemical makeup of the dust. In the future, the
investigator will endeavor to compare the data rapidly collected during this
year of extreme drought to data to be collected in wetter years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dust will be collected at four sites along an elevational
gradient in the Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory (SSCZO), ranging from
400 m to 2700 m elevation. At each site, dust will be collected monthly through
November 2014, and again in Spring 2015, from passive dust collectors and from
filters (1 um pore size) on the Eddy Covariance Towers active CO2 samplers. To
complement dust collection, soil samples (10 cm depth) will be collected within
the footprint of the towers. The origin of dust samples will be determined using
radiogenic strontium (Sr) and neodymium (Nd) isotopic tracers. Nutrients and
microbial composition of dust and soil samples will also be analyzed. This
approach will allow to identify the effects of mega-droughts on i) dust-related
contributions to the geobiology and biogeochemistry of soils and ecosystems, ii)
the role of local versus distant dust sources of microorganisms, including
bacteria, archaea and fungi, and of nutrients to the Sierra Nevada, and iii) the
role of elevation in determining the ecological effects of mega-drought-induced
dust transport.