* 1449751
* EAGER: Defining a Dynamical Behavioral Model to Support a Just in Time Adaptive Intervention
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Daniel Rivera, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 287,544.00

EAGER: Defining a Dynamical Behavioral Model to Support a Just in Time Adaptive
Intervention &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER supports exploratory work to
develop a novel approach to the creation of a dynamical computational model of
human health behavior. The goal of this high risk project is to apply an
experimental design that merges methods from multiple disciplines to generate
the necessary data to develop a dynamical systems model of human health
behavior. In theory, mobile technologies have this capacity to provide health
interventions in real-time that are adapted to the individual, but in practice
the specific theoretical models and decision rules required to determine exactly
when, where, and how to intervene do not exist. Standard health approaches use
theoretical frameworks to identify and select target behaviors and approaches or
intervention. By creating dynamical models of human behavior, real-time adaptive
interventions can be developed and empirically assessed building the
foundational science of computational behavior. While this project is concerned
with creating dynamic computational models for increasing exercise behavior, the
approach may find applications more broadly with a wide range of human health
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this EAGER project is to create a
mathematical model that will provide the evdience for making decisions about
when, where, and how a "just in time" adaptive mHealth physical activity
intervention should be implemented. Creating this dynamical behavioral model is
a challenging problem that requires insights from different disciplines because
behavioral science provides insights regarding what to measure, and behavioral
intervention strategies that could be used dynamically; however, current
behavioral theories fail to provide any real insights on when, where, and how to
intervene at the opportune moment. Control systems engineering provides a
methodology for creating dynamic mathematical models and decision-making, but
this methodology has only sparsely been applied in a human behavioral context. A
key first step for developing a dynamical behavioral model is to gather
"informative" empirical data to estimate the model. These data will be generated
with an informative system identification "informative" experiment within a
human context that builds on lessons from behavioral science about experimental
designs and that takes full advantage of the temporally rich data available from
mHealth technologies. We will use these data to develop a fundamental yet
empirically- supported dynamical behavioral model for understanding our target
behavior.