* 1449337
* SNM: Scalable Manufacturing of Nanostructured Membranes for Fracking Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Satish Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,300,000.00

CBET-1449337&lt;br/&gt;Lee, Univ of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to enable the large scale, low-cost manufacturing of
nanostructured membranes for fracking wastewater treatment. Fracking wastewater
contains unusually high concentrations of both oily components and heavy metal
ions, making it extremely difficult to use the conventional membrane technology.
Advances in nanostructured membranes present unique opportunities to overcome
these issues, but most current methods to generate nanostructured membranes are
suitable only for lab-scale production, and this project will explore scalable
approaches for manufacturing. The nano-manufacturing approach will be to use
roll-to-roll slot coating (R2RSC) of particle-containing suspensions and
nanoimprinting of thin film composite (TFC) membranes using roll-to-roll
nanoimprinting lithography (R2RNIL). Nanostructured membranes to be manufactured
in this study will efficiently remove oily contaminants and heavy metal ions
without losing their efficacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to fracking
wastewater treatment, providing access to clean water is a Grand Challenge
identified by the National Academy of Engineering. Membranes that handle the
impurity profiles in fracking wastewater will be widely useful for potable water
purification. The project will provide internship research opportunities to
undergraduate and high school students from diverse background through existing
outreach programs such as Advancing Women in Engineering at University of
Pennsylvania and Native American Undergraduate Fellowship program at University
of Minnesota. The project will also contribute to curriculum innovations that
incorporate nanostructured membrane-based separations into courses that are
taught by the PIs. The project will also significantly benefit from strong
collaborations with partners in industry and national laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important technical challenge in the project is to
isolate the key features that provide for high-efficiency nanostructured
membranes that will uniquely enable the reuse and reclamation of fracking water
in natural gas production. The PIs propose using a combination of nanostructured
amphiphobic membranes (gravity driven oil + water separation) , (NAM) nano
imprinted membranes (NIM) with anti-fouling properties, and nanocomposite
membranes (NCOM) that have enhanced selectivity and permeability. The
intellectual merit of the proposal lies with the science associated with the
scale up of the manufacturing of these membranes. Toward this end, four specific
directions are proposed: &lt;br/&gt;- To understand the fundamental physics of
selective deposition of NPs on porous surfaces using R2RSC to manufacture
nanostructured amphiphobic membranes for efficient oil/water separation;
&lt;br/&gt;- To understand processing-structure relationship of R2RNIL to
manufacture nanoimprinted membranes with anti-fouling and anti- scaling
properties. Experiments and hydrodynamic modeling to design nanopatterns that
minimize fouling of membrane surface will be performed; &lt;br/&gt;- To
understand the critical parameters that lead to the formation of polymer/NP
bilayer in R2RSC and to understand the subsequent nanowicking of polymer into
the percolating network of NPs. The dynamics of polymer nanowicking and the
structure of nanocomposite membranes will be investigated; and, &lt;br/&gt;- To
test the separation performance of nanostructured membranes. Fracking wastewater
will be treated in three stages involving gravity-driven oil/water separation
using nanostructured amphiphobic membranes, dissolved organic matter and fine
particle removal using nanoimprinted membranes, and nanocomposite membranes-
based heavy metal ion removal.