* 1449695
* I-Corps:  Sensors For Relightable Images
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* James Davis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Industrial inspection, law enforcement, and museum preservation professionals
all need to capture digital representations of real objects. These digital
representations are later used for evidence and analysis that allows more
efficient product manufacturing, faster criminal investigations, and
preservation of priceless cultural objects. Existing cameras can capture a
single view under a single lighting condition, and 3D scanners can capture the
shape, but existing devices do not capture the surface reflectance properties.
In this proposal, the team has developed a method to capture photographs which
allow the lighting to be interactively changed after they are captured. In
addition, computation on the data can reveal details which are not visible to
the naked eye.

A wide variety of sensors have been investigated in research labs and
commercially. These include cameras that fundamentally measure light intensity,
as well as depth sensors that fundamentally measure 3D object geometry. This
proposal regards a related but different kind of sensor that fundamentally
measures surface reflectance, how that surface reacts to light from different
incident angles. This is important because the surface reflectance properties of
an object may contain important information, even when the surface has no
apparent detail when measured with a standard camera or depth sensor. In
addition to surface reflectance, this new sensor can directly observe small
changes in surface orientation which are below the noise threshold when
measuring the surface shape with triangulation or time-of-flight based 3D depth
sensors.