* 1449578
* EAGER: III: CIFRAM: Dynamic Identification and Interpretation of Emerging Systemic Risks Using Textual Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Kathleen Hanley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 299,683.00

This project will employ linguistic tools to determine how and why financial
crises, such as the 2008 crisis following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, form
and grow in magnitude. By examining textual information gleaned by processing
large volumes of verbal data from 10-K filings to the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the principal investigators will use techniques developed by
computer scientists to assess verbal themes and link them to market data to
assess whether future crises are forming. The techniques employed enable the
identification of actual risks allowing regulators and market participants the
ability to respond appropriately in advance of a major development. The free
provision of data and computer code on the internet will lower the cost for
future researchers to also examine these issues. The principal investigators
will also present the research at conferences, submit the work for publication,
and will work with and train graduate students. The material will be taught to
future business leaders in the classroom, where MBA students and undergraduate
students can openly discuss the results and their implications. The work will
also be submitted to conferences attended by regulators to share insights on how
they can be used to manage potential crises before they can cause extensive
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will use methods from
computational linguistics, including Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and
document similarity analysis, to identify a set of verbal topics that are common
among financial firms, non-financial firms with exposure to the finance
industry, and then all firms in the economy. The investigators will then use
clustering and network methods to assess and categorize the business links among
firms in the economy and to examine how they evolve over time. The resulting
firm-relatedness network will then be compared to market data during various
time intervals to understand how and why stock prices comove differently in
neighboring periods, especially periods leading up to major crises. The verbal
factors will be interpretable, and hence this technique will provide a fully
automated description of why firms comove in different ways in different time
periods. This method will be replicable and not subjected to researcher
prejudice, allowing the data to inform researchers regarding the most salient
issues affecting markets, even if the researcher is ex-ante unfamiliar with the
true drivers of a specific systemic risk event. Once the textual drivers of
comovement are understood, these factors can be used to back-test how the
dynamic topic structure evolves during other systemic events. If successful,
this research could create an early warning system for potential future crises
and serve as a risk management tool by addressing the drivers of crisis before
they occur, thereby reducing the cost of resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
further information see the project web site:
http://scholar.rhsmith.umd.edu/khanley/nsf-grant?destination=node/1084