* 1449068
* EAGER: Synthesis and Implementation of Click Sugar Analogs for Plant Cell Wall Polysaccharide Imaging
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Ian Wallace, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,830.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;All plant cells are surrounded by a polysaccharide-rich
cell wall comprised of cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. While plant cell
wall polysaccharides collectively represent the most abundant molecules on the
planet, many aspects of cell wall formation remain unclear. For example,
hemicelluloses and pectins are synthesized within the cell, transported to the
plasma membrane, and organized to form a functional cell wall. However, the
mechanisms of polysaccharide transport and organization are unknown, primarily
due to the fact that these polysaccharides cannot be visualized by traditional
methods. The Wallace lab has previously demonstrated that a metabolically
incorporated monosaccharide analog compatible with "click" chemistry can be used
to circumvent these issues and fluorescently label cell wall polysaccharides.
This research supported through the NSF-EAGER mechanism will build upon these
findings by developing novel probes to visualize plant cell wall polysaccharides
as they move throughout the cell and into the cell wall. By developing
techniques to "see" cell wall polysaccharides in their native environment, these
tools will facilitate the investigation of plant cell wall polysaccharide
synthesis and transport in fundamentally unique ways that are unattainable with
existing technologies. The results of this project will provide a deeper
understanding of plant cell wall formation, which could be utilized to produce
biomass crops with tailored cell wall compositions for human utilization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Plants annually assimilate 1011
metric tons of CO2, and a large portion of the resulting reduced carbon is
partitioned into plant cell walls, the polysaccharide-rich extracellular
matrices surrounding all plant cells. Plant cell wall polysaccharides can be
grouped into 3 categories: cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. While cellulose
is synthesized at the plasma membrane, hemicelluloses and pectins are
synthesized in the Golgi apparatus, delivered to the plasma membrane via a
poorly characterized vesicle-mediated trafficking pathway, and deposited into
the extracellular space, where they become organized to form a functional cell
wall. The mechanistic details of non-cellulosic polysaccharide trafficking and
organization remain unclear, primarily due to the lack of available methods to
visualize plant cell wall polysaccharides. The Wallace group previously
demonstrated that Fucose alkyne (FucAl), an analog of the naturally occurring
cell wall monosaccharide fucose, is metabolically incorporated into plant tissue
and can be fluorescently labeled with azide-containing fluorophores using the
copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition reaction. This sugar analog
specifically reports the sites of fucose incorporation into pectin and can be
used to examine pectin dynamics in native cell walls. This project will build on
these ideas by synthesizing and implementing novel monosaccharide analogs of
common cell wall sugars that are compatible with click chemistry, and utilizing
these metabolic probes to label unique cell wall polysaccharides. Rationally-
designed azide-containing monosaccharide analogs will be synthesized and will be
assayed for incorporation into cell walls. Furthermore, the labeled
polysaccharides, incorporation pathway metabolic enzymes, and reactivity of
individual sugars will be investigated. This project will fundamentally change
the way that cell wall polysaccharide trafficking is investigated, and will
provide key insights into the nanoscale structure and trafficking of non-
cellulosic cell wall polysaccharides. Additionally, this project will support
advanced graduate education in the developing field of plant chemical biology,
will provide advanced undergraduate research education through the UNR
Department of Biochemistry senior thesis program, and will support an inter-
departmental chemical ecology and chemical biology colloquium.