* 1449656
* Diffusion of Mobile Hands-on Learning in Puerto Rico Using the Analog Discovery Board
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Juan C. Morales, Universidad Del Turabo
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2016
* USD 49,999.00

The goal of this sequence of workshops is to create a community of faculty
engaged in the delivery of active, hands-on courses in all the universities in
Puerto Rico that offer Electrical Engineering. Faculty participants will be
trained on active learning pedagogies through the use of the Mobile Hands-On
Studio in the classroom. The participants in the workshop have committed to
transforming their courses with mobile hands-on learning activities. The
workshops will be offered by two experienced developers of the Mobile Studio who
have successfully offered similar workshops in the past. The first workshop in
the Fall of 2014 will introduce hands-on classroom activities using an Analog
Discovery board. By the end of the first workshop the participants should have
the capacity to start transforming their Spring 2015 courses with a few mobile
hands-on learning activities. The second workshop, to be offered in Spring of
2015, will provide a forum to share and discuss initial impressions after having
experimented with a transformed classroom. More advanced pedagogical activities
will also be presented. To increase the ease of initial implementation, Analog
Discovery boards and parts kits will be distributed to each participating
institution to provide a seed from which to start growing the course
transformation. The boards will be loaned to students at the beginning and
returned by the end of each semester.

The workshop organizers have retained a well-known engineering education
researcher who will assess the success of the workshop itself in terms of the
formation of a community of scholars and the diffusion of active learning
pedagogies. These workshops have the potential to have an impact on society at
many different levels. First, the project includes a research component that has
the potential to contribute to our knowledge of how engineering education
innovations diffuse. Second, the project is a state-wide level partnership
between all the engineering institutions in Puerto Rico. It will directly
improve the training and development of Hispanic faculty members in STEM and
indirectly improve Hispanic student learning.