* 1449525
* EAGER: Coupling Electron Transport and Metabolism using Biological Routers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Nicole Buan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,615.00

Methanogens, which are found in nearly all anaerobic habitats, are key players
in the global carbon cycle, producing 1 gigaton of methane gas annually.
Methanogens survive by converting carbon in low-oxygen sediments to methane gas,
which is then oxidized to carbon-dioxide in the aerobic environment, thereby
playing a key role in the global carbon cycle. Recent preliminary evidence
supports the involvement of a large multienzyme complex in biological methane
production and resolves unexplained mutant phenotypes reported in the
literature. Multienzyme redox complexes are important because cells must
coordinate the relative ratio of oxidized vs reduced electron carriers with the
catalytic requirements of enzymes involved in central metabolism. This project
seeks to elucidate the basic biochemical principles by which this novel multi-
enzyme complex coordinates metabolic processes in methanogens. Defining the
mechanism by which this multi-enzyme complex functions will also help us
understand the basic underlying biochemical principles related to multienzyme
redox complexes in other archaea, bacteria, or eukaryotes. The project will
support student training in anaerobic microbial physiology and biophysical
biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The multi-enzyme complex is comprised of
three enzymes, CoM-S-S-CoB heterodisulfide reductase (HdrD), acetyl-CoA
decarbonylase/synthase (ACDS), and methylene tetrahydromethanopterin reductase
(Mer). The studies supported by this award will use genetics, biophysical
biochemistry, and molecular biology techniques to define the mechanism by which
the HdrD:ACDS:Mer complex integrates flux through electron transport and
metabolism. The HdrD:ACDS:Mer multienzyme complex directs carbon to biosynthesis
or methanogenesis dependent on the ratios and oxidation state of electron
carriers in the cell. Specific aims for the study include verifying
HdrD:ACDS:Mer complex formation by in vivo crosslinking, affinity purification,
and mass spectrometry of all component subunits. Experiments will also be
conducted to investigate redox-dependent crosstalk between enzymes in vivo.
Acetyl-CoA production and methyl-tetrahydromethanopterin-dependent reduction of
ferredoxin, F420, and CoM-S-S-CoB electron carriers will be measured in coupled
reactions catalyzed by the HdrD:ACDS:Mer complex in mutant cell extracts by
UV/Vis spectrophotometry. Results of the study will be disseminated through
presentations at scientific conferences and through peer-reviewed publications.