* 1449148
* Workshop - Past as Prologue: Holocene Climate as Context for Future Climate Change; Mount Hood, Oregon; October 14-16, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Jeremy Shakun, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,993.00

The Holocene, which covers the entire time span of human civilization, stands
out as an interval of relative climate stability. Model projections indicate
that 21st century global-average warming will substantially exceed even the
warmest Holocene conditions (Marcott et al., 2013), producing a climate state
not previously experienced by human societies. A major goal of the paleoclimate
community has been to develop a longer-term perspective on climate change, and
provide context for future warming beyond the instrumental record. Given that
the Holocene is the closest analog for today's climate, continued, detailed
analyses of the Earth System over this time frame will provide information
relevant to future global climate change to scientists, policy makers, and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will engage ~40 data
collectors and modelers working on reconstructions of climate, ice, atmosphere,
and ocean variability of the past 11,500 years. The objectives of the workshop
are threefold: bring together key personnel working on the Holocene epoch to
discuss and identify the past, present, and future directions of research on
this interval; establish collaborations and networking among the various groups
to facilitate future and ongoing research plans, which will be formalized as a
new Past Global Changes (PAGES) Holocene working group; and propose a
publishable data-model synthesis and statistical analysis for the Holocene to
guide future research. The convenors will strive to bring young and
underrepresented scientists to the meeting whose attendance would not be
possible without support from this award.