* 1449351
* CCE STEM: Finding Practices that Cultivate Ethical Computing  in Mobile and Wearable Application Research &amp; Development
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Adam Porter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 05/31/2020
* USD 615,600.00

Cultivating ethical computing researchers is an ongoing challenge. Much current
research focuses on framing ethics (e.g., privacy, equity, or accessibility) as
explicit software design goals. This has resulted in dedicated design techniques
(e.g., value sensitive design, privacy by design) meant to eliminate bias,
ensure privacy, or enable accessibility. Less studied have been existing ethical
cultures within software research and development. Researchers don't know when
and how ethical discussions and decisions emerge within development, or what
encourages these discussions and decisions. In this project the PI and her
research team will study academic and commercial software research and
development (R&amp;D), to discover factors that encourage discussion and action
on ethical challenges. They will then incorporate their findings into curricular
materials for computer ethics, by building interactive R&amp;D simulations both
for the classroom and for massive online open courseware (MOOCs). Project
outcomes will answer questions such as "What practices within mobile application
research and development encourage discussion of, and decisions about, ethics?"
and "How can these practices be incorporated into computer ethics education?"
and also "How do simulations based on these practices impact computer ethics
education?" Understanding how work practices influence ethical deliberation
within software R&amp;D will influence computing research and the design of
emerging technologies by encouraging in situ ethical debate and decision-making,
which in turn will cultivate ethical stem researchers by encouraging ethical
debate and reflection as integral, embedded parts of technical work.
Dissemination of findings from this project will focus on bridging domains; the
PI and her research team have extensive interdisciplinary experience, and
findings will be published in information and computer science, ethics, and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's previous ethnographic work suggests that
the day-to-day work of software R&amp;D can include work practices that pry open
discussions about values and help teams build consensus around social values as
design criteria. The PI refers to these work practices as values levers. This
project will build upon and test those preliminary findings by collecting
comparative data from contrasting software R&amp;D environments. The research
will focus on mobile and wearable application development, an area rife with
ethical concerns. These devices collect sensitive data ranging from biometrics
to location to contacts, yet the collection of such data is almost entirely
unregulated. The team will observe diverse types of mobile and wearable R&amp;D
work, including academic and commercial, co-located and virtual, and small and
large teams. They will use participant-observation methods (attending
conferences, participating in design meetings, and conducting interviews) as
well as analysis of trace data (logs, chat, bug trackers, and other recorded
means of organizing virtual work), to observe the diverse work practices
involved in mobile application development. Collecting data from contrasting
projects will illuminate the relationship between diverse R&amp;D practices and
ethical computing research, and will enable the PI to discover values levers
relevant to multiple computing cultures. The project team will then incorporate
the empirical findings into interactive simulations for students in mobile
application design courses to evaluate whether values levers from the field can
have impacts in the classroom and in online education.