* 1449014
* EAGER: TelePathy: Telecommunication Systems Modeling and Engineering of Cell Communication Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Nicole Buan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 307,700.00

This EAGER project, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology program, will
lead to the development of tools that will allow researchers to manipulate the
behavior or state of cells, mostly microbes,for specific purposes or
applications. The investigators will characterize and simulate the functions and
dynamics of cell-communication networks using telecommunications and computer
networks theory, and engineering principles. This fundamentally important
research, if successful, will provide a novel perspective of how cells
communicate, and will enable the simulation and the design of networks through
cell behavior modification to perform useful functions such as the manufacture
of chemicals, distributed environmental bio-sensing, and the control of cell
proliferation and harmful states. This strongly interdisciplinary effort will
offer valuable training for students and postdoctoral associates at all levels.
The principle investigator will develop a course together with social scientists
and ethicist to address how this work, and synthetic biology in general, will
affect society as whole. The investigators will also mentor a team of
undergraduates to participate in the International Genetically Engineered
Machine competition.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The development of tools to analyze,
model, and exploit cell-communication systems remains an unexplored avenue for
both synthetic biology and computer network engineering. The goal of this
project is to develop quantitative models based on telecommunications
engineering principles, and by applying telecommunications metrics, to define
and manipulate the exchange of information among cells. This will be achieved by
pursuing four objectives: (1) the development of a modeling framework that will
allow the identification of cell-communication pathways, and their chemical and
physical parameters, from public databases; (2) the telecommunications metrics
characterization of these cell-communication pathways, in particular focusing on
currently poorly characterized syntrophic microbial systems; (3) the development
of a computer simulation framework based on the COMSOL Multiphysics software
platform to enable the validation of the developed models, and allow their
further characterizations in a controlled in-silico environment; (4) the design
and optimization of an artificial cell-communication system based on the
syntrophy between two human gut microbes, i.e., Methanobrevibacter smithii and
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, which will be a proof-of-concept of using the
developed models to develop biological cell-communication systems able to
reliably exchange artificial messages.