* 1449500
* NSF Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Nantechnology Enabled Water Treatment Systems (NEWT)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2025
* Paul Westerhoff, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dana L. Denick
* 07/31/2025
* USD 31,694,029.00

Title: A Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Nanotechnology Enabled
Water Treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to safe drinking water is a basic
need for all life on the planet. It is a grand challenge linked to public
health, energy production, and sustainable development. This is not just a need
in the developing world. Over 40 million Americans are not connected to a
municipal water system and rely on the quality of the water available from
wells. The quality of this water varies with location and climate change
exacerbates fresh water scarcity. The technologies that result from the research
of this center will broaden access to clean drinking water with a variety of
potential sources (e.g. groundwater from wells, salt water, brackish water, or
recycled industrial water). The modular systems that will be designed will
address drinking water from the scale of a household, to a neighborhood to a
remote town. These technologies will also find application to help people get
drinking water during natural disasters. In addition to drinking water, the
Center will improve the water "footprint" of oil and gas exploration and
production operations by helping to increase the quality of water cleanup for
reuse and recycle. The environmental impact of water use in these industrial
settings will be improved, saving energy and water resources. Students trained
in this Center will have a multidisciplinary, team-based research experience
with the skills needed to translate their research to a broad set of
stakeholders (e.g., industrial organizations, governmental organizations, and
citizens) that lack a secure source of clean water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ERC
is led by Rice University, with partners at Arizona State University, University
of Texas-El Paso and Yale University. The Center's use of nanotechnology will
allow the design and manufacture of multifunctional nanomaterials to adsorb a
wide variety of pollutants including oxo-anions, total dissolved solids,
nitrates, salts, organics, foulants, scalants, viruses and microbes. These
nanomaterials will be immobilized in membranes that are packaged into system
modules. The use of modules offers flexibility of targeted pollutant(s) and end-
use application capacity or scale of delivered water rate. Novel photonic,
electronic, catalytic, and magnetic engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) will
introduce new approaches to transform water treatment from a large, chemical-
and energy-intensive process toward compact physical and catalytic systems.
These innovations will benefit multiple stakeholders, from rural communities and
locations hit by natural disasters to hydraulic fracturing oil and gas sites,
where reuse of produced waters minimizes regional environmental impacts. The
Center's innovative technologies are founded on rigorous basic research.
Component technologies include fouling-resistant, high-permeability membranes
that use ENMs for surface self-cleaning and biofilm control; capacitive
deionization with highly conductive and selective electrodes to remove scalants
(divalent ions); rapid magnetic separation of paramagnetic nanosorbents for easy
reuse; nanophotonics-enabled direct solar membrane distillation for low-energy
desalination; disinfection and advanced oxidation/reduction using nanocatalysts;
and template-assisted nanocrystallization for scaling control. Fundamental
research on ENM interactions with water pollutants and substrate materials;
integrated unit processes that immobilize, support, or recover ENMs; and safety
by design demonstrated in testbeds will ensure that the Center's systems are
resilient, economical, and highly efficient.