* 1449617
* NRT: Education Model Program on Water-Energy Research (EMPOWER) at Syracuse University
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Charles Driscoll, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 03/31/2022
* USD 3,113,717.00

Research at the interface of water and energy cycles is critical to inform
solutions to meet human needs for water and energy. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award will prepare master?s and doctoral
students at Syracuse University with the tools needed to advance understanding
of hydrocarbons, the primary energy source for current societies, and linkages
to water quality and availability. The domestic and international field
components of this program promote integrated technical training and global
awareness of research with significant societal impact. In addition to technical
knowledge, students will develop the professional skills in communication,
public policy, management, and law that will prepare them to share the science
and engineering discoveries with diverse audiences. The program will produce a
cadre of highly skilled trainees in a field where graduates often pursue a wide
range of non-academic careers as well as research careers. By filling critical
gaps in knowledge on the complete pathway of hydrocarbon production and
interconnections with the water cycle, this training program contributes to our
national competitiveness and environmental security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NRT program bridges chemistry, engineering, and earth science to tackle issues
at the water-energy nexus. The research theme spans the complete pathway of
hydrocarbon energy production, from deposition and origin of hydrocarbons, to
production from shale, to environmental effects of hydrocarbon use, and the
linkages of the energy and water cycles. Trainees will address knowledge gaps on
hydrological and geological controls on the development of productive shale
plays, characterization of produced water and gas from shale, and how changes in
emissions, fuel sources, and infrastructure for hydrocarbon transport impact the
environment. The program provides training beyond core academic competency with
comprehensive technical and professional development training that will develop
student understanding of how knowledge in one area can be applied to another.