* 1449852
* PECASE: Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework Membranes. Novel Materials for Carbon Dioxide Capture.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Moises Carreon, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 198,531.00

The separation of CO2 from light gases is a very important environmental and
energy issue. The state-of-the-art process for the purification of CO2 uses
amine adsorption, which is a complex, and costly approach. Membrane separation
technology is far less expensive and requires less energy consumption. Although
polymeric and zeolite membranes can separate CO2 from light gases, the
development of superior performance membranes for gas mixture separations
requires novel materials with fundamentally different structural, compositional,
adsorption and transport properties than those of polymers and zeolites. In this
respect, zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) a subclass of metal organic
frameworks, have emerged as a novel type of crystalline porous materials which
combine highly desirable properties, such as uniform micropores, high surface
areas, and exceptional thermal and chemical stability, making them ideal
candidates for molecular separations. This proposal aims at demonstrating the
potential of ZIFs as membranes for the separation of CO2 from light gases.

The central intellectual thrust of this career proposal is to establish a solid
fundamental science program leading to the rational design of a novel family of
membranes, composed of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks which offer the
possibility of demonstrating high separation performance for carbon dioxide
purification from light gases, and other important functional gas separations.
The specific research objectives are: 1)Rational design of a novel family of
zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) membranes for CO2 purification from light
gases; 2)Develop facile chemical synthesis strategies to rationally modify the
pore structure and functionality of the ZIF membranes; 3)Elucidate and
understand the basic formation mechanisms governing the transformation of
precursor solutions into zeolitic imidazolate framework phases; and 4)Establish
the fundamental structure/separation relationships of ZIF membranes in relevant
functional gas separations such as CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2. If successful, this
career development plan will establish the viability of novel self-assembly and
synthesis concepts as general approaches for a broad range of functional
zeolitic imidazolate framework membranes with tunable architectures, surface
chemistry, and porosities for applications in relevant industrial gas
separations, including CO2 capture from natural gas and flue gas. It will
represent an important advance in the rational design of a subclass of metal
organic framework membranes and in fundamental understanding of its
structure/separation relationships.

A parallel objective of this proposal is to effectively integrate the proposed
research activities with education and outreach programs to provide significant
educational opportunities at the undergraduate, graduate and community levels.
The educational outreach of the proposed career plan spans from a dual level
course on molecular engineering of functional nanoporous materials, inclusion of
underrepresented groups in undergraduate education, international collaboration,
recruitment of minorities for graduate studies, and a short course for high
school teachers. The results of this project will be disseminated to the
scientific community through journal publications, conference presentations and
technical seminars, and will be implemented in course material lectures taught
by the PI to benefit the student body interested in membrane science, separation
processes and advanced materials. The educational activities have already
resulted in a funded international collaboration as a platform for minority
student recruitment; undergraduate minority student research participation in
the PI laboratory; recruitment of Mexican students for the PhD program in
Chemical Engineering Department at University of Louisville and the
establishment of a program called HISPAIRE (Hispanics with Interest in the
Requisites for Engineering), aimed at recruiting Hispanic and Latino students.