* 1449999
* NRT: Training Next-Generation Scientists with Experimental, Theoretical, and Computational Competencies for Complex Interfaces (INTERFACE)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Julie Cwikla, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 03/31/2021
* USD 2,873,955.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award prepares Ph.D.
students at the University of Southern Mississippi with the competencies to
address grand materials challenges of 21st Century ranging from pharmaceuticals
to energy. This traineeship will provide students with interdisciplinary skills
needed in industrial, academic, and national laboratories to drive American
competitiveness in advanced materials innovation. The program transcends the
divide that currently exists across experimental, theoretical, and computational
scientists to train a new cadre of scientists and engineers capable of leading
the data-driven design of materials in biolubrication, biomaterials, and
renewable energy. Through internships and training opportunities, trainees will
develop exceptional content knowledge and scientific skills, with honed
professional skills, with readiness to communicate science with a wide audience,
including K-12 students. This traineeship also seeks to increase the
participation and retention of women and underrepresented minorities in doctoral
programs by strong linkages with effective programs and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research theme of this NRT
program is complex interfaces of polymeric materials. Faculty from polymer
science and engineering, chemistry and biochemistry, and physics, as well as
staff scientists from national labs and industrial partners, will co-advise
trainees in a multidisciplinary team environment. Trainees will engage in both
computational and experimental research projects related to bioinspired
interfaces, biomaterials interfaces, and charge transport at interfaces. The
education program is designed to provide trainees with hands-on access and
training in computational and experimental research tools, to encourage critical
analysis of the state of literature, and to identify unmet research challenges.
Trainees will also receive extensive training in professional skills such as
project management, problem solving, conflict resolution, high performance
teams, business etiquette, research ethics, and oral and written communication
via a series of professional development workshops. As a final element, trainees
will participate in internship opportunities designed for exposure to multiple
career paths in academia, industry, national labs, and government policy.