* 1449246
* EAGER: Bio-Inorganic Chemistry of the Rare Earth Metals: Chemistry Relevant to the Cerium-Dependent Methanol Dehydrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 215,571.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award through the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program and Chemical Catalysis Program in the
Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Eric Schelter of the University of
Pennsylvania to study the electronic structure of functional model complexes of
the active site of the first rare earth-containing metalloenzyme and to
synthesize new efficient catalysts for the dehydrogenation of alcohols. It has
been recently discovered that M. fumariolicum SoIV, an organism found in the
Sofatara Crater in Italy, requires rare earth metals in order to grow. This
surprising finding marks the first time that any rare earth elements have been
found to be necessary for life. It has also been recently determined that the
organism possesses a cerium atom in a key enzyme used to convert methane into a
food source for the organism. This project is focused on determining exactly how
the cerium center does this and what the role of the rare earth elements are in
keeping these microbes alive. This work will have a broad impact on our
understanding of the basic features of life and what is required for life to be
sustained, even in extremely harsh environments. Graduate students trained
through this project will acquire unique and diverse skills at the interface of
bioinorganic chemistry and chemical catalysis. The findings of the project will
be communicated through outreach programs targeted toward high school students
and the general public. Underrepresented groups including women graduate
students, an African American graduate student, a visiting African woman
scientist and a Latino postdoctoral associate will benefit from support of the
project.

Recent studies have shown that the methylotrophic M. fumariolicum SolV has an
essential growth requirement for the rare earth metals La-Gd. The methanol
dehydrogenase enzyme of M. fumariolicum SolV was determined to have a cerium
cation in its active site. This surprising finding marked the first instance
that rare earth elements (RE = La-Gd, Sc and Lu) were shown to have an essential
biochemical role. The central hypothesis of this application is that the metal
redox activity of Ce can be used to evaluate the electronic structure of the
active site, that Ce-quinone complexes will similarly induce methanol
dehydrogenation in model complexes, and that the strong Lewis acidity of RE
cations enable fast and unique reactivity for the cerium methanol dehydrogenase.
The team will test the hypothesis through a combination of model complex
synthesis, electrochemistry and density functional theory studies. The overall
goals of the research are to determine the electronic structure of the cerium
active site and to synthesize functional model complexes of the enzyme that
catalyze the dehydrogenation of alcohols.