* 1449768
* RAPID; GOALI: Sources of 1,4-Dioxane in the Cape Fear River Watershed of North Carolina and Treatment Options for 1,4-Dioxane Control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Detlef Knappe, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

1449768&lt;br/&gt;Knappe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAPID; GOALI: Sources of
1,4-Dioxane in the Cape Fear River Watershed of North Carolina and Treatment
Options for 1,4-Dioxane Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past, 1,4-dioxane
was widely used as a solvent stabilizer, and it is commonly thought of as a
groundwater contaminant that co-occurs with chlorinated solvents. While
1,4-dioxane usage in the context of solvent stabilization has been phased out,
1,4-dioxane continues to be used as an industrial solvent (e.g. textile
industry, paper industry, production of brominated flame retardants), and it is
a by-product of manufacturing processes involving ethylene oxide (e.g.
production of surfactants used in laundry detergents and shampoos, production of
certain plastics). In a recent EPA study, data for North Carolina showed that
all 1,4-dioxane detections occurred in drinking water derived from surface
water. In fact, the four highest 1,4-dioxane concentrations shown for NC systems
also represent the four highest reported values nationally. The highest
1,4-dioxane concentration was reported in drinking water sampled in Moore County
at the East Moore Water District (EMWD) Intertie (9.2 ìg/L). Water at the EMWD
intertie represents water purchased from Harnett County Regional Water Treatment
Plant (Lillington, NC), which treats Cape Fear River water. Furthermore, data
collected in our laboratory show that 1,4-dioxane is present at concentrations
of up to about 90 ìg/L in the Haw River, and in drinking water derived from the
Haw River at concentrations of up to 80 ìg/L (Pittsboro, NC).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed research are to (1)
identify 1,4-dioxane sources, (2) establish the spatial and temporal variability
in 1,4-dioxane concentrations and mass flows, (3) assess 1,4-dioxane removal by
existing point-of-use (POU) treatment devices and identify adsorbent properties
that govern 1,4-dioxane removal, and (4) develop fundamental process parameters
that describe the oxidative transformation of 1,4-dioxane by O3/H2O2, UV/H2O2,
and UV/chlorine advanced oxidation processes in a surface water treatment
context. To accomplish the proposed results, stream samples and daily composited
samples from drinking water providers will be collected and analyzed by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). In conjunction with USGS daily stream
flow data, the resulting 1,4-dioxane concentration and mass flow results will be
used to identify 1,4-dioxane sources, estimate the quantity of 1,4-dioxane
released into the environment, and estimate human exposure to 1,4-dioxane via
drinking water consumption.