* 1449269
* Mathways
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Matthew Ando, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,998.00

The recruitment and retention of underrepresented students in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) is a national priority. A
growing body of evidence suggests that involving undergraduates in communities
of scholars and in research can play an important role in motivating students
from underrepresented populations to become involved in science. This project
will develop multiple mathematical pathways (Mathways) to expand the pool of
students who participate in collaborative mathematics research and instruction,
by connecting two successful programs at the University of Illinois: the Merit
Program for Emerging Scholars and the Illinois Geometry Lab (IGL). The Merit
Program has a strong record of building communities of scholars, especially from
underrepresented populations, who successfully complete introductory mathematics
courses including calculus. The project will recruit students from the Merit
Program into the Illinois Geometry Lab, a community for undergraduate research
and outreach in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathways will serve as a
national model for increasing the pipeline of STEM-engaged students, in
particular students from underrepresented minority groups. Mathways has three
main components: the participation of Merit students in IGL research projects,
mentored by NSF-supported Mathways postdocs; the creation of a Mathways summer
camp in which these research students will serve as mentors for 8th and 9th
grade students participating in guided-self-discovery projects; and an
independent evaluation and assessment of these activities.