* 1449607
* CAREER: Synthesis, Microstructure, and Properties of Novel Magnesium-based Nanoporous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Qizhen Li, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 364,295.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This CAREER project aims to acquire fundamental and
comprehensive understanding of the relationships among processing,
microstructure and properties of magnesium-based nanoporous materials. The
specific technical objectives of the research are to synthesize magnesium-based
nanoporous materials, characterize their microstructural features using the
state-of-the-art tools, experimentally investigate their properties and
mechanical behavior and evaluate these behaviors in the light of current
theoretical understanding.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The success of this research will allow full advantage to
be taken of nanoporous magnesium for a variety of applications that utilize
combinations of mechanical properties, ultralight weight, excellent energy
absorption capability, and multifunctionality that accompany the introduction of
nanopores into non-porous metals. The research will also advance the underlying
understanding of the processing-structure-property relationships in other
nanoporous metallic materials. This project will integrate research and
education/outreach activities to train undergraduate and graduate students for
the workforce, and stimulate the interest and participation of high school
students and underrepresented student groups (Hispanic and Women) in science and
engineering. The results will be disseminated to other researchers and the
general public through a variety of channels such as international journals,
technical conferences and the internet. These activities are expected to
increase the general public awareness of advanced nanostructured metallic
materials and their scientific importance, and to enhance the broader public
interest in science, engineering, and the pursuit of technology-oriented
careers.