* 1449584
* Crystalline Conjugated Block Copolymer Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Rachel Segalman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2016
* USD 278,245.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical to efforts for optimizing
organic optoelectronic devices, biological membranes, and drug delivery
applications is an understanding of the thermodynamics that control nanometer-
scale self-assembly in specially designed polymeric materials. This is an
integrated research program aimed at understanding the thermodynamics of self-
assembly of block copolymers where molecular rigidity and semi-crystallinity
affect the polymer nanostructure and charge transport properties. An important
component of this project involves several integrated educational activities.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in forefront areas of
materials science, participate in local and national meetings, and interact
closely with collaborators in the process of performing this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rod-coil
block copolymers play a central role in many recent efforts to optimize organic
optoelectronic devices, but it is clear that structure must be controlled on
multiple length scales ranging from the atomic spacing in a crystalline lattice
to the 10 nm length scale of block copolymer self-assembly and the 100 nm to
micron scale of the device. Critical to these efforts is an understanding of how
these interactions occurring over drastically different length scales work in
combination. The goals of this project involve the synthesis and self assembly
of conjugated block copolymers, gaining a fundamental understanding of phase
separation in these rod-coil block copolymers, and understanding the interplay
of structural effects on charge mobility. In the longer term, this fundamental
understanding will be used to guide the design of semiflexible block copolymers
and ultimately impact fields such as organic optoelectronics and
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay between backbone shape, block
copolymer self-assembly, crystallinity, and semiconducting properties is crucial
both for a fundamental understanding of structure-property relationships as well
as for the future design of optimized materials with controllable properties.
Here, synthetic design and self-assembly of conjugated rod-coil block copolymers
will be utilized to: (a) Develop a detailed understanding of the relationship
between chain shape, crystallinity, and charge mobility in conjugated polymers
(particularly polythiophene derivatives); (b) Understand the rules associated
with achieving confined crystallization in conjugated rod-coil block copolymers
and the detailed morphology of crystals within these nanodomains, and (c) Probe
the roles of semi-flexible rods and the balance between liquid-crystalline and
block-copolymer interactions on conjugated block copolymer self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;