* 1449370
* Collaborative Research: Foundations of Social and Ethical Responsibility Among Undergraduate Engineering Students: Comparing Across Time, Institutions, and Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,09/30/2020
* Brad Agle, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2020
* USD 120,296.00

Recognizing the critical roles played by technical professionals in serving the
public and addressing grand&lt;br/&gt;challenges, many formal courses and
programs have been created to promote professional responsibility&lt;br/&gt;and
ethical integrity among engineering graduates. Other interventions (e.g.,
service learning programs)&lt;br/&gt;have been developed to more broadly
challenge engineering and technology students to see themselves
as&lt;br/&gt;engaged citizens and community members. Yet there has been a lack
of research on foundational&lt;br/&gt;understandings of social and ethical
responsibility among such students, including how these&lt;br/&gt;understandings
change over time and through participation in specific types of learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;Additional empirical evidence is needed to guide ongoing
efforts to cultivate enhanced social and ethical&lt;br/&gt;responsibility among
future engineers, including by identifying and promoting specific interventions
that&lt;br/&gt;have the biggest positive impacts on
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study responds to these gaps in the
existing scholarship by asking the following research&lt;br/&gt;questions: 1)
What do engineering students perceive as responsible (and irresponsible)
professional&lt;br/&gt;conduct, and what do they perceive as socially just (and
unjust) technical practices?, and 2) How do&lt;br/&gt;foundational measures and
understandings of social and ethical responsibility change during a four-
year&lt;br/&gt;engineering degree program, both in general and in relation to
specific kinds of learning experiences? To&lt;br/&gt;investigate these
questions, a longitudinal mixed-method study design will collect and
analyze&lt;br/&gt;quantitative and qualitative data from undergraduate
engineering students at four universities. To improve&lt;br/&gt;transferability
of results, these schools will represent a variety of institution types. Each
collaborating&lt;br/&gt;school also has large numbers of students in programs of
interest, e.g., service-learning and intensified&lt;br/&gt;ethics instruction.
Further, the study will give priority to investigating differences in
perceptions and&lt;br/&gt;experiences among underrepresented student
populations.