* 1449110
* EAGER: Salicylic Acid Biosynthesis and Metabolism in Plant Defense
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mary Wildermuth, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2018
* USD 139,919.00

Plants have developed sophisticated mechanisms for recognizing and responding to
their environment and for integrating environmental cues to coordinate growth,
development, and stress/defense responses. Plant hormones play a central role in
mediating these processes with the hormone salicylic acid (SA) as a major
regulator of plant defense. SA synthesis is induced in response to pathogens and
turns on a broad spectrum of defense responses that limit the extent of
infection. When SA synthesis is limited, plants are more susceptible to a broad
range of pathogens. However, if SA is made prematurely or is always being
synthesized at elevated levels, there is a negative impact on growth. Therefore
understanding how SA is made and modified to control its activity is essential
to understanding plant defense and its associated impact on growth. This
knowledge can then be exploited to enhance agricultural productivity.

Despite the importance of SA in plant defense, its biosynthetic pathway has not
been fully defined. Furthermore, the role of the SA-amino acid conjugate SA-Asp,
detected in diverse plants, has not been established. Funding has been limited
by controversy in the field, with proof of proposed pathways and modifications
being required by some reviewers as a prerequisite to funding. Therefore, this
project is considered high risk - high reward. Using the model genetic/genomic
plant Arabidopsis thaliana, the investigators will use molecular genetic,
biochemical, and analytical approaches to obtain convincing preliminary data
defining (1) the full pathogen-induced SA biosynthetic route via isochorismate
and (2) the importance of SA-Asp in plant defense. Basic research in Arabidopsis
on induced SA metabolism and defense has translated to commercially important
species, allowing for enhanced productivity. In addition, this project will
train two graduate students and two undergraduates, including a first generation
college-educated student. Finally, the investigator is committed to fostering
the next generation of scientists through programs at local Berkeley public
schools in which >45% of students are from under-represented groups and >40%
qualify for free lunch. In particular, the investigator initiated and developed
a new STEM outreach program for 7th graders entitled "Be A Scientist" in which
each student develops and explores their own scientific question over the course
of a semester in concert with UC Berkeley scientist volunteers and staff of
Community Resources for Science, a local non-profit providing practical support
for great science teaching.