* 1449501
* Engineering Research Center for Bio-mediated and Bio-inspired Geotechnics (CBBG)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2025
* Edward Kavazanjian, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 07/31/2025
* USD 34,571,451.00

Title: Engineering Research Center for Bio-mediated and Bio-inspired Geotechnics
(CBBG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground engineering is a critical part of the
construction of all civil infrastructure, remediation of contaminated
groundwater, mitigation against earthquakes and landslides, and the recovery of
natural resources. For example, buildings and bridges are supported through
foundations by the ground, tunnels are constructed in the ground, levees and
damns are constructed of and on the ground, and natural resources are mined or
pumped from the ground and their waste materials, such as mine tailings, are
placed on the ground. Currently, almost all the methods used to engineer the
ground use large amounts of energy and material, typically cement and concrete,
and produce large amounts of greenhouse gasses. Natural biological processes can
do many of the same things that engineers need to do, such as strengthen the
soil through the action of bacteria facilitating the cementation of sand
particles to make sandstone, utilizing significantly lower levels of energy and
only the materials found naturally in the air and ground. The CBBG ERC will
conduct basic research to understand biological processes that act in the
ground, including the action of bacteria, plants and animals. The Center will
develop ways to directly use naturally occurring bacteria to strengthen the
soil, to mitigate against earthquake-induced liquefaction, and clean up polluted
sites. It will also use methods inspired by biological processes to design more
efficient tunneling processes, foundations and sensors that can penetrate the
ground and travel to desired locations. The expected benefits of this research
will be less costly construction of civil infrastructure with reduced energy and
material use and less environmental degradation. The CBBG's Innovation Ecosystem
will bring together the key industrial, regulatory and civil infrastructure
stakeholders necessary to commercialize the Center's research discoveries and to
maximize benefits to society. In addition the Center is committed to educating,
preparing and inspiring a new generation of innovative biogeotechnical
engineering students who will have the opportunity to train in a multi-
discipline, team-based interdisciplinary research setting. By leveraging
industrial partnerships and educating the workforce of the future the CBBG ERC
will ensure that the United States leads the world in the rapidly developing
field of biogeotechnics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ERC is led by Arizona State
University, with partners at the Georgia Institute of Technology, the University
of California, Davis, and New Mexico State University. Use of biological and
bio-inspired processes will create a paradigm shift in the practice of
geotechnical engineering from one that depends on energy and materials intensive
solutions to one that minimizes the impact of its engineering solutions.
Laboratory investigations have already shown the potential of utilizing
naturally occurring bacteria to mitigate liquefaction through at least three
different mechanisms, and to significantly reduce fugitive dust on dirt roads
and construction sites. Research has also shown that tree roots are
significantly more efficient at lateral wind load resistance than tower
foundations, and ants are several orders of magnitude more efficient than humans
in tunneling. The Center will conduct fundamental engineering, biological,
chemical and engineering research to understand these biological processes.
Using this knowledge, they will utilize Life Cycle Cost Analyses (LCCA) and Life
Cycle Sustainability Analyses (LCSA) to identify with their industrial partners
the most promising applications of this knowledge, and continue to evaluate
these projects as they move to the field scale. Test beds will be used to
demonstrate the viability of the Center?s research and provide realistic cost
estimates to compare with current practice.