* 1449650
* Investigating the Impact of Co-Learning Systems in Providing Customized, Real-Time Student Feedback
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Soundar Kumara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 287,990.00

A current frontier in STEM education is the development of individualized
learning environments that can help students learn challenging topics. The need
is especially acute during active learning sessions and laboratory activities.
This project will develop co-learning systems to enhance student performance in
STEM laboratory activities. Co-learning systems consist of computer systems
equipped with sensors. These systems can learn from humans and in turn interact
with humans providing them with customized, real-time performance feedback. The
lessons learned from the project can also be applied in other areas of STEM
education such as the K-12 environment where co-learning robotic laboratory
tutors could help alleviate some of the demands on the time and attention of
science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objective of this
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project is to test the hypothesis
that co-learning systems are able to enhance student performance in
undergraduate STEM laboratory activities by providing them with customized,
real-time performance feedback. The project will utilize existing commercial,
off-the-shelf technologies in development of the systems. Sensor input will
consist of audio, video, depth, skeletal, and 3D mesh data collected using a
multimodal sensing device. The co-learning systems will be integrated into the
laboratory environments to capture and translate data pertaining to STEM
classroom environments and student interactions during laboratory activities.
The type of data will include audio data pertaining to student verbal queries,
skeletal data pertaining to student gesture patterns, and the content of student
work. The project will investigate machine learning algorithms suitable for
discovering knowledge pertaining to student learning during STEM laboratory
activities. Work will assess the students' perception of co-learning systems and
evaluate the ability of co-learning systems to improve performance during
laboratories. The investigators will compare student learning outcomes between
comparable student groups subject to different amounts of interaction with the
co-learning systems. These results will provide information about the potential
of co-learning systems to augment traditional teaching and provide an effective,
automated, personal STEM learning environment.