* 1449291
* SNM: Knowledge-based Continuous and Scalable Manufacture of Quantum Dots
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Klavs Jensen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,300,000.00

Semiconductor nanoparticles are attractive for enhancing the color quality and
efficiency of display and lighting applications. Synthetic techniques are
currently unable to produce particles that are bright, that emit color pure, and
that are stable without using materials that contain toxic heavy metals. This
Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) research project is designed to produce
application ready and heavy metal free nanoparticles suitable for applications
in lighting and display technologies. Experimental methods and theoretical
studies will be combined to improve our general understanding of the chemical
and physical forces that control nanoparticle growth. Special chemical reactors
that allow the researchers to study the molecular mechanisms of nanoparticle
growth will be designed. Theoretical work using computer models of the
nanoparticle surface and the molecules involved in growth will be used to
complement these studies and gain a deeper understanding into the processes
involved. By combining the experimental and theoretical results from these
experiments, the researchers intend to develop a predictive model of
nanoparticle growth that will insight into possible paths for the production of
heavy metal free application ready nanoparticles. This understanding will allow
the researchers to design synthetic methods to produce nanoparticles that meet
the requirements for implementation in lighting and display applications and
provide consumers with energy efficient displays with vibrant, rich colors. This
research will impact national nanotechnology challenges through publishing,
patenting, and industrial collaborations. Graduate students will be educated in
synthesis and scalable manufacturing of quantum dots. Undergraduate research
will be an integral part of the labs through the Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program at MIT. The impact of this fundamental research on science
and technology will be disseminated to the K-12 educational audience through a
series of video productions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be attractive for use in
lighting and display technologies, fluorescent nanoparticles must be efficient
and bright with narrow photoluminescence spectra. Currently, the only
nanoparticles that are able to meet the specifications required for high impact
applications in display technologies contain the heavy metal cadmium and are
based on cadmium selenide. The most promising heavy metal free substitute for
quantum dots for color downshifting applications is indium phosphide. However,
it is not currently possible to make indium phosphide based materials with the
narrow spectral linewidths required to meet the specifications of display
applications. Preliminary mechanistic studies reveal that there are substantial
challenges both in understanding the dynamics and mechanistics of nanoparticle
growth at the earliest stages. This work will explore the earliest stages of
nanoparticle growth by using stopped flow nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy to study the evolution of the reagents just after mixing.
Furthermore, continuous flow systems will be integrated with mass spectrometers
in order to measure and quantify the evolution of species that form early in the
reaction that are not well suited to NMR characterization. These experimental
measurements will be complemented and informed by theoretical techniques that
model the inorganic-organic interface at the nanoparticle surface, identify
potential sources of surface poisoning and explore possible methods to mitigate
this problem through techniques such as etching. A comprehensive model of the
factors that control the dynamics of nanoparticle growth will be developed that
includes the dynamics of never-before-characterized intermediate molecular
species and their interaction with the nanoparticle surface. This model will be
tested using a microfluidic reactor that allows rapid, reproducible scanning of
growth conditions. As it is verified, the model will be used to predict the
optimal conditions for control of nanoparticle size and size distribution. The
continuous flow synthesis is both well suited for the fundamental study required
to improve indium phosphide synthesis as well as inherently scalable for
applications in lighting and consumer electronics.