* 1449644
* EAGER/SusChEM/Collaborative Research: Feasibility of Molten Oxide Inductolysis for Metal Alloy Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Antoine Allanore, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Sustainable Chemistry,
Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM) Collaborative Research project will allow
for experiments to demonstrate the feasibility of Molten Oxide Inductolysis, a
new concept that holds the promise to reduce energy consumption, greenhouse gas
emissions and the capital investment required to process metal alloys. This
concept relies on the use of electricity (derived from renewable sources) to
convert various oxide ore feedstock to metal, allowing for greater flexibility
on the raw materials to be used for alloy production. With this concept, it may
be possible to use lower grade (i.e. cheaper) feedstock with comparable product
quality. This enhanced flexibility, coupled with the potential to operate with
less harmful emissions, could impact the return of metal manufacturing in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines electrolysis with
inductive heating to eliminate the dependence on resistive heating during
processing of high temperature master alloys. The underlying premise is that it
will be possible to decouple the heat-generation processes from the electrolysis
process through the use of induction heating. The goal is to balance the energy
such that the energy required for the oxide decomposition would be derived from
the electrochemical potential difference while induction would provide the other
energy needs such as melting and superheating. The proposed work will seek to
demonstrate an experimental proof-of-concept for this innovation using a model
laboratory reactor system. Future work will address the fundamentals of the
process-structure relationships, the development of a comprehensive
electrochemical and thermal process model as well as a path to scale-up for
Molten Oxide Inductolysis.