* 1449033
* STTR Phase I:  Scalable Detector for Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) Communication Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Chung Him Yuen, Black Lattice Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in its ability to
implement MIMO detectors of any size. This, in turn, impacts the broad needs of
wireless communications industry that is always is search of more efficient use
of the scarce spectral resources. Since its invention 15 years ago, MIMO has
been included in all wireless standards, e.g. WiFi, WiMAX, and LTE. As of today,
MIMO products of sizes up to 4x4 (i.e. 4 transmit and 4 receive antennas) have
appeared in the market, while the most recent standards, such as IEEE 802.11ac
WiFi and LTE-Advanced cellular, have specified MIMO sizes as large as 8x8. For
WiFi this can mean more effective hot-spots in public and workplace settings.
For cellular this can mean improved connectivity in rural areas with fewer base-
station towers, having a positive economic impact. Industry activities that
attempt to build larger MIMO systems such as 16x16 are occurring. Massive MIMO
networks with more than 100 antennas at the base stations have recently been
proposed for 5G cellular and beyond. These trends indicate a large market
opportunity for the scalable MIMO technology that this project builds
upon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project plans to develop and commercialize a set of intellectual
property (IP) software-codes/IP-cores related to multiple-input multiple-output
(MIMO) communications. These cores address the needs of wireless chipset
manufacturers. The main hurdle in the design and implementation of MIMO systems
is their complexity which drives cost and power consumption. The complexity of
an optimal MIMO detector grows exponentially with the number of transmit
antennas. The same is true for most of the near optimal MIMO detectors that have
been suggested in the literature and adopted by industry. This limitation has
been the main impediment in developing commercial MIMO systems that support
larger array sizes with increased range and data rate. This project adopts a
novel technology that achieves near optimal performance having complexity that
only grows linearly with the number of transmit antennas. It thus can be used to
implement MIMO systems of any size, at an affordable complexity.