* 1449058
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a novel device that simplifies and expedites blood-based diagnosis of infectious diseases
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Alexander Revzin, Sersense Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the development of a simpler and more rapid assay
that can be used for diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) and other infectious
diseases. TB testing is an important public health task in both developed
countries and in the developing world, as approximately 2.2 billion people have
been exposed to TB and may be carriers of this disease. Currently, 22 million TB
tests are carried out annually in the United States alone, with per test
reimbursement rates ranging from $12 to $70, making this a significant market
opportunity. However, existing TB diagnostics based on a skin reaction are
imprecise and have high rates of false positives, particularly in immigrants or
foreign visitors and students. The proposed biosensor-based diagnostic test will
use a small blood sample, and promises to greatly reduce false-positives and,
unlike a skin test that takes 48 hours to complete, will provide a result within
several hours. In addition to the proposed TB diagnostic test, the technology
developed during this project will be a platform technology that may be applied
to the development of diagnostic tests for a wide range of infectious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
biosensor platform for detection of inflammatory cytokines commonly associated
with Tuberculosis (TB) infection where specificity for the analyte is conferred
by selection of atpamers. This sensing technology will be broadly applicable for
making simple and sensitive affinity measurements in complex physiological
liquids. The platform will be built to mimic a micro-titer plate and will be
integrated with electrodes for detection of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and
tissue necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) from whole human blood. The use of
atpamers will allow the detection of cytokines in blood without additional
washing or labeling steps. Availability of such a platform will address the need
for developing simpler and faster alternatives to enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays commonly used for detection of infectious diseases such as TB. Specific
objectives of the project will include designing more sensitive aptamer-based
biosensors for detection of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha, and developing hydrogel
coatings to minimize electrode fouling.