* 1449093
* EAGER: Preliminary Explorations for the Development of Responsive Prosodic Behaviors for Interactive Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* David Novick, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research is motivated by the attractiveness of
spoken interaction as a way for people to interact with autonomous intelligent
systems. When systems talk to people, speech can convey not only lexical
information but also meta information, such as whether the information requires
immediate attention or is just background, how well the system understands the
user's goals and situation, and whether the system needs to continue providing
information or is done for the moment. In human-human dialog such meta-
information is mostly conveyed by prosody (intonation): subtle variations in the
pitch, energy, rate and timing within utterances. Unfortunately this sort of
expressiveness for agents is not today available without using pre-recorded
prompts or hand-crafted synthesized utterances, neither of which is flexible
enough for systems operating in contexts where the possible configurations of
communication needs are not fully predictable ahead of time. Thus there is a
need to make spoken language technology better support interaction for robots
and other systems. Advances in prosody modeling can also inform language
teachers and communication teachers, and health practitioners who deal with
communications disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two
preliminary steps to the goal of using prosody in human-computer dialog: first
experimentation with different models of speech synthesis to determine which can
best support the realization of prosodically well-adapted utterances, and to
determine where improvements need to be made, whether to the engine itself or to
the training-data collection procedures; and second a pilot data collection and
analysis to determine which aspects of context need to be measured and
represented to support appropriate prosodic choices.