* 1449053
* STTR Phase I:  New Perfluorodioxolane- and Perfluorodioxane-based Copolymer Membranes for Gas Separations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Zhenjie He, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program Phase I project could lead to a dramatic improvement in natural
gas processing economics using membrane technology. Natural gas processing is
the largest industrial gas separation application, and natural gas separation
equipment currently represents a market of approximately $3-5 billion per year.
Due to high energy intensity and environmental concerns with currently dominant
amine systems, gas processors are seeking alternative separation options.
Membrane technology offers many advantages including clean, simple, and
efficient operation. However, expanded use of clean membrane technology has been
hindered by insufficient separation performance of existing membranes. If
successfully developed, the new perfluoro polymeric composite membranes to be
developed in this project will strengthen the competitive position of membrane
technology in the natural gas treatment market, allowing users to capture the
ease of processing and environmental advantages offered by membranes. If gas
selectivity and permeance targets are met, significant reductions in the
operating cost (up to 30%) and in the capital cost (up to 40%) can be achieved.
Corresponding gas processing costs would also drop about 35%. The proposed
technology can potentially be extended to other applications such as H2/CH4,
He/CH4, and olefin/paraffin separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this Phase I research project are to optimize synthesis of new perfluoro
dioxolane copolymers and to fabricate these materials into robust composite
membranes, whose gas separation performance is superior to commercially
available membranes. Building on recent synthesis work at NYU, a series of
perfluoro dioxolane copolymers will be prepared to study structure/property
relationships. Optimization of the polymerization reaction will be carried out
to obtain the targeted copolymers with optimized gas separation performance,
reasonably low cost, excellent chemical and thermal stability, good film-forming
properties and solvent-processability. The resulting copolymers will be
fabricated into thin-film composite membranes and tested with industrially
relevant mixtures at MTR. At the end of the Phase I project, the most promising
copolymer will be selected for scale up and commercialization in a Phase II
program.