* 1449395
* SNM: Thermal Drawing of Fibers with Individually Addressable Nanoelectrode Array for Cellular Electrophysiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Xiaochun Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,287,439.00

Individually addressable nanoelectrode array fibers are fibers with continuous
metal nanowires in their core. They have many uses such as probes for thin-film
resistivity, cellular electrophysiology and neural electrical signal recorders.
There is a strong demand for such fibers with a predicted global commercial
market of billions of dollars. Despite the huge economic and technological
impact that high-volume production of these fibers would bring, success in their
reliable and scalable manufacturing has been limited. This Scalable
NanoManufacturing (SNM) award will overcome the fundamental limits for scaling
up the manufacturing of such fibers in a totally lithography-independent and,
thus, very low-cost manner. This award will generate knowledge in
nanomanufacturing, biomedicine, electronics, and materials science and help
nurture and educate future engineers and scientists in the area of
nanomanufacturing. Through this project, underrepresented students will gain
research experiences, which will help their transition into industry or advanced
studies. The planned outreach activities to high school, industry and general
scientific community will stimulate awareness and interest in nanotechnology and
nanomanufacturing.

This award supports a novel nanocomposite approach to tackle grand challenges
for scale-up manufacturing of fibers embedded with long metal nanowires. The
fundamental constraints are the fluid instability induced by the low viscosity
of molten metals and the large interfacial energy with the amorphous cladding
materials. There also exists a fundamental size limit to the diameter of
thermally drawn metal wires below which the metal wires become inherently
unstable and their size extremely difficult to control, if not impossible. The
team will conduct research to overcome the fundamental limits and technical
barriers to enable a reliable scalable nanomanufacturing of fibers with
individually addressable nanoelectrode arrays. The research will address an
unmet need in cellular electrophysiology and specifically revolutionize cell-
based assays. The research includes theoretical material and functional design
for nanoelectrode arrays, scalable nanomanufacturing of fibers with metal
nanowires through thermal drawing, in-situ observation and ex-situ
characterization of nanoelectrode arrays, and development and validation of
nanoelectrode-enabled cell-based assay platform.