* 1450962
* BRAIN EAGER: Multiscale dynamics and emergent properties of suprachiasmatic circuits in real time
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Sweedler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award is being made jointly by the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division
of Integrative and Organismal Systems and the Instrument Development for
Biological Research program (IDBR) in the Division of Biological Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the brain enables us to think, act,
learn, and remember is challenging. Progress has been impeded by lack of a
dynamic picture of interactions and properties that emerge when tiers of
interconnected brain cells (neurons) are activated in response to experiences.
These interactions cause changes in our behaviors and can affect subsequent
activities of these neurons, a process called plasticity. This proposal will
develop and use newly created, complementary technologies that will non-
invasively control, measure, and analyze brain network dynamics and change in
real time. Neuroscientists, engineers, and chemists from the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will work together, each bringing cutting-edge
methods to bear on this problem. Approaches include: 1) analyzing slices of
brain tissue that maintain dynamic properties in a dish; 2) real-time, label-
free imaging of neuron activity by novel optical methods; 3) activating and
measuring neuronal activity with flexible, clear electrodes that interface
directly with cells; and, 4) measuring and identifying patterns of brain
chemicals released by experiences. These approaches will be applied together to
better understand the dynamic geography of brain information processing and
plasticity. Such comprehensive studies of brain dynamics in space and time have
never been done. In the future, these technologies can be applied to many brain
regions to advance understanding, broadening their impact. Students will be
trained beyond usual disciplines, so that neuroscience, imaging technology,
engineering of new materials for electrodes, and high-resolution analysis of
neuron-to-neuron signals will be taught and used together. Outcomes will
contribute to a workforce trained in new ways to tackle problems beyond current
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What dynamic interactions and emergent
properties of neuronal cells and circuits encode experience and generate changes
in complex behaviors? Understanding the temporal and spatial dynamics of signal
flow and evolution in multi-tiered neuronal circuits has been elusive. The
proposed study will address this gap through transformational research that
bridges excellence in fundamental neuroscience with innovative technologies in
non-invasive imaging, materials development, and neurochemical analysis. Focus
will be on processing of a surrogate sensory signal in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), the brain's circadian pacemaker, that generates long-term
behavioral change. This initiative will enable a pioneering program to develop
and integrate novel non-invasive imaging of action potentials assessed by
quantitative phase imaging of optical signals, stimulation/sensing by original,
transparent, biocompatible electrodes, and chemical analyses of complex peptide-
release signatures to understand the spatiotemporal dynamics of information flow
in rat SCN circuits. These approaches will be applied together to better
understand the dynamic geography of brain information processing and plasticity.
Such comprehensive studies of brain dynamics in space and time have not been
done previously. In the future, these technologies can be applied to many brain
regions to advance understanding, broadening their impact. Students will be
trained beyond usual disciplines, so that neuroscience, imaging technology,
engineering of new materials for electrodes, and high-resolution analysis of
neuron-to-neuron signals will be taught and used together. Outcomes will
contribute to a workforce trained in new ways to work beyond current boundaries.