* 1450062
* EAGER:  Combining Data and Instruction Level Parallelism through Demand Driven Execution of Imperative Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Soner Onder, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2016
* USD 113,910.00

Title: EAGER: Combining Data and Instruction Level Parallelism through Demand
Driven Execution of Imperative Programs

This project advances a new execution paradigm, namely, demand-driven execution
(DDE) of imperative programs. It studies the feasibility of the paradigm by
establishing theoretical performance bounds, and identifying its key scalability
aspects. The primary intellectual merit of the proposal is the DDE methodology
and its use in removing impediments to parallelism due to data flow and control
flow. The project's broader significance and importance stems from its impact on
the design of future processors, and its synergistic use of compilers and
microarchitectures. Processors built using the DDE approach can better utilize
computing resources and are energy efficient.

The basic idea behind the DDE methodology is to compile C-like programs such
that both instruction-level and data-level parallelism can be used through a
collaboration between compilers and microarchitectures. The basis for this
collaboration is an executable, intermediate program representation known as
"Future Gated Single Assignment" (FGSA) form into which a source program is
compiled. The FGSA representation not only can be used by an optimizing compiler
but also can be used as hardware instructions which can be directly executed by
the microarchitecture.