* 1450871
* IRNC: RXP: StarLight SDX A Software Defined Networking Exchange for Global Science Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Thomas DeFanti, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 2,810,156.00

The StarLight Software Defined Networking Exchange (SDX) project focuses on
research, development, and deployment of services, architectures, and
technologies designed to provide scientists, engineers, and educators with
highly advanced, diverse, reliable, persistent, and secure networking services,
enabling them to optimally access resources in North America, South America,
Asia, South Asia (including India), Australia, New Zealand, Europe, Africa, and
other sites around the world. The StarLight SDX ensures continued innovation and
development of advanced networking services and technologies. The facility
supports continued research, development, experimental deployment, and trials of
multi-domain SDXs and serves as an innovation platform on which to introduce
next-generation services, architectures, policies, processes, and technologies,
supported by persistent experimental research
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three main activities:
(1) development of an SDN Development Environment - the StarAX (StarLight
Advanced eXchange) Innovation Engine - that enables facilities around the world
to deploy SDXs that are compatible and interoperable with others; (2) deployment
of an instance of this system at the StarLight facility; and, (3) coordination
and collaboration with others around the world to deploy such systems at their
exchange points. This project establishes an SDN Innovation Platform (software
closely integrated with select hardware) to provide multiple network functions
and features quickly and reliably. This StarLight initiative builds on prior
successes of the StarLight International/National Communication Exchange
Facility, and operates a wide range of emerging services and capabilities,
including those based on 100 Gbps channels, programmable networking, SDN, SDX
techniques, and related innovations. Northwestern University, the University of
California at San Diego, and the University of Illinois at Chicago are
undertaking this project in partnership with other research organizations,
advanced R&amp;E networks, and science communities around the world.