* 1450520
* Summer Course for Research Design in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SCRD)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 151,726.00

This project runs a three-year series of summer courses called "Summer Course
for Research Design in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SCRD). The
SCRD brings together social science area experts and post-graduate participants
from across the social, behavioral and economic sciences (SBE) for 1 week of
intensive study of issues in research design in SBE disciplines with an emphasis
on scientific proposal development. Participants, approximately 12 who already
hold a PhD in any of the SBE disciplines, are selected from a competitive pool
of applicants. Criteria for selection are based primarily on a participant's
genuine interest in issues of research design in SBE research, demonstrated
interest in research relevant to under-served populations and interests in
advancing their proposal writing skills. Potential participants from under-
represented groups are particularly encouraged to apply. This course should be
of particular interest to individuals interested in the SPRF postdoctoral
research fellowship initiative at NSF. Course content covers a broad spectrum of
research design issues, but with a heavy emphasis on the link between theory and
methods and its importance in writing well-conceived research proposals. This
summer course provides PhDs in any of the SBE disciplines with the knowledge and
tools to produce well-conceived research projects and proposals. In turn,
participants will use the course to fashion fundable research agendas that could
directly benefit under-served communities. Moreover, the knowledge and skills
learned in the course can be used in the teaching of research design and
proposal writing in their home institutions.

This program accomplishes a number of goals: 1) provides participants with a
basic understanding of the link between theory and scientific methodology in the
social sciences, 2) enhances a participant's ability to produce a well-conceived
and written research proposal, and 3) provides participants with basic
scientific research knowledge and skills for solving a variety of research
design problems in the future. Topics include the link between theory and
development of research designs (e.g., experimental, quasi-experimental,
observational), research objectives, concepts, definitions, variables, measures,
and hypotheses; the relationship between quantitative and qualitative approaches
within the social sciences; the development of research plans in proposals
including content on data collection procedures; probability and non-probability
sampling; statistical analysis and models; human subjects concerns; introduction
to data structures and management in both a qualitative and quantitative
context; narrative and text analysis; and hypothesis testing to name a few.