* 1450829
* BRAIN EAGER: Spatially-Resolved In Vivo Optogenetic Stimulation and Imaging Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Justin Rhodes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Boppart, Stephen A. Proposal: 1450829 Title: BRAIN EAGER: Spatially-Resolved
In Vivo Optogenetic Stimulation and Imaging Platform

Significance The successful outcome of this research project will have a broad
impact in neuroscience in addition to optical science and engineering. The PI
will use implanted imaging fiber bundles that will enable in vivo imaging as
well as spatially-controlled optical stimulation and optical feedback of large-
area neural circuits. Current fibers only indiscriminately illuminate large-
areas. Optogenetics is expected to make a broad impact in neuroscience, as well
as medical science and clinical medicine in the future. This proposed research
offers the potential to have an even greater impact by controlling the light
stimulus and enhancing specificity in the control of neural circuits. The
results of this project will be shared widely amongst the scientific and
engineering communities, and also across wide segments of society in outreach
activities. The new imaging and visualization capabilities will inspire K-12
students to think about how technology can be used to see things one cannot
normally see, and how we can invent new ways of seeing the world around us and
discovering new knowledge. Outreach activities will include demos of these
imaging fiber bundles and novel light sources to K-12 and community groups
through annual Engineering Open House events, as well as integration of these
technological methods in Prof. Boppart?s undergraduate ECE/BioE 467 Biophotonics
and ECE/BioE 380 Biomedical Imaging courses.

Technical Description Optogenetics is a rapidly developing field with an ever-
expanding toolkit of molecular biology techniques to enable light-activated
switching and control of cells, most commonly neurons. Equally significant
advances have occurred in optical science and engineering. By understanding and
exploiting physics-based principles of how light interacts in photonic crystal
fibers (PCFs) and within imaging fiber bundles, it is possible to generate,
control, and optimize a wide range of new optical parameters for in vivo
optogenetic stimulation. Traditionally in in vivo optogenetic applications,
light has been sent down single multi-mode optical fibers to diffusely
illuminate the brain, relying on the molecular biology of optogenetically-
modified neurons for cell and circuit specificity. This EAGER project will
uniquely develop and demonstrate the use of imaging fiber bundles, and the
generation of specific light pulse parameters to enable spatially-resolved
optogenetic stimulation and imaging of neural circuits in vivo. These novel
neurotechnologies will enable new investigations underlying behavior and
cognition.