* 1450153
* NRI: Large: Collaborative Research: Human-robot Coordinated Manipulation and Transportation of Large Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Paul Oh, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,618.00

Motivated by the complementary abilities of humans and humanoids, the objective
of this proposal is to develop the science and technology necessary for
realizing human-robot cooperative object manipulation and transportation. The
key concepts that this research seeks to promote are adaptability to human
activity under minimal communication, and robustness to variability and
uncertainty in the environment, achieved through a layered representation and
deliberate processing of the available information. Moreover, this project aims
to make maximum use of a minimal set of sensors to plan and control the actions
of the robot, while ensuring safe and efficient cooperative transportation. The
embodiment of this research is a humanoid co-worker that bears most of the load,
when helping a person to carry an object, without requiring excessive
communication, or prior training on the part of the
human.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By introducing concrete methods for human-robot
physical collaboration in semi-structured environments, this project enables a
unique synergy between robots and humans that has the potential to increase
productivity, and reduce accidents and injuries. In doing so, it also promotes
the advancement of new practical applications of robots in construction,
manufacturing, logistics, and home services. By developing open-source, portable
algorithms for humanoid robots and mobile manipulators, this effort results in
cost and time savings for researchers, developers, educators, and end-users in
robotics. Finally, through an aggressive educational and community outreach
plan, and by actively engaging K-12 students in an exciting RoboTech Fellows
program, this project seeks to increase diversity and attract underrepresented
groups to STEM.