* 1450730
* Collaborative Research: Geological Constraints on ~25 Million Years of Magmatism Along an Arc-transform Junction, Wrangell Volcanic Belt, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Jeff Benowitz, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2019
* USD 152,135.00

The Wrangell volcanic belt in southern Alaska is situated in a complex tectonic
environment where an oceanic plateau (the Yakutat block) is presently colliding
with and subducting beneath Alaska at a very low angle. To the east, a large
transform fault system, the Denali fault, bounds the edge of this subducting
plateau and a major volcanic chain, the Wrangell volcanic belt that has been
built up over the last 25 million years, marks this intersection. Such junctions
are common in modern convergent margin settings and the resulting volcanic belts
record both variations in relative position of the leading front of the slab and
translation of the upper plate along strike-slip faults. The processes that
generate lavas in these complex settings are poorly understood. Here, this
research team aims to decipher the origins of the volcanic rocks in the Wrangell
volcanic belt through a comprehensive study of the geology, volcanic rock
chemical composition, and geochronology of the belt. The results would provide a
new understanding of how volcanic chains develop in such complex tectonic
settings. The project also benefits society or advances desired societal
outcomes through: (1) planned involvement of students from underrepresented
minorities in STEM; (2) increased public scientific literacy and public
engagement with science and technology through presentations in local
communities and development of interpretive materials for the Wrangell-St. Elias
National Park and Preserve; and (3) development of a STEM workforce through
training of graduate and undergraduate students and support of early career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the geochemical-eruptive
evolution of an under-sampled 25 Ma arc-transform magmatic belt, the Wrangell
volcanic belt in Alaska. The belt is transected by a major strike-slip fault,
the Denali fault system, and located above both the edge and leading front of
the Yakutat flat slab. The researchers will collect bedrock, detrital
sand/cobbles samples, and sedimentological and structural data from the Wrangell
volcanic belt. They will determine major and trace element composition, whole
rock Sr, Nd, Pb, and Hf, and zircon Hf-isotope concentrations, and 40Ar/39Ar and
U/Pb geochronology on bedrock and detrital samples. Specific objectives of the
project are to: (1) determine the temporal-spatial history of magmatism of the
Wrangell volcanic belt; and (2) decipher the links between strike-slip faulting,
and slab melting on the geochemical evolution of this slab edge volcanic belt.
These data will be integrated with geological mapping to provide important new
constraints on the development of slab edge magmatism along an arc-transform
junction as the leading front of the flat slab progresses inboard and the
relationship between strike-slip faults and the geochemistry of magmatic
products.