* 1450614
* Workshop for a Future Nanotechnology Infrastructure Support Program, August 18-19, 2014, Westin Arlington Gateway Hotel, Arlington, VA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Thomas Theis, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2015
* USD 68,120.00

Proposal: ECCS-1450614&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tom Theis, Semiconductor
Research Corporation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: NSF Workshop for a Future
Nanotechnology Infrastructure Support Program, August 18-19, 2014, Westin Hotel,
Arlington VA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
is planning a future nanotechnology infrastructure support program that will
succeed the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN). This Workshop
will bring together 22 recognized national experts from academe, industry, and
government to develop a vision of how such a future nanotechnology
infrastructure support program could be structured and what the key needs for
the broad user communities are over the coming decade. The Workshop will be held
on August 18-19, 2014 at the Westin Arlington Gateway Hotel in Arlington, VA,
with portions of the proceedings made available to remote participants via web
conferencing. Dr. Thomas Theis (IBM Research, on assignment to the Semiconductor
Research Corporation) and Dr. Mark Tuominen (University of Massachusetts,
Amherst) will serve as co-chairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop will seek to
develop and articulate a vision for a future nanotechnology infrastructure
support program that advances science, technology and education by enabling the
research and technical development communities to bring key opportunities of
nanotechnology to fruition. The primary objectives of the Workshop are to: (i)
Identify the important goals of a nanotechnology infrastructure support program
and recommend ways that these goals can best be achieved; (ii) Identify the key
needs of the user communities and how these needs are expected to evolve over
the next ten years; (iii) Develop recommendations for the organization and
coordination of user facilities within the program, and recommend an appropriate
selection process and selection criteria; and (iv) Consider the importance of
integrating student education, training, and outreach into an infrastructure
program, and in identifying ways that the program can address societal concerns.
The Workshop will deliver a report outlining the vision, opportunities, and
needs, which will be provided to NSF and be made publicly available through the
NSF website.