* 1450690
* Collaborative Research: Ground-based Measurements to Constrain Aerosol-Cloud-Precipitation Interactions in West Coast United States Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Markus Petters, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 02/28/2017
* USD 180,185.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to characterize aerosol particles acting
as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and ice nucleating particles (INPs) during
wintertime storms along the west coast of the U.S. Specifically the researchers
will participate in CalWater-2/ACAPEX field campaign with a combination of
ground measurements at Bodega Bay, CA and airborne instruments studying the
Atmospheric River (AR) phenomena and the impact of aerosols on wintertime
precipitation in the Sierra Mountains of California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;These ground-based
and in situ airborne measurements will improve our fundamental understanding of
the role of biological and other aerosol types in enhancing or suppressing
orographic precipitation over the western U.S. during winter. A variety of
instruments will be used to directly and remotely measure these aerosols. The
results should aid the cloud microphysics community through improved
understanding of ice formation in clouds at temperatures warmer than -20C. This
study will be conducted in collaboration with the Department of Energy (DoE) and
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) during the CalWater-2
field campaign. The ground- and ship-based data will be combined with airborne
data to develop a four-dimensional view of Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN) and
Ice Nucleating Particle (INP) concentrations. Data sets will be integrated into
a description of the influences of these aerosols on winter and early spring
precipitation in the Sierra Mountains of California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the training of Ph.D. students from two universities (Colorado State
University and North Carolina State University) using advanced instrumentation
including confocal fluorescence microscopy and scanning electron microscopy.
With the ongoing drought in the western United States this study is both timely
and critical in advancing our understanding of biological and other aerosol
types on wintertime precipitation in the Sierra Mountains. As a major source
region of the U.S. food supply, an improved understanding of the role of these
aerosols on wintertime precipitation has broad implications on the resulting
spring and summer water management policy in California.