* 1450943
* Expanding the Limits of Compassion: A Motivated Emotion Regulation Account of Compassion Collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Christopher Cameron, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 01/31/2017
* USD 336,832.00

Compassion -- an emotion that motivates people to care about and relieve the
suffering of others -- can lead to charity, cooperation, and forgiveness. Yet
compassion is susceptible to a surprising bias: people typically feel more
compassion for one victim than many victims. This compassion collapse is
compelling scientifically, because it conflicts with how people think they would
and should respond to mass suffering, and socially, because it highlights
barriers to compassionate action. Why does compassion collapse occur? According
to the motivated emotion regulation account developed by Daryl Cameron
(University of Iowa) and colleagues, compassion collapse results from motivated
choices to avoid compassion for multiple victims because of anticipated costs.
For example, people might worry that attending to the suffering of many victims
will be more emotionally overwhelming than that of a single victim, and
therefore proactively down-regulate compassion to avoid emotional exhaustion.
The proposed research will test this theoretical model of compassion collapse. A
first series of studies will examine how anticipated affective costs -- i.e.,
the fear of being emotionally exhausted and overwhelmed by compassion -- can
motivate emotion regulation processes that create compassion collapse. A second
set of studies will test whether shifting these motivations can reverse
compassion collapse. These results would further our understanding of the
motivational influences on moral outcomes. Given that compassion collapse may
influence pro-social behavior, philanthropy and policy decisions, it is
important to understand why this effect occurs and how to mitigate its
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research by this research team has shown
that motivated emotion regulation contributes to compassion collapse. Building
on this work, the proposed research will examine how the affective costs of
compassion predict spontaneous use of emotion regulation processes, and how this
in turn leads to increased compassion collapse for multiple (vs. single) victims
of a crisis. These experiments will examine emotion regulation in three ways:
employment of strategies to avoid or limit exposure to information about
victims; use of the psychophysiological measure of respiratory sinus arrhythmia
as a marker of autonomic emotion regulation; and through manipulation of the
emotion regulation strategy of reappraisal. The proposed research will also test
manipulations designed to increase one's motivation to feel compassion, and
therefore reverse compassion collapse. This will be done by increasing the
perception that compassion is healthy; decreasing the perception that compassion
has a limited capacity; activating the moral self-concept; and increasing self-
compassion. Together, this research can make transformative advances in the
science of compassion by revealing how motivation shapes the use of emotion
regulation to create compassion collapse. By testing strategies to reverse
compassion collapse, this research may have implications for increasing
compassion and philanthropy toward challenging social problems in the real
world.