* 1450103
* I-Corps Sites:  University of Washington - Center for Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,06/30/2023
* Magali Eaton, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 469,961.00

NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Site builds on activities at this institution during the past 5-6 years during
which the University of Washington (UW) developed an ecosystem for technology
entrepreneurship that provides integrated resources and also uses the business-
model canvas as part of the planning around each commercialization opportunity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UW will apply I-Corps Site funding to qualified teams for
the purpose of initiating and developing specific customer relationships. They
will solicit Site teams from three overlapping pipelines of emerging start-ups
at the UW: UW Center for Commercialization; the Buerk Center for
Entrepreneurship; and the Clean Energy Initiative, with overlapping pipelines of
technology start-ups and of student-led start-ups. With a Site award, UW
addresses customer development within the I-Corps framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;UW has been actively
participating in state-level and regional entrepreneurial strategies for the
past six years. Their involvement in the I-Corps national network expands their
coherent effort to execute a national strategy. Also, to help drive the regional
innovation economy around Seattle and the Puget Sound, UW has developed its own
ecosystem for technology entrepreneurship. An I-Corps Site award will expand
participant?s entrepreneurial experience, especially for students, by
emphasizing the importance of early and frequent interactions with potential
customers. This would directly improve the quality and momentum of the start-ups
in UW's pipeline, which translates into healthier company starts in Washington
State.