* 1450104
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Origins Of Social Stratification
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Douglas Kennett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 29,737.00

Although one of the central goals of anthropological archaeology is to
understand the origins of social, economic, and political inequality and its
long-term effects, the emergence of complex society in many parts of the ancient
world is poorly understood. Under the supervision of Dr. Douglas Kennett, Claire
Ebert will conduct archaeological research to examine the emergence of
sociopolitical and economic inequality between households during the Middle and
Late Formative Periods (ca. 900 BC - 350 AD) at the ancient Maya site of Cahal
Pech in the Belize Valley. In the Maya lowlands, the Formative Period represents
a critical transition for domestic, social, economic, and political
organization, and previous research has focused on the growth of large regional
centers and the strategies used by the ancient Maya elite to gain, maintain, and
legitimize their power during this time. This project considers the role of
hinterland households in influencing status differentiation. Archaeological
studies of households, the most fundamental socio-economic unit in ancient
societies, provide a long-term perspective on the complex processes that
influence domestic transformation, that in turn affect broader cultural patterns
at the regional level. Understanding resource distribution between households
can shed light on the social and economic contexts that led to the emergence of
institutionalized socio-economic inequality.

Differences in architecture and artifacts between households occupied during the
Middle to Late Formative at Cahal Pech will be measured to determine the types
of activities that the households performed (e.g., food procurement and
preparation, tool manufacture, craft production, exchange) and how access to raw
materials, subsistence resources, and exchange networks varied over time. Two
primary questions are addressed: 1) Did differential social status exist between
households during the Middle and Late Formative Periods, and is it visible in
the material record (artifacts and architecture)? 2) Was there a relationship
between domestic craft production, inter-household exchange, and social status?
The project combines traditional archaeological survey and excavation of ancient
settlements with innovative applications of spatial analyses using high-
resolution Lidar data, AMS 14C dating, trace element analysis of ceramic and
obsidian artifacts, and statistical analyses to understand changing ancient Maya
domestic organization.

Public and community outreach also form a strong component of the project.
Throughout the project undergraduate students from the US, Canada, the UK, and
Belize will be involved in field and laboratory research, cultivating their
ability to express and apply scientific concepts to real-world situations in
both laboratory and field situations. Research results will be presented at
public and professional forums in the US and Belize including universities and
local schools.