* 1450645
* Collaborative Research: Helium Diffusion in Lower Mantle Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2017
* USD 68,752.00

Helium is one of the most important geochemical tracers of Earth's internal
composition and evolution. It consists of two isotopes: 3He, which has a
primordial origin, and 4He, which is the product of uranium and thorium decay.
The ratio of these two isotopes in samples derived from Earth's mantle is
variable, as are the ratios for many other elements. A long-standing question is
how the observed heterogeneity in isotopic composition relates to the
heterogeneity that is observed by other means, including seismic imaging. To
answer this question, it is necessary to know on what length scales isotope
heterogeneity can persist in Earth's mantle over geological time, against
diffusive and convective mixing. Because helium is a highly mobile element in
geological materials, it can provide a lower limit on the length scale of
heterogeneous regions that are sampled by geochemical methods. However, while
the mobility of helium has been determined experimentally in shallow mantle
materials at low pressures, no information is yet available on the mobility of
helium in the deepest 80% of Earth's mantle. The proposed work will provide the
first data on helium mobility in these deep mantle materials. The proposed
research combines both experimental measurements and first-principles
calculations. Experiments will be carried out at CWRU and Harvard to determine
the mechanism and rate of He diffusion in periclase, as well as its solubility,
over a wide range of temperature and pressure. The diffusivity of He will be
determined by incremental outgassing step-heating experiments on He-saturated
crystals using the noble gas mass spectrometer at Harvard. Helium diffusivity
and solubility at high pressures will be determined through time series
experiments in sealed noble-gas charged capsules followed by bulk He analysis of
the recovered crystals. Theoretical first-principles calculations will be
carried out at the University of Wisconsin to determine He diffusivity and its
mechanism in both periclase and MgSiO3-perovskite. The calculations will provide
a critical cross-check on the experimental data and extend the study to deep
lower mantle conditions that are experimentally inaccessible. The proposed
research will provide a fundamental constraint on the minimum length scale of
geochemical heterogeneity that can be maintained in Earth's deep mantle. It may
also provide indirect insight into the helium mobility in nuclear reactor
materials, where helium embrittlement is a persistent problem, and in proposed
nuclear waste disposal materials, which include perovskite-structured oxides.