* 1450963
* EAGER: Quantitative Modeling of Behavioral-Change for Personalized Weight Loss Interventions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Philip Kaminsky, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Obesity is a growing problem linked with diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and
some cancers. In the United States, 70 percent of American adults are overweight
or obese, and related health care costs are estimated to be $147 billion
annually. Past studies have shown that programs combining exercise and improved
diet can lead to weight loss, and thus result in significant reduction in
associated chronic illnesses. The challenge is ensuring continued participation
in these labor-intensive and often expensive programs. There is a growing belief
that the data and interactive possibilities of increasingly ubiquitous digital,
mobile, and wireless technologies have the potential to dramatically reduce
costs and increase participation in these programs. However, significant
knowledge gaps remain with respect to how the data generated by these devices
can be used to model and predict behavior in a way that enables the design of
effective, personalized, dynamically updated weight-loss strategies. If
successful, this EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
address these gaps, resulting in foundational mathematical models and computer
algorithms for weight loss treatment personalization, utilizing data from
digital, mobile, and wireless technologies as inputs. Such foundational tools
have the potential to be used in the future to engineer innovative approaches to
lower costs and increase efficacy of weight loss interventions, in order to
reduce obesity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to development of
novel approaches for quantitative modeling of behavioral-change for weight loss
through physical activity and diet, where the model is then used for
personalized decision-making and treatments. Existing behavioral-change models
focus on retrospective understanding and aggregate-level analysis for the
purpose of improving treatments at an aggregate-level; however, new modeling
approaches like the ones that will be developed in this project are needed for
personalized decision-making. The approach of this project will be to convert
qualitative models of behavioral-change in health care, such as social cognitive
theory, into a mathematical modeling framework. These modeling frameworks will
be chosen in a manner that will enable the quantitative validation, comparison,
analysis, optimization, and automated decision-making of the resulting models of
behavioral-change. Among the anticipated contributions of this project are:
quantitative comparison of different qualitative models of behavioral-change,
identification of a "best" model of behavioral-change for weight loss, and new
stochastic programming frameworks for novel forms of uncertainty found in new
medical technologies and in models with "irrational" behavior. Taken in
combination, these contributions will form a framework for quantitative modeling
of behavioral-change that can be used for design of personalized health care
treatments.