* 1450455
* SI2-SSI: CRESCAT, A Computational Research Ecosystem for Scientific Collaboration on Ancient Topics, Spanning the Full Data Life Cycle
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Thomas Levy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,750,000.00

This project integrates, tests, and documents a suite of interoperable software
tools to support collaborative research. The tools are collectively called
CRESCAT (Computational Research Ecosystem for Scientific Collaboration on
Ancient Topics). The initial focus is on disciplines that deal with dynamic
interactions and structural changes within spatially situated populations over
long time spans in the past, e.g., paleobiology, archaeology, and economic
history. Despite their differences, these disciplines have similar computational
needs for modeling and analyzing data. Moreover, the same software can be used
in many other disciplines, enabling economies of scale by building and
maintaining a common set of interoperable tools to serve a wide range of
researchers, while spanning the full research data life cycle, consisting of (1)
acquisition, (2) integration, (3) analysis, (4) publication, and (5) archiving
of data. An intuitive graphical user interface is provided for end-user
researchers to work with their data in all stages of the life cycle without
cumbersome manual data transfers and transformations. The project will address a
major computational problem that affects many scientific disciplines due to the
challenge of integrating and analyzing data of diverse origins based on
heterogeneous spatial, temporal, and taxonomic ontologies. Thus it will have a
broad impact in the sciences and beyond by showing how to represent explicitly
the full variability of individual judgments and the divergent
conceptualizations and terminologies through which those judgments are
expressed, with explicit attribution of each observation, interpretation, and
conceptual ontology to a particular named person or group. Unlike many
computational tools for scientific research, which assume a degree of
ontological consensus that does not exist, CRESCAT conforms to actual research
practices. It does not impose a standardized ontology, thereby ignoring or
suppressing the inevitable disagreements and conflicting interpretations that
arise among researchers. Instead, it represents ontological diversity,
observational uncertainty, and interpretive disagreement explicitly within a
larger common framework in which end users can query, analyze, and compare the
full range of observations, interpretations, and terminologies to inform their
own judgments about the evidence. CRESCAT is designed to allow scientific
disagreements and observational and interpretive uncertainties to be represented
digitally in a way that exposes these differences themselves as data for
analysis and debate. Thus, in addition to the practical goal of building a more
efficient shared framework for advanced research, the proposed work will provoke
theoretical reflection about how computational tools should relate to scientific
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CRESCAT project is an interdisciplinary
collaboration between computer scientists, paleobiologists, geoscientists,
archaeologists, economic historians, and other social scientists. The goal is to
demonstrate the value of an integrative software ecosystem that spans the social
and natural sciences and can facilitate any research characterized by
overlapping models of temporal and spatial relations or by conflicting
terminologies and taxonomies. CRESCAT's representation of scientific knowledge
eschews forced standardization, which is impractical in many cases due to lack
of an enforcement mechanism and is also questionable in principle since
divergent ontologies often legitimately reflect different theoretical
assumptions and research agendas. Central to the CRESCAT suite of tools is an
innovative data-integration system that represents explicitly both research data
and the ontologies inherent in the data. An ontology is defined here as a
conceptual model of entities and the relationships among them in a given domain
of knowledge, in contrast to a schema,&amp;#148;which is the implementation of
an ontology in logical data structures within a working system. CRESCAT's data-
integration system operates at a level of abstraction sufficient to provide a
predictable and efficiently queryable database structure based on an abstract
global schema, which in turn is based on an upper ontology specified in terms of
fundamental concepts and relationships applicable to all scientific and
scholarly disciplines. The data-integration system is implemented in an
enterprise-class XML/XQuery DBMS that serves as a data warehouse (using the non-
relational graph data model), in which is stored diverse data from a wide range
of research projects representing many disciplines. The terminology and
conceptual distinctions of each research project are fully preserved. The
approach to research data taken in the CRESCAT project is (1) coherent, tightly
integrating software tools and data formats within a single analytical
framework; (2) open-ended, interconnecting existing tools while allowing the
addition of new tools in the future; (3) non-exclusive, in no way preventing its
component tools from participating in other software ecosystems; (4) scalable,
designed to handle large-scale data management, analysis, and visualization; and
(5) sustainable, maintaining shared resources to meet common needs for software
and technical support and thus enabling substantial economies of scale.