* 1450553
* US-Africa High Performance Computing Workshop: TACC Ranger Lives On
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Tommy Minyard, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,080.00

This workshop will enhance the potential for U.S. scientists to collaborate with
African colleagues on a wide range of data-intensive projects by helping African
scientists improve local supercomputing capacity. The workshop will be organized
and managed by Tommy Minyard, Director of Advanced Computing Systems at the
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) of the University of Texas and Austin,
and will build upon the 2013 donation to three African countries of almost 2000
compute nodes from the decommissioned ?Ranger? supercomputer, which was itself
funded by NSF. The 2013 donation of Ranger computing components to institutions
in Botswana, Tanzania, and South Africa was funded independently by the
University of Texas. This workshop will help ensure that the African scientists
who received this computing infrastructure have the skills and information
necessary to use this resource to advance discoveries in astronomy, agriculture,
climatology, earth sciences, transportation, telecommunications and many more
fields of study that are of interest and value to the U.S. and Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TACC will organize a series of training and information
exchange events to support broader understanding and use of supercomputing in
Africa and to build a foundation for US-Africa collaborative research projects.
In November 2014 approximately eight African researchers will visit TACC
following their attendance at the SuperComputing Conference in New Orleans. The
Austin visit will allow demonstration of a broad range of applications and tools
that will enhance the African scientists? understanding and ability to
facilitate the second phase of the workshop in South Africa. In addition
visiting Austin will allow the African scientists to meet and discuss potential
collaboration with several U.S. researchers using supercomputing to study topics
in or relevant to southern Africa. In December 2014 the South African Centre for
High Performance Computing (CHPC) will host a second, much larger workshop
activity. The December 2014 event will follow the annual South African
Supercomputing Conference hosted by CHPC and participants from this conference
will be invited to attend the subsequent workshop. Six TACC staff members will
travel to South Africa to conduct three-days of intensive discussions and
trainings on configuring servers into single clusters and installing and using
appropriate open source applications for a range of research activities. TACC
staff will also discuss the emerging multi-national African high performance
computing (HPC) development plan with their African colleagues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enhancement of HPC capacity in Africa is likely to
produce near term benefits to two specific NSF-supported global activities: the
Square Kilometer Array (SKA) and the iPlant Collaborative. The internationally-
funded SKA will be locating instruments and data processing equipment within
South Africa and the CHPC will be supporting the computational requirements of
this instrument, which will produce data for researchers in the United States
and around the world. The NSF-funded iPlant project works with the Gates
Foundation International Breeding Platform (IBP) to share computationally based
molecular breeding tools for staple food crops within Africa. The TACC-provided
infrastructure and training will help HPC Centers in Tanzania and South Africa
to locally host the tools and data necessary to improve productivity in staple
crops in Africa. The datasets produced will be shared around the globe,
providing rich comparative datasets to U.S. plant science researchers, whose
research is often limited to the strains of crops used for food production in
the U.S. and further limited by data held privately by Agribusiness
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of this activity will be
spurring interest and skills in high performance computing that will encourage
students to learn to build and manage cluster computing resources and help
scientists to understand how they can use HPC to power discoveries that change
the world. New collaborations between researchers and their students in the U.S.
and Africa are likely to develop as African capacity for data processing
improves and based on the meetings that this workshop supports. In addition,
improvements in HPC have the potential to improve both computer-focused
education and science education in these three African
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by International
Science and Engineering in the Office of the Director and Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.