* 1450310
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Data-Intensive Analysis for High Energy Physics (DIANA/HEP)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Kyle Cranmer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 04/30/2021
* USD 939,189.00

Advanced software plays a fundamental role for large scientific projects. The
primary goal of DIANA/HEP (Data Intensive ANAlysis for High Energy Physics) is
developing state-of-the-art tools for experiments that acquire, reduce, and
analyze petabytes of data. Improving performance, interoperability, and
collaborative tools through modifications and additions to packages broadly used
by the community will allow users to more fully exploit the data being acquired
at CERN's Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and other facilities. These experiments
are addressing questions at the heart of physics: What are the underlying
constituents of matter? And how do they interact? With the discovery of the
Higgs boson in 2012, the Standard Model of particle physics is complete. It
provides an excellent description of known particles and forces. However, the
most interesting questions remain open: What is the dark matter which pervades
the universe? Does space-time have additional symmetries or extend beyond the 3
spatial dimensions we know? What is the mechanism stabilizing the Higgs boson
mass from enormous quantum corrections? The next generation of experiments will
collect exabyte-scale data samples to provide answers. Analyzing this data will
require new and better tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the project will
provide the CPU and IO performance needed to reduce the iteration time so
crucial to explore new ideas. It will develop software to effectively exploit
emerging many- and multi-core hardware. It will establish infrastructure for a
higher-level of collaborative analysis, building on the successful patterns used
for the Higgs boson discovery and enabling a deeper communication between the
theoretical community and the experimental community. DIANA?s products will sit
in the ROOT framework, already used by the HEP community of more than 10000
particle and nuclear physicists. By improving interoperability with the larger
scientific software ecosystem, DIANA will incorporate best practices and
algorithms from other disciplines into HEP. Similarly, the project will make its
computing insights, tools, and novel ideas related to collaborative analysis,
standards for data preservation, and best practices for treating software as a
research product available to the larger scientific community. Finally, to
improve the quality of the next generation of software engineers in HEP, DIANA
will host an annual workshop on analysis tools and establish a fellowship
program.