* 1450893
* EAGER: Activity Awareness in Collaborative Information Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2017
* John Carroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2017
* USD 158,000.00

This project will investigate the concept of activity awareness, defined as a
team's awareness of its own sustained collaborative activity. It is set in the
context of online distributed work, an increasingly typical and chronic work
arrangement. Awareness is a critical enabler of collaborative online activity.
Collaborators need to know who is present, what partners are doing, and how
individual activity coordinates and coheres into group endeavor. Collaborators
need to keep track of how their teamwork is organized and managed, including
team strategies and practices, and interdependent member responsibilities and
roles. They need to keep track of their partners' relevant experiences,
distinctive resources and unique knowledge, prior contributions and
perspectives, as well as values, expectations, and goals. In continuing or
longer-term interactions, addressing shared projects of greater scope and
complexity, collaborators must be aware of the status of work along many fronts.
Issues that were raised an hour ago, or a week ago, may nonetheless be critical
again. It is important for research to examine, understand, and provide
effective tools and environments for these longer-term and broader real-world
CSCW interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory project has two primary
goals: (1) further developing the concept of activity awareness, and (2)
investigating empirical measures of activity awareness. First, developing the
concept of activity awareness involves articulating and validating aspects of
collaborative work activity that are critical to effective team coordination.
The project will investigate how activity awareness is developed in teams, how
it is facilitated and enhanced, and how it can be impeded or undermined. Second,
the PI's prior research demonstrated several direct approaches to measuring
activity awareness in complex laboratory reference tasks. A rich set of
variables have been identified and developed in social and organizational
psychology, but not investigated specifically as facilitators of or consequences
of activity awareness. The project will design and carry out a laboratory study
with a prototype tool and measure various facets of activity awareness and a
number of contextual variables at both the individual and team levels to capture
the complex and interdependent processes that occur throughout the project
lifecycle.