* 1450644
* I-Corps for Learning (I-Corps-L): Propagating and Scaling Educational Innovations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 362,796.00

The I-Corps for Learning project addresses the problem of developing a well-
prepared STEM workforce that is crucial to the Nation's health and economy, by
laying the foundation for broad implementation of effective instructional
practices and advances in education. I-Corps for Learning provides support for
teams of educational innovators to accelerate and scale-up novel effective
practices in a sustainable manner. Help for teams takes the form of workshops,
mentoring, and participation in a cohort of like-minded educational innovators.
The I-Corps-L approach attempts to utilize insights gained from bringing product
discoveries to market to create an entrepreneurial approach to bringing learning
innovations into situations where they can benefit society. Educational
innovations in this case applies to developments that address K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral research, as well as learning in
informal science education environments. In providing organizational and
logistical support, the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) is
collaborating with the I-Corps-L Instructional Team led by Dr. Karl Smith. This
project has the potential of helping to achieve the goal of educational
transformation through propagation and scale-up of educational
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps for Learning model is centered
around participating three-person teams. Team composition includes a principal
investigator who has developed an education innovation through prior support
from the National Science Foundation, an entrepreneurial lead who is committed
to leading the team through the investigation, and a mentor who understands the
nature of successful education-focused innovations. Training includes an
introductory three-day training session, five online sessions, and a closing
two-day training session. This project is designed to fill the gap between
educational innovations of proven effectiveness in enhancing student learning
and the widespread use of such practices. I-Corps L, is based on a process of
hypothesis testing and investigation along with clarification of user needs.
This approach can benefit education researchers by helping them to develop ways
to broaden the impact of innovations in teaching and learning science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). In tandem with its logistical
and organizational services ASEE is conducting an evaluation to assess
individual sessions within the face-to-face meetings, overall elements of the
multi-day training workshops, and handling of meeting logistics. In addition,
the participants will answer formative questions throughout the effort to ensure
success in meeting workshop objectives, and properly accommodate all aspects
associated with the virtual sessions.