* 1450870
* RAPID: Impacts of State Security Responses to Global Sporting Events on Marginal Social Groups and their Informal Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Gregory Mitchell, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 21,399.00

Major international sporting events are seen as highly lucrative economic
opportunities that raise the profile of the municipalities and states that host
them by opening them to new forms of investment. Governments spend billions on
getting the rights to host the event, and the infrastructure necessary to
support it. At the same time, these events evoke public and official concerns
about a potential inflow of illegal and socially and economically disruptive
activities. Local governments respond to such concerns with increased
regulation; but what kind of regulation best serves the public interest often is
unclear. For both regulators and social scientists, reliable data is hard to
collect. This project addresses this problem by using an intensive, ethnographic
research methodology to get a ground-level understanding of the problem. Given
the massive public expenditures that are made by states and municipalities to
host such events, an adequate understanding of the costs and benefits associated
with regulation and local-level responses to regulation is critical to assessing
the conditions under which such investments improve the economic competitiveness
of the localities in which they take place. As the U.S. makes significant
contributions to global security efforts, especially around international
sporting events, the project will also provide valuable data to law enforcement
officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Gregory Mitchell of Williams College
explores contemporary approaches to policy, governance and state security
through of an examination of the security coalitions engaged in the 2014 World
Cup and the preparations for the 2016 Olympics in Brazil. The researcher will
interview policy makers, laborers, and Brazilian and U.S.-based law enforcement
with respect to security mobilization efforts. The research relies on
conventional ethnographic data collection methods such as participant
observation and interviews. Existing research on security practices has tended
to focus on security studies and theories of organizational behavior and
management. This project seeks to collect empirical evidence about the everyday
experiences that are not easily quantified or captured by statistics, nor easily
understood at the macro-level of organizational behavior. In so doing, this work
will provide clarity and nuance to existing approaches to security data. The
project realizes the Cultural Anthropology Program's long term goal to support
investigations into the causes and consequences of human mobility and
displacement, including migration, economic and cultural globalization, and the
impacts of technologies.