* 1450356
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Bringing End-to-End Provenance to Scientists
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Barbara Lerner, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 422,997.00

Reproducability is the cornerstone of scientific progress. Historically,
scientists make their work reproducible by including a formulaic description of
the experimental methodology used in an experiment. In an age of computational
science, such descriptions no longer adequately describe scientific methodology.
Instead, scientific reproducibility relies on a precise and actionable
description of the data and programs used to conduct the research. Provenance is
the name given to the description of how a digital artifact came to be in its
present state. Provenance includes a precise specification of an experiment's
input data and the programs or procedures applied to that data. Most
computational platforms do not record such data provenance, making it difficult
to ensure reproducability. This project addresses this problem through the
development of tools that transparently and automatically capture data
provenance as part of a scientist's normal computational
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary team of computer scientists
and ecologists have come together to develop tools to facilitate the capture,
management, and query of data provenance -- the history of how a digital
artifact came to be in its present state. Such data provenance improves the
transparency, reliability, and reproducibility of scientific results. Most
existing provenance systems require users to learn specialized tools and jargon
and are unable to integrate provenance from different sources; these are serious
obstacles to adoption by domain scientists. This project includes the design,
development, deployment, and evaluation of an end-to-end system (eeProv) that
encompasses the range of activity from original data analysis by domain
scientists to management and analysis of the resulting provenance in a common
framework with common tools. This project leverages and integrates development
efforts on (1) an emerging system for generating provenance from a computing
environment that scientists actually use (the R statistical language) with (2)
an emerging system that utilizes a library of language and database adapters to
store and manage provenance from virtually any source. Accomplishing the goals
of this proposal requires fundamental research in resolving the semantic gap
between provenance collected in different environments, capturing detailed
provenance at the level of a programming language, defining precisely aspects of
provenance required for different use cases, and making provenance accessible to
scientists.