* 1450923
* BRAIN EAGER: Flashes of insight: Revealing dynamic mental models during rodent virtual reality foraging
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Dora Angelaki, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

A primary goal of neuroscience is to understand how the brain works-- not in
artificial lab tasks, but when using its full capabilities to thrive in the
rigors of the natural environment. Neuroscience has made enormous progress by
examining how the brain performs simplified tasks, but these tasks do not expose
the richly adaptive dynamics that the brain must use in a changing world.
Therefore, the current neuroscientific understanding of the brain is missing
fundamental ingredients. The current project begins to fill this gap, providing
a new paradigm for the conduct of behavioral neuroscience and offering an
unprecedented opportunity to observe the neural computations that solve a
complex natural task. Team members will record activity of many neurons in
multiple areas of a mouse brain while the mouse is foraging in a virtual reality
environment, and develop mathematical models to make sense of the complex data.
This research will thereby provide a unique training opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students in both computational and experimental
neuroscience. The project results will be widely disseminated by sharing data,
computational models, and analysis techniques with the neuroscience community
through public data repositories, so conclusions can be replicated and extended.
This research will thereby advance society?s goals of understanding the biology
of healthy and disordered brains, with the ultimate hope of repairing
neurological problems.

Experimenters will train mice to forage in a virtual reality environment, while
recording activity from many neurons in four brain areas involved in vision and
navigation: visual cortex, entorhinal cortex, posterior parietal cortex and
hippocampus. State-of-the-art analysis techniques will be used to describe the
mouse's behavior, and to discover neural representations of the internal models
that express the animal's beliefs about things that cannot be observed directly
in sense data. Finally, the project will uncover how neural representations of
critical task variables are communicated and transformed across brain areas,
guided by the hidden variable dynamics of the behavioral model. Together, these
experiments, theory, and analysis will provide an unprecedented, system-wide
understanding of neural computation, ranging from the scale of individual
neurons up to a multi-region system. A key quality of the approach is the
pervasive influence of theory, both in structuring experiments and dictating
analyses. Since the great strength of the human brain is its ability to
comprehend the hidden structure in the world, this approach takes an essential
step toward unraveling the mysteries of cognition.