* 1450932
* BRAIN EAGER: Monitoring the Function of Individual Synaptic Contacts during Circuit Plasticity with Novel Optogenetic Sensors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Karen Zito, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 12/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

One of the primary challenges in neuroscience is to understand how sensory
experiences drive the changes in brain circuits that underlie learning. Notably,
the current lack of adequate tools to monitor the functional properties of
individual synaptic connections has been holding back efforts to define how
complex neuronal firing patterns drive changes in neuronal connectivity in the
brain. This EAGER proposal is focused on the development and application of
radically novel fluorescent probes to visualize integrated neural activity at
individual synapses. If successful, these innovative probes will be
transformative for the field; broad application of these probes by the
neuroscience community will enable discovery of the rules that link sensory-
driven neural activity to the structural changes in synaptic connectivity
underlying learning. This knowledge would revolutionize current understanding of
the dynamic changes in brain structure and function during learning.
Furthermore, this project will foster close collaboration between groups of
investigators with complementary expertise, and thus will create a vibrant
environment for interdisciplinary training of the next generation of scientists.

This EAGER proposal addresses one of the major unsolved problems in
neuroscience: how complex patterns of neural activity at multiple synapses
interact to drive experience-dependent changes in circuit connectivity. The
specific goal is to develop and apply novel fluorescent probes for visualizing
the history of neural activity at individual synapses. These innovative probes
will facilitate mapping the function and structure of the neural circuitry
underlying a specific physiological process or behavioral task. To accomplish
this goal, a multidisciplinary approach will be used that incorporates genetic
strategies, computation-guided protein design, two-photon imaging, and
electrophysiology. First, candidate sensors will be generated through a high-
throughput, multi-step sensor screening process. Next, the sensitivity and
kinetics of the sensors will be characterized in neurons in vitro, ex vivo, and
in vivo. Finally, the sensors will be implemented in brain slices to probe the
activity-dependent mechanisms that drive the formation and stabilization of
synaptic connections. Ultimately, these sensors will be used to define the
activity-dependent mechanisms that drive circuit changes in vivo during complex
behavioral tasks. The proposed research would provide much needed imaging tools
of synaptic activity that are compatible with a variety of advanced imaging
techniques, such as wide-field, confocal and two-photon microscopy, and would
dramatically enhance understanding of how the history of neural activity at
individual synapses and their neighbors can influence long-term stability of
neural circuit connections.