* 1450161
* I-Corps:  Establishment of an I-Corps Hub at the Cleveland Clinic
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Paul DiCorleto, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Cleveland Clinic seeks to establish a National Science Foundation I-Corps Hub in
collaboration with the recently established NIH Center for Accelerated
Innovations at Cleveland Clinic (NCAI-CC), which is supported by the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The National Science Foundation and National
Institutes of Health are leveraging the I-Corps and NCAI Programs to enhance the
education and mentoring of researchers, clinicians, and developers, with the
goal of moving technologies faster and more effectively to the market so they
may benefit patients. The commercialization of life sciences technologies
requires consideration of specific needs, which are not addressed in "general"
entrepreneurship and innovation education. This project will help fill the
associated gaps in the curriculum augmentation and delivery. Cleveland Clinic
will deliver the I-Corps training program with a special focus on life sciences
technologies, including diagnostics, devices, therapeutics, and health care
information management. The I-Corps-CC team is uniquely positioned to create and
implement an I-Corps life sciences curriculum by leveraging its well-established
and successful biomedical technology commercialization organization. The project
holds considerable promise for broad implementation of the I-Corps curriculum
across different stages in the maturation of IP development. The ultimate goal
of the program is to make investigators and clinicians more effective
innovators, which will ultimately result in new products and solutions that can
benefit millions of patients. The I-Corps-CC research and education will be
specifically tailored to meet the needs of life sciences innovators and provide
intellectual contributions to NSF's I-Corps program's National Innovation
Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of an I-Corps Hub at Cleveland
Clinic will help educate investigators to use the Lean Launchpad Business Model
in exploring intellectual property that is specifically tailored to life
sciences. The objectives of the program will be: 1) to establish and implement
an I-Corps program curriculum at Cleveland Clinic (I-Corps-CC) to enhance the
entrepreneurial and innovations skills of clinicians and life science
researchers at the institution; and 2) to integrate the I-Corps program with the
skills development mission and activities of the NCAI-CC program. The I-Corps
Hub will initially be focused as a single institution training program at
Cleveland Clinic; directing skills development and education to the large
organization of over 200 principal investigators and their staffs in life
science research at the institution, the majority of which have been funded by
NSF/NIH. The I-Corps training methodology enhanced for life sciences
technologies will: add an important element to the educational resources being
offered by Cleveland Clinic, support the skills and education program of the
NCAI, and be made available to the broader NSF I-Corps community.