* 1450921
* BRAIN EAGER:   Wireless Measurement of Neuronal Currents Using Spin-Torque Nano-Oscillators
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Benjamin Shapiro, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award is jointly made by two programs the Instrument Development for
Biological Research program (IDBR) and Emerging Frontiers (EF) in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain is a
complex network of interconnected circuits that exchange signals in the form of
action potentials. These action potentials hold the key to understanding
cognition and complex thought. Currently available non-invasive methods for
probing neuronal activity cannot achieve sufficient spatial or temporal
resolution to observe individual action potentials from single neurons or small
clusters, which is a major limitation. This principal investigator proposes to
study a novel approach for non-invasive measurements that will be able to read
out individual action potentials across the entire brain. This project will take
advantage of recent advances in spintronic devices to create injectable nano-
reporters that will detect weak electrical signals in the brain and convert them
to microwave signals that can be detected wirelessly outside the body. The
detection device to be used is the spin-torque nano-oscillator (STNO), which
converts electrical signals into microwave field oscillations that can be
detected wirelessly. This approach could ultimately lead to the first non-
invasive technology capable of measuring activations of individual neurons and
small-scale neuronal networks in live primates and humans. This capability would
have a major impact on our understanding of the inner workings of the brain and
cognition. It could also have important clinical applications, particularly in
the areas of neurological disorders and brain machine interfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to monitor neuronal activity at the cellular
level non-invasively is crucial for attaining a better understanding of
cognition, as well as many clinical applications. Currently, all non-invasive
methods for monitoring brain activity cannot simultaneously achieve the spatial
and temporal resolution required to sense individual action potentials from a
single neuron. This project is a novel approach for non-invasive measurements
that will be able to read out individual action potentials across the whole
brain from single neurons. To achieve the transduction of electrical activity to
microwaves, a nano-sized device called a spin-torque nano-oscillator (STNO) will
be used that converts steady electrical signals into microwave frequency
magnetic field oscillations that can be detected wirelessly. The STNO responds
in microseconds to electric signals, and thus can be directly used to measure
individual neuronal action potentials. In addition, the STNO is a nano-scale
device and can report on the firing and location of a single neuron. This
project represents the first application to neurobiology of the exciting and
rapidly evolving field of spintronics. A test system will be developed that
includes a neuron simulator (a tunable circuit that simulates the voltages and
impedance of a single neuron) and a high sensitivity microwave receiver to
demonstrate the ability of these devices to report that activation state of a
neuron wirelessly. this project also involves the design, fabrication, and test
optimization of STNO devices for neurobiological applications. The ultimate and
specific goal of this EAGER project is to perform a proof-of-concept
demonstration of the proposed apparatus on a live squid axon.