* 1450528
* A Proposal to Manage the U.S. Science Support Program Office associated with the International Ocean Discovery Program (USSSP-IODP)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2025
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Johnson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 54,121,211.00

The Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) will manage the U.S. Science Support
Program associated with the International Ocean Discovery Program (USSSP-IODP).
Judicious management of the U.S. Science Support program will enable the U.S.
scientific community to maximize the scientific return from the IODP drilling
platforms and address the major themes outlined in the IODP Science Plan for
2013-2023. These include monitoring past climate and ocean change; pursuing
greater understanding of subseafloor organisms and ecosystems; examining
connections between Earth's surface environment and deep processes; and
increasing our understanding of geohazards such as earthquakes, landslides, and
tsunamis. Scientific ocean drilling remains one of the preeminent tools for
reconstructing Earth's history and improving predictive models for its future.
IODP also provides a means whereby young investigators and graduate students can
work alongside experienced scientists who will serve as mentors and leaders. The
results obtained from IODP will constitute an important data set that should
inform social policy in the coming decades. In addition, USSSP-IODP will pursue
a comprehensive outreach program with the goal of increasing the public's
awareness of IODP's accomplishments. Outreach efforts will include family
learning opportunities and the use of traditional media and Internet-based
initiatives such as social media. As much as possible, LDEO will bring IODP
scientists into direct contact with the public through the use of ship-to-shore
video, online interviews and Q&amp;A sessions, and special outreach events at
museums and other informal learning centers. Through collaboration with the
American Museum of Natural History, an estimated 15,000 family visitors over
five years will attend IODP-related lectures as part of the Millstein Science
Series, after which they will interact with IODP researchers and museum-based
educators on IODP-specific activities. In addition, the multidisciplinary nature
of IODP makes it an ideal platform for STEM education development and
initiatives. USSSP-IODP will promote STEM learning by engaging teachers at all
levels in IODP-related professional development programs and providing them with
the opportunity to sail on the JOIDES Resolution as part of the School of Rock
or the new Onboard Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LDEO has a long involvement
with scientific ocean drilling and the collective experience of the PI and co-
PIs provide a strong foundation that will ensure the office is managed
efficiently and with an eye toward providing superior service to the U.S
scientific community. USSSP-IODP will support numerous components of the U.S.
IODP effort, including travel costs for program development and planning,
expedition participation and pre-and post-drilling activities. Salary support
for U.S. scientific party members on both the JOIDES Resolution and non-U.S.
drilling vessels will also be provided. The LDEO and Columbia administration
groups have extensive experience with establishing subawards and are well
positioned to provide these services on behalf of the USSSP-IODP. The
reorganized U.S. Science Advisory Committee (USAC) will coordinate or provide
reviews of proposals and applications from the U.S. IODP community and will
provide the implementing organizations with recommendations for shipboard
staffing. USAC will also advise USSSP-IODP in establishing goals for U.S
activities in IODP, promote the development of working groups and individual
drilling proposals, and provide oversight of the USSSP Office.