* 1450802
* Acquisition of a gas source mass spectrometer for high precision - high sensitivity (delta)17O and (delta)18O analyses of silicates
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Karen Ziegler, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2016
* USD 197,938.00

This award will provide funds for the acquisition of a high sensitivity/high
precision gas source mass spectrometer as a foundation for our new research
program involving high-spatial resolution and ultra-high precision triple oxygen
isotope geochemistry. This exciting technique of measuring small variations in
17O values of geological materials is in its infancy, with many potential
applications across a broad spectrum within Earth Sciences. The application of
ultra-high resolution 17O measurements will be an integral part of the thesis
work for three incoming graduate students (one woman) and will ultimately serve
to demonstrate to the broader geological community the potential for this new
technology. The facility will be available to outside users with relevant
research projects. It will serve as a platform for future NSF proposals
involving student research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high precision mass
spectrometer is the basic platform for a number of research themes,including
constraining paleoclimate variations, understanding Deep-Time climate, tracking
near-surface signatures in shallow crustal and mantle rocks, measuring
individual zircons extracted from lunar and Archean terrestrial rocks,
meteoritic studies, and other evolving projects. This equipment will be the
primary research tool of the two PIs and will compliment other advances being
instituted in the newly formed University-wide Center for Stable Isotopes (CSI).