* 1450898
* BRAIN EAGER: A novel toolkit for imaging transcription in vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Takaki Komiyama, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Learning requires the conversion of transient experiences into long-lasting
changes in neural circuitry. Animal behavior triggers changes in gene expression
in small populations of neurons and behaviorally induced genes regulate synapses
and neuronal morphology. Yet, it is unclear if changes in gene expression are
the cause of behavioral plasticity, or the consequence. This project will
develop a new genre of fluorescent reporters that enable the visualization and
manipulation of endogenous transcription factors in individual neurons, in real
time, and within the brain of behaving animals. During the award period,
candidate reporters will be made that recognize six different transcription
factors. These reporters will have widespread utility for investigating the
molecular mechanisms that support learning in vivo and analysis of populations
of neurons that are active during a learning paradigm. The development of these
reporters includes ongoing training of undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate
scientists. Student training is optimized with guidance from the CREATE STEM
Success Initiative on the UCSD campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inducible
transcription factors (ITFs) translate signals that last milliseconds or seconds
into changes in cellular function that may persist for hours, days, or longer.
This project will develop genetically encoded transcription factor reporters
(GETFaRs) that are designed to visualize or manipulate an ITF. GETFaRs are based
on molecular scaffolds, engineered through a process of synthetic affinity
maturation of camelid nanobodies (Nbs) which bind the endogenous ITF. The Nb
protein will be fused to a fluorophore or DNA modifying enzyme, allowing users
to visualize or manipulate endogenous transcription factors. A degradation
signal (degron) will be incorporated into the Nb near the ITF binding site.
Consequently, GETFaRs will be constitutively expressed and rapidly degraded in
the cytoplasm. When the ITF is expressed, the GETFaR-ITF interaction will mask
the degron, stabilizing the complex. The ITF's nuclear localization signal will
translocate the complex into the nucleus, resulting in stabilized GETFaRs that
accumulate in the nucleus and stoichiometrically reflect ITF expression.
Candidate GETFaRs will be validated in vitro using standard biochemical and
imaging techniques and in vivo using two photon imaging of neurons in head fixed
mice. Optimal GETFaRs will enable research that 1) monitors or manipulates
transcriptional states during learning, 2) studies the emergence of ensembles of
co-active neurons within a circuit, 3) probes the dynamics of chromatin and
nuclear organization, and 4) analyzes the genome of defined populations of
neurons responding to complex, natural stimuli.