* 1450398
* I-Corps Sites:  BYU I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Thomas Sederberg, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project, from Brigham Young University,
creates an I-Corps Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps)
Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to
nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology
concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team
applicants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical I-Corps Site is funded for
approximately $100,000 per year for up to three years. The Site funding is used
to by academic institutions to catalyze teams (with amounts ranging from $1,000
to $3,000) whose technology concepts are likely candidates for
commercialization. The make-up of teams at the Sites is modeled after the
composition of I-Corps Teams, and education at the Sites shares the principles
of the I-Corps Curriculum. With the support and mentorship of the Sites, the
teams will learn first-hand about entrepreneurship and explore the transition of
their ideas, devices, processes or other intellectual activities into the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Brigham Young University I-Corps Site serves students and faculty members by
providing funds to encourage greater technology commercialization activity.
Through this project, the BYU I-Corps Site brings together and builds on
successful programs in three diverse colleges and two major entrepreneurial
units at BYU: the Rollins Center for Entrepreneurship and Technology (CET), and
the Technology Transfer Office (TTO). The CET primarily addresses student
entrepreneurship and the TTO primarily addresses faculty technology
commercialization needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing specifically
targeted commercialization funds, this I-Corps Site program builds bridges that
attract and stimulate both faculty and student entrepreneurial activity.
Approximately 30 teams each year receive I-Corps funds to explore technology
commercialization opportunities at BYU. Expected outcomes include (1) formation
of startup ventures with students as major players, (2) creation of scaling
plans suitable for presentation to seed-stage investors, (3) increased
participation by BYU students in the commercialization of faculty-generated IP,
and (4) increased participation of women and underrepresented participants in
BYU student entrepreneurship activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This program advances knowledge by studying best practices in
university-centered technology commercialization processes, learning how to
better incentivize students and faculty at BYU to participate in these
processes, and tracking weaknesses in student teams to learn how best to blend
student energy and creativity with faculty expertise and external mentoring. By
engaging student teams in the technology commercialization process, so they
build scalable new ventures, this program will directly create greater economic
activity, particularly in the inter-mountain west region of the USA. This will
result in increased job creation along with the other normal outcomes of
increased economic activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will also reach
out to women and underrepresented participants, thus increasing the diversity of
students involved in entrepreneurial activities within the BYU ecosystem. As an
I-Corps Site, the CET's synergistic activity of holding the annual International
Business Model Competition will gain greater visibility and thus promote the
overall goals of the I-Corps programs to inculcate customer development and
related lean launch principles in young entrepreneurs across the country.