* 1450811
* Revisiting Coupled Instability Theory and the Initiation of ENSO (El Nino/Southern Oscillation)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2017
* USD 177,632.00

Warm El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events are climatic fluctuations in
which sea surface temperature (SST) along the central-eastern equatorial Pacific
is relatively warm, accompanied locally by lower sea level pressure (SLP), with
higher SLP on the western side of the basin. Cold ENSO events have the same
pattern but with the SST and SLP anomalies reversed, so that SST is colder and
SLP is higher along the central-eastern equatorial Pacific.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical theories view ENSO events as the result of an
instability of the coupled atmosphere-ocean system, in which the atmospheric
circulation anomalies associated with the SLP anomalies reinforce the oceanic
anomalies associated with the SST change and vice versa, thereby enabling a weak
initial perturbation to grow into a fully-developed ENSO event. Early studies
demonstrated that instability theory can account for ENSO-like behavior in
highly simplified models of the equatorial Pacific ocean-atmosphere system. More
recent research using sophisticated models and observational analysis suggests
that various forms of precursors and triggers, some external to the equatorial
Pacific, can play a key role in ENSO initiation. But while precursors and
triggers can be identified for some ENSO events, other events appear to initiate
without them. There are also instances in which conditions appear favorable for
an ENSO event but initiation does not occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
seeks to determine the essential elements for ENSO initiation through model
experiments in which ENSO events are initiated starting from an atmosphere-ocean
state which contains virtually no ENSO activity. The ENSO-free initial state is
generated through a spin-up procedure in which an atmosphere-ocean general
circulation model (GCM) is modified so that the ocean component model does not
feel the effect of atmospheric circulation anomalies (more precisely, surface
wind stress anomalies) over the equatorial Pacific. Out of 60 simulations
performed in preliminary work for the project, 10 developed strong warm ENSO
events and 13 developed strong cold events. Work performed under this award
analyzes these experiments and conducts additional experiments to determine why
some simulations produced warm events while others developed cold events or
near-neutral conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader societal
impacts due to the variety of ways in which ENSO events affect weather and
climate over the US and other parts of the world. A better understanding of the
key factors in ENSO initiation may lead to better ENSO predictions, and in
particular a reduction in the occurrence of "false alarms" in which an ENSO
event is predicted but does not materialize. In addition, the project supports a
female graduate student, thereby developing the future workforce in this
research area, and enhancing the participation of an underrepresented group.