* 1450193
* EAGER: Computational Propaganda and The Production/Detection of Bots
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Philip Howard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 218,825.00

Political bots are manipulating public opinion over major social networking
applications. This project enables a new team of social and information
scientists to investigate the impact of automated scripts, commonly called bots,
on social media. The PIs will study both the bot scripts and the people making
such bots, and then work with computer scientists to improve the way we catch
and stop such bots. Experience suggests that political bots are most likely to
appear during an international crisis, and are usually designed to promote the
interests of a government in trouble. Political actors have used bots to
manipulate conversations, demobilize opposition, and generate false support on
popular sites like Twitter and Facebook from the U.S. as well as Sina Weibo from
China.

The first stage of this research is international fieldwork with the political
consultants and computer experts who are commissioned to make bots. Second, the
PIs are building an original database of political incidents involving bots.
Finally, the PIs are using this knowledge to make better tools for detecting
political bots when they appear. The PIs are doing "real-time" social and
information science, and actively disseminating their findings to journalists,
industry, and foreign policy experts. By developing an a network of experts in
political bot detection and an original data set, the researchers will not only
have a better understanding of how bots are manipulating social networks but
also advance the conversation in the social sciences, computer sciences, and
industry about the size of the problem and the possible solutions.