* 1450006
* NRT-DESE: Training in Data-Driven Discovery - From the Earth and the Universe to the Successful Careers of the Future
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Aggelos Katsaggelos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,272,665.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award prepares
master's and doctoral students at Northwestern University with the data-analysis
skills to advance the research frontiers in astronomy, physics, and Earth
science. While providing students with training in data-enabled science and
engineering, the program promotes collaborations with research and education
that will lead to the development of new data tools with broad applicability.
Through internships, evidence-based curricular approaches, and capstone citizen
science projects, trainees will develop the core competencies in demand by a
wide range of employers. Trainees will learn how to effectively engage the
public in discoveries on the solar system, stellar explosions, star clusters and
galaxies, gravitational waves, and seismic waves. The citizen science projects
will be used for innovative recruiting, strengthening the participation of the
public and students from underrepresented groups. By diversifying the graduate
student population and improving instruction and mentoring, the research will be
contributing to a diverse, inclusive scientific workforce in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will bridge computer science,
electrical engineering, applied math, and statistics to physics, astronomy, and
Earth sciences in order to develop students with the skills required to analyze
datasets of unprecedented size and complexity. Trainees will be prepared for the
technical challenges of extensive data generated at major research equipment and
facilities, including Large Syntopic Survey Telescope, Advanced Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory, and EarthScope. Trainees will
learn data analytics and management, statistical methods, and image processing
skills to ask new questions and choose the appropriate tools from the method
disciplines and adapt them to solve problems in physics, astronomy, and Earth
sciences. The program will also prepare students to work in a collaborative
scientific community, advancing their leadership, communication, mentoring, and
management skills. Internships at major research facilities, national
laboratories, and the private sector will help students gain transferrable
professional skills to pursue a range of career paths.