* 1450424
* I-Corps Site:  Oregon State University Advantage Accelerator Program Enhancements Toward an NSF I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Irem Tumer, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 468,965.00

This project establishes an I-Corps Site at the Oregon State University (the
Oregon State University Advantage Accelerator (OSUAA)). NSF Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Site project
helps OSU deliver on its mission as a land grant university and advance efforts
to revitalize an economically depressed Oregon by helping multiple local teams
transition their ideas to the marketplace. Funds allow OSUAA to make specific
enhancements to the Accelerator and increase the number of I-Corps Site (ICS)
teams. The project's three goals include the following: (1) Enhancing linkages
with the OSU engineering, science, and business disciplines through a faculty
liaison program in support of Accelerator ICS teams; (2) Creating and delivering
new course content on personal development, team formation, and dynamics to
enable high performing ICS teams; and (3) Providing course materials and
tracking software to enhance the Lean Canvas curriculum delivery and seed funds
for development of prototypes and minimum viable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the emerging companies OSUAA supports
help address larger societal issues such as clean energy and expensive
healthcare devices. OSUAA provides a supportive environment to allow these
cutting-edge technologies to develop and find commercialization pathways.
Ultimately, the OSUAA may serve as a viable model to help develop new business
and enhanced employment outcomes for other rural land grant institutions engaged
in similar research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OSUAA framework to
advance the commercialization of research will help improve the economic climate
and development in the largely rural state of Oregon. Oregon, particularly in
the rural areas, tends to lag the nation in economic prosperity and recovery.
Through facilitated launch of new startup companies, the OSU system may reduce
unemployment through the creation of higher-wage positions in development,
manufacturing and related support roles. Funded investments in ICS teams
accelerate the transition of research to market by providing stronger curricular
components and dedicated resources for prototyping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSUAA
works across all 11 university colleges, which allows for students to actively
participate in the real-world, experiential aspects of moving research to the
marketplace. The OSUAA also works closely with the four cultural centers on
campus to ensure that traditionally underrepresented groups know about, have
access to, and take advantage of OSUAA's learning opportunities.