* 1450527
* EAGER: Identifying Affective Events and Situations in Text
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Ellen Riloff, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,991.00

Most natural language processing (NLP) systems still have only a literal
understanding of words and phrases. In particular, current NLP technology is
oblivious to the psychological impact that events and situations have on people.
For example, NLP systems can recognize phrases associated with being hired or
fired, but they do not understand that being hired is usually desirable while
being fired is generally undesirable. This exploratory research aims to endow
NLP technology with the ability to recognize events and situations that will
have a positive or negative impact on people. The proposed research could be
transformative because it would enable a fundamentally deeper understanding of
language beyond the literal meaning of words and phrases. New methods resulting
from this research would benefit a wide spectrum of applications that require
understanding of written texts and human conversation, document summarization,
question answering, sarcasm recognition, and identification of threatening
statements. Society could also benefit from this technology through new
opportunities to automatically harvest knowledge from the Web and social media
about the events and personal situations that most frequently affect different
types of people. Recognizing affective states could help to identify at-risk
individuals who may be a danger to themselves or others, such as teenagers who
are being bullied, veterans who suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder,
young adults who feel angry or disenfranchised, and elderly people who may be
lonely and depressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EArly Grant for Exploratory
Research investigates novel methods for learning to recognize "affective" events
and situations in text. Affect state recognition is essential to understand
people's motivations, plans and goals, causal chains, and the narrative
structure of text and conversation. The goal of this research is to create
weakly supervised learning methods to automatically identify phrases
corresponding to affective events and situations that have a positive or
negative impact on people. This research aims to develop a set of independent,
weakly supervised learners, where each component will exploit a specific type of
linguistic structure and discourse context to identify events and situations
that are associated with positive or negative affect states. The set of weakly
supervised learners will then be embedded in an ensemble architecture, and
multi-view learning methods will be explored to enable large-scale bootstrapped
knowledge acquisition across the set of independent learners. Key aspects of
this work explore different types of linguistic and discourse structures for
bootstrapped learning, different approaches for learning multi-word expressions
for events and situations, and different methods for handling contextual
ambiguity during both learning and recognition. Lexical affect stateknowledge
would improve the ability of NLP systems to recognize sarcasm, identify threats,
recognize causal relationships, and achieve a deeper understanding of narrative
text and conversational dialogue.