* 1450751
* EAGER: Spatiotemporal Regulation of Receptor-Initiated Intracellular Complexes of Signaling Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Matthew Lazzara, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 01/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

1450751 Lazzara, Matthew J.

Receptors reside at the cell surface, interact with cognate proteins outside the
cell, and transmit information to the cell by activating intracellular
biochemical pathways that regulate cellular processes including proliferation,
differentiation, and migration. This "outside-in" cell signaling depends upon
the ability of activated receptors to nucleate functional multi-membered
complexes of proteins inside cells. Recent data from the PI's lab suggests that
the receptor-mediated assembly and maintenance of these protein complexes can
operate in complex, previously undocumented ways that can impact cell signaling
strength and duration, and thereby exert profound control over cellular
behaviors. Working with the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) system, the
PI has gathered data suggesting that EGFR can operate through intermediary
proteins to regulate the functional activity and persistence of a key protein
complex at a distance from the receptor, which is restricted to the cell surface
and internalized vesicles, potentially at any point within the cell. This
hypothesis stands in stark contrast to the classical view of EGFR?s ability to
regulate this complex. To validate our hypothesis and lay the groundwork for its
broader exploration in other receptor systems, the PI will develop new molecular
tools to visualize directly in live cells the protein complex assembly process
in response to EGFR activation. In addition, a mathematical model of this
process will be developed to interpret the imaging data and identify the key
determinants of complex persistence within cells. The successful validation of
this hypothesis has important implications for our fundamental understanding of
receptor-mediated cell signaling and our ability to rationally tune signaling
through EGFR and other pathways for a variety of applications.

The activation of signaling pathways downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) requires the nucleation of multi-membered complexes of signaling proteins
held together by phosphotyrosine-SH2 (Src homology 2) domain and other
interactions. While these complexes are typically represented as simple static
assemblies, reversible binding interactions, phosphatase activity, and other
system topological possibilities allow for more sophisticated modes of
spatiotemporal protein complex regulation that can impact cell signaling in
profound ways. Developing quantitative understanding of these more complex modes
of signaling regulation is required to realize the full promise of our molecular
understanding of the components of various signaling pathways. Using the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) as an example RTK system, PI has
discovered a previously undocumented mode of signaling protein complex
regulation wherein EGFR activates intermediary cytosolic Src family kinases
which amplify EGFR activity to counteract GAB1 (Grb2-associated binder 1)
dephosphorylation and maintain the association of SHP2 (Src homology 2 domain-
containing phosphatase 2) with phosphorylated GAB1, which promotes SHP2
activity, in the cytosolic compartment distal from EGFR. Importantly, activated
SHP2 participates in a host of critical signaling regulatory processes in the
functioning cell. This mode of signaling regulation could enable RTKs such as
EGFR to regulate signaling events at intracellular locations from which the
receptor is excluded, even as the receptor degrades through lysosomal sorting
processes due to the amplification step. This view of RTK-mediated signaling
complex regulation, for the EGFR-GAB1-SHP2 system and other RTK systems in
general, stands in stark contrast to the classical understanding of how
receptors nucleate complexes of signaling proteins. The overarching goal of the
proposed work is to directly visualize in live cells the spatial and temporal
persistence of GAB1-SHP2 complexes in response to EGFR activation relative to
the receptor?s position and to identify the determinants of the time and length
scales of GAB1-SHP2 complex persistence. To do this, two specific aims are
proposed: 1. Develop fluorescent fusion reporter constructs to image the spatial
and dynamic persistence of GAB1-SHP2 complexes in response to EGFR activation in
live cells using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) microscopy; and
2. Develop and validate a computational model of the spatiotemporal regulation
of GAB1-SHP2 complex assembly in response to EGFR activation. By developing new
experimental and computational tools to explore a newly discovered mode of
signaling regulation, this work will lay an important foundation that will
ultimately lead to an improved ability to engineer cell signaling, and therefore
cell fates, in a predictive manner.

This EAGER award to co-funded by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
Program of the CBET Division and by the Synthetic and Systems Biology Program of
the Division of Molecular Cell Biology.