* 1450861
* EAGER: Development of a High-Control Jet-Array Wavemaker
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Patrick Lynett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2016
* USD 58,127.00

Despite recent advances in numerical modeling, there is still a need to study
many wave phenomena in a well-controlled laboratory setting with mechanically
generated waves. Traditionally, and nearly universally, waves are generated in a
tank with a moving piston or flap that is mechanically oscillated in a column of
fluid. The benefits of these systems are their relative simplicity and a large
base of user experience and knowledge. Drawbacks lie mainly in physical
limitations; a wavemaker of a certain design targets a specific regime of waves,
such as long or short, linear or nonlinear. Further, with these traditional
wavemaker systems, coupled waves and currents, and even further stratification,
begin to require a patchwork of modifications and may not be suitable for
fundamental scientific investigation. This exploratory project will develop and
implement a new experimental concept for "complete" wave, current, and
stratification control using an array of computer-controlled water jets. This
has the potential to fundamentally change the way scientists and engineers study
oceanographic flows. Small-scale tanks using this technology, such as the one to
be built in this project, are relatively inexpensive, and widespread
proliferation of the concept is a goal. The developed design drawings and
control system configuration will be completely open and distributed through
online means. At some future time, wave and flow facilities may do away with
walls and wavemakers completely, being instead wrapped on all sides with a
honeycomb of flow portals, all individually and simultaneously controlled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to attack multi-scale and multi-fluid physics
problems, a new experimental platform to study complex oceanographic situations
is required. This "platform", called the jet-array wavemaker (JAW), is meant to
replace the traditional concept of a wavemaker, simplistic in its bulk, with a
series of individual flow systems, each delivering flow to a specific vertical
level. The flow delivery method consists of a water-filled cylinder with a
motor-controlled piston pushing and pulling water out of and into the cylinder.
This system has extremely precise flow control, as the motors can accept input
at very high frequencies and can deliver enough torque to meet most needs at
reasonable cost. The flow rate from the cylinder is straightforward to control
as it is a simple conservation-of-mass calculation. The JAW is similarly precise
as the displacement of the piston is linearly correlated to the time-integration
of the motor revolution count. Thus, the cylinder concept has clear advantages
over other systems in terms of precision and control, which are the most
important components of a JAW system. There are two primary physical-
application-space advantages of the JAW over existing wavemaker systems. The
first is the very wide range of wavenumber times depth application; one can run
simultaneous waves and currents where these two components are generated through
the same system. The second primary advantage of the JAW system is the
generation of simultaneous waves, currents, and stratified flow, including
internal waves. This is the most unique potential of the system, and should
present opportunities to study complex oceanographic processes which are
unapproachable with existing systems.