* 1450341
* EAGER: Predicting Drought Adaptation in C4 Plants with High Throughout Quantitative Phenotyping
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Brian Dilkes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,587.00

This EAGER project will test whether use of a novel combination of high-
throughput field-scale measurement of ion accumulation levels and carbon isotope
discrimination can predict yield under stress in maize. If successful, this
project will generate a new paradigm for the study of abiotic stress tolerance
in maize and other C4 plants and the immediate improvement of crop abiotic
stress tolerance by the plant breeding industry. It could also enable scientists
to rapidly predict the consequence of genotype on adaptation to increasing
temperature, decreasing water arability, and other predicted outcomes of global
climate change. A postdoctoral scientist will receive training and mentorship in
the integration of high throughput phenotyping, bioinformatics and quantitative
genetics. All data generated in this study will be accessible through iHUB
(www.ionomicshub.org) and the Purdue University Research Repository
(http://purr.purdue.edu). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many phenotypes used for drought
tolerance estimation in plants are slow, costly, and of insufficient
heritability to make substantial progress connecting genotype to phenotype.
Measures of water relations often assess dynamic responses of the plant to the
local environment, are strongly influenced by temporal factors and unusable for
genetics. The absence of high throughput quantitative phenotyping approaches
(e.g. phenomics) that precisely report the integrative physiological status of
field-grown plants is hampering the discovery of molecular mechanisms of plant
adaptation. This problem is particularly notable in plants with C4
photosynthesis and has limited the discovery of the mechanisms controlling water
use in these drought adaptable species and inhibited crop improvement in maize
and in many target biofuel crops including sorghum and switchgrass. Preliminary
data suggests a correlation between delta-13C, the ratio of stable isotopes
13C:12C, and yield under drought and the relationship between delta-13C, water
relations, and photosynthetic capacity in C4 plants. This EAGER project will
test the hypothesis that the combination of water-soluble element accumulation
and carbon isotope ratios in mature maize kernels can predict adaptation to
drought. The specific objectives include a genome-wide assessment of genetic
contribution to these traits by genome-wide association study. Both traits will
be assessed within an association panel of maize in the field under a managed
drought environment.