* 1450181
* Hypsometric History of the North American Continental Interior and Implications for Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 296,833.00

The project represents an interdisciplinary study aimed at understanding the
thickness, spatial extent, and evolution of long-eroded sections of the
Phanerozoic stratigraphic record across the continental interior in order to
understand cryptic variations in paleoelevation of the Earth's surface and how
variations in the properties of the mantle have influenced its history. It has
long been recognized that cryptic elevation changes in the continental interior
have occurred through the geologist past, but such changes are difficult to
reconcile by conventional plate tectonic models in which deformation is largely
related to processes at or near plate margins. The principal investigators posit
that variations in vertical motion of the Earth's crust, termed dynamic
topography, are related to the interaction of the Earth's lithosphere with
convection deep within the mantle. The project will involve a combination of
thermochronology, geologic age constraints, and 3D modeling to test hypotheses
related to how mantle dynamics of the Earth's mantle affects surface processes.
The project represents a fundamental contribution to furthering understanding of
how deformation of the Earth's crust may be linked with processes deep within
the planets interior. In addition scientific goals of the research, the project
is contributing to research infrastructure; is supporting the research efforts
of a faculty member who is a member of an underrepresented group in the
geosciences; is contributing to the training of a Ph.D. student in a STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathemathics) discipline; is supporting
the involvement of an undergraduate student intern from the University of
Colorado's Research Experiences in Solid Earth Science for Students (RESESS),
which is a program that promotes diversity within the Earth Sciences; and is
providing for international collaboration between U.S. and Australian
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryptic epeirogenic elevation change in
continental interiors is not easily accounted for by plate margin tectonism,
suggesting that fundamental aspects of geodynamics and continental evolution are
not yet understood. Nevertheless, this problem has received comparatively little
attention in geologic investigations. Dynamic topography, produced by vertical
motion of the Earth's surface in response to normal traction generated by mantle
convection, provides an attractive explanation for aspects of the North American
interior surface history that otherwise are not easily explained by tectonic
processes. However, despite the increasing sophistication and diversity of
dynamic modeling efforts, it remains challenging to definitively test these
models. There is now enormous demand for geologic constraints to better
calibrate dynamic models and discriminate between their different predictions.
The multistep approach to be employed in this study is characterized by 1)
thermochronology data acquisition at a scale appropriate to deduce regional
trends, 2) reconstruction of the regional burial, unroofing and elevation change
history by coupling of thermochronologic and geologic constraints, 3) comparison
of this surface history with the vertical motion predictions of a 3D dynamic
model of thermochemical convection, and 4) experimentation with reasonable
modifications to the dynamic model to evaluate the sensitivity of the fit to
different parameters. This study is framed around two key hypotheses concerning
mantle dynamic controls on the surface evolution of the North American interior
that emerged from previous work. The proposed will expand these past efforts
spatially across a broader region of the continent as well as temporally into
the Cretaceous. Hypothesis 1: Mantle flow associated with supercontinent
evolution was an important control on the Paleozoic-early Mesozoic hypsometric
history of the North American interior. Hypothesis 2: Cretaceous burial was more
substantial across the entire central U.S. than recognized previously, which is
key for accurately calibrating dynamic models of Farallon slab evolution.