* 1450117
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of A High Throughput Cell Mechanical Stimulator
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Yi Zhao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Cell based assays have been widely used for drug discovery, where the
effectiveness and toxicity of drugs on live cells in presence of various
external stimulations are examined. Lab-on-chip technologies with high
throughput capability have greatly propelled the development of cell based
assays by significantly reducing the time and cost of applying these
stimulations and obtaining the cell responses. Current technologies that
stimulate live cells by mechanical signals, however, have relatively low
throughput. This project is to explore the commercialization potential of a high
throughput cell mechanical stimulator, which applies controlled strain to a
large number of in vitro cultured cell groups. The proposed technology provides
an important research tool for biological researchers in the field of cellular
biomechanics and mechanobiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high throughput and
multiplex capability enabled by the proposed technology meets the imperative
needs for parallel application of mechanical stimulation to live cells.
Understanding how mechanical signals regulate cell function and how they
orchestrate with drugs and medications is therefore a fundamental question that
attracts extraordinary attentions of a large number of researchers in
universities and pharmaceutical industry. The proposed device is expected to
provide a powerful research tool to enhance our understanding of the role of
mechanical signals and their synergistic effects with drugs/medications. It is
expected to hasten new knowledge in mechanobiology and new treatments against
diseases in many fields. It will also allow high throughput screening of drugs
and medications that target on treatments of mechanical-activated cells and
tissues. The greatly enhanced throughput and lower per-test cost are also
expected to expand the market from basic research laboratories at universities
to pre-clinical and applied research divisions in pharmaceutical industry.