* 1450624
* EAGER: Age-Targeted Automated Cueing Against Cyber Social Engineering Attacks
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Daniela Oliveira, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 261,497.00

Online social engineering attacks have been often used for cybercrime
activities. These attacks are low cost and complicate attack attribution. Pure
technical defense solutions cannot counter them, which rely on human
gullibility. Humans often engage in short-cut decision-making, which can lead to
errors. Another expectation is that users should be able to understand complex
security tips, which do not consider user demographics. User age has been
overlooked in understanding these attacks and user behavior related to them.
This project investigates the influence of user age on the type and the
effectiveness of social engineering attacks through user studies involving young
and older adults.

In this research, participants are first monitored in their homes while using
the Internet and receiving age-targeted malicious e-mails. Then, in a lab
session involving benign and malicious Internet activities, the experimental
group receives age-targeted cues about the attacks. Participants' visual
attention is monitored with eye tracking technology. The results of these
studies allow the development of a browser extension to cue users in an age-
targeted fashion about risky situations online. This project represents a
paradigm change: age-targeted security information reaches users at the time
they need it, and not the other way around. This research will lead to
widespread benefits on Internet safety for end-users, especially to the
population of older adults, who will likely be a target of the next generation
of social engineering attacks.