* 1450500
* EAGER: Exploring Heuristics and Designing Interface Cues to Understand Revealing or Withholding of Private Information
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 278,383.00

In individual pursuits of personalized service and other functionalities, people
disclose personal and private information by trusting certain online sites and
services. Scholars often assume that such trust is based on a careful assessment
of the benefits and risks of disclosing information online. This project departs
from such an assumption and investigates the possibility that decision-making
about online information disclosure is not systematic, but rather based on
cognitive heuristics (or mental shortcuts) triggered by cues in the interaction
context. The objective of this project is to identify positive and negative
heuristics triggered by online interface cues that predict why users
instinctively trust or distrust certain online systems.

Phase 1 involves exploratory interviews and a survey pertaining to privacy and
security mishaps. Based on findings from these studies, the PIs design cues and
related interface functionalities in Phase 2. Phase 3 features controlled
experiments that empirically assess how interface cues trigger heuristics and
what role they play in user trust and information disclosure.

The findings of this research can be transformational in advancing knowledge
about the many paradoxes that confront researchers, such as the privacy paradox
(users reveal more than they admit) and control paradox (provision of control to
users makes them worry more, not less, about security). Design insights from
this project can be propagated to a variety of contexts to trigger desired
heuristics and promote secure and trustworthy computing. The enumeration of
heuristics serves a media-literacy function by alerting users to common
psychological biases that compromise the security of their information.