* 1450552
* I-Corps:  Nanophosphors as Ultra-Sensitive Lateral Flow Reporters in a Lab-on-Phone Platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Diagnostic uncertainty or delay can exact a substantial toll on morbidity and
mortality, especially with infectious diseases. For several critical medical
conditions, reliable diagnostic tests currently have turnaround times of hours
to days, besides requiring expensive equipment and trained personnel. Point-of-
care (POC) diagnostics enable better disease management and patient care through
decentralization and rapid time-to-result, and are rapidly growing in usage. Of
all the existing and potential POC technologies and formats, the Lateral Flow
Test (LFT), a nearly three decades-old technology, most readily meets the
usability criteria and is, therefore, preferred over other formats when it is
applicable and has sufficient sensitivity. However, commercially available LFTs
for several critical diseases lack the analytical sensitivity and the cost-
effective quantitative ability required to make a large clinical impact. When
specific and stable antibodies to an analyte are used in combination with an LFT
strip composed of the right components, the analytical sensitivity of an LFT is
determined by the detectability of the reporter particle. The LFT reporters that
have been developed thus far, to overcome the limitations of the colorimetric
labels have not had a large impact in the POC market, and are likely to remain
limited in their adoption, due to a combination of cost and
practicality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation in the proposed technology
is the use of 'nanophosphors', silica-encapsulated persistent luminescent
nanoparticles, as Lateral Flow Test (LFT) reporters. Nanophosphors can enable
the objective, ultrasensitive and quantitative measurement of analyte levels
from complex samples through LFTs that use only a cell phone's built-in optics
and an inexpensive plastic attachment for readout. The LFT is one of the most
widely used point-of-care assay formats owing to its versatility and simplicity.
LFTs have been hugely successful in applications including home pregnancy
testing, but are not quantitative, and suffer from sensitivity and
reproducibility limitations. Nanophosphors have an intense luminescence emission
that lasts for several minutes after exposure to light available from
inexpensive optical components like a cell phone flash. They are therefore more
detectable than the currently used and visually-read colloidal gold, and when
used as LFT reporters, allow the quantitative detection of much lower analyte
concentrations.