* 1450993
* BRAIN EAGER: Solving the Code of Olfaction Using Nano-Robot Switchable Odorants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Hiroaki Matsunami, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The sense of small (olfaction) holds in it a major mystery: No scientist or
perfumer can look at the structure of a novel molecule and predict its odor or
molecular structure. This project aims to develop molecules that bind to
individual olfactory receptors in the nose and thereby help solve the code by
which odors result in odor perception. The proposed approach has broad
implications and applications: It may pave the path towards the introduction of
odor into everyday devices. The idea of odor-emitting televisions, computer game
boxes, cell-phones, etc, has existed for some time. However, this goal remains
unattained, mostly for "simple" technical reasons: Even if one successfully
generates an odor-emitting device, what does one then do with the emitted odor?
For example, a car-racing computer game may emit the smell of burning rubber
tires, but how does one then evacuate the smell of burning rubber from the room?
Moreover, given that odors linger, how can one rapidly switch from one odor to
the next? The technology proposed here may solve these problems because it will
entail particles that are odorless, yet take on a given odor as a function of
rapidly-switchable externally applied fields. If successful, the proposed
mechanism will drive a revolution of odor devices. Further, the "switchable
chemical" approach will be extendable to other receptors in the brain, and can
be applied towards asking basic questions concerning emotion, sensorimotor-
coordination, memory and learning, as well as developing potential novel
therapies for diseases associated with receptor signaling failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a path towards solving the combinatorial code
of olfaction, the Bachelet lab will design DNA strands called aptamers that
assume a 3D structure that will specifically bind to a single type of olfactory
receptor and induce signal transduction. These DNA-based "artificial odorants"
will be tagged with a nanoparticle that changes its conformation in response to
an external electromagnetic field. The product will be artificial odorants that
are externally switchable in vivo. The Matsunami lab will use tissue culture
cells expressing olfactory receptors to validate the function and selectivity of
these switchable nano-robot odorants. The Sobel lab will then apply these
artificial odorants to the human olfactory system, and measure perception and
neural activity following switching the artificial odor on and off. This three-
level approach will allow closure of the loop from receptor to perception, and
potentially answer in this way what remains a fundamental question in olfaction.