* 1450957
* BRAIN EAGER:The Virtual Neuroanatomist: Using Machine Intelligence to Study Intelligent Machines
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Partha Mitra, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Cutting-edge light microscopy technology allows entire vertebrate brains to be
digitized, resulting in data sets of unprecedented size and complexity. However
there is a lack of adequate computational tools to visualize, manage, analyze,
and disseminate these enormous data sets, and visual examination by expert human
neuroanatomists remains the standard method to extract information from
microscopic images. Software tools exist that can perform simple operations, but
they are not able to adequately mimic the visual pattern recognition skills of
an experienced neuroanatomist. This project aims to develop computational tools
that mimic the analysis of an expert neuroanatomist, thus allowing for rich data
analysis of whole-brain light microscopy data sets on a scale that has been
previously intractable using human experts.

Machine vision algorithms will be developed and integrated into an an open
source software toolbox (with associated whole brain image data) that will be
made widely accessible for further development and refinement. Pattern
recognition methodology will be applied to combine information about brain
location (e.g., "where are we in the brain") with information about
correspondence of brain structures in different species (e.g., "which areas of
the brain of these species correspond"). Incorporating comparative
neuroanatomical knowledge into pattern-recognition methodology is radically
different from the "atlas morphing" approach currently used, and has the
potential to transform the study of whole-brain neuroanatomy. The tools will
help fill a gap in knowledge and skills (as contemporary neuroanatomists are
increasingly less frequently being trained to study whole-brain microscopic
anatomy), and postdoc and PhD students will be trained in the project.