* 1450606
* Inferring Biological Relatedness And Genomic Ancestry Using 2nd Generation Sequencing
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Krishna Veeramah, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 100,646.00

Krishna Veeramah of Stony Brook University and Patrick Geary of the Institute
for Advanced Study will use advanced ancient DNA analysis to clarify the nature
of the medieval "barbarian" societies from which many modern-day Europeans still
trace their national identities. The degree to which biological relationships
shape the social organization of human groups has been a major area of research
across many fields. Understanding these dynamics in past non-state societies
matters because many modern nations claim these earlier polities as their own
historical identities. However, written texts and cultural artifacts such as
weapons, jewelry, and clothing are at best ambiguous sources for understanding
this past. DNA from burials potentially offers new biological information that,
when combined with more traditional archeological and written data, can
substantially increase our understanding of the social structures of past
peoples. In particular, 2nd generation sequencing is revolutionizing the ability
to interrogate DNA from ancient samples, though until now its application has
been limited to questions regarding hominin
prehistory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between the fifth and seventh centuries Western
Europe experienced the disappearance of the Roman Empire and along with it a
fundamental transformation of economic, social, and cultural patterns. Migrating
barbarian groups are thought to have played an important role in this
transformation and scholars have long debated their social structures. It is
uncertain whether these were communities that had long maintained social and
cultural cohesion or if they were heterogeneous ad hoc military groups. The
migration of the Lombards from Pannonia (what is now Western Hungary, the Czech
Republic, and Eastern Austria) into Italy in 568 C.E. represents one of the most
historically documented migrations and one for which there is a relative
abundance of putative archaeological material. Veeramah, Geary and colleagues
will generate genomic level data from a key Lombard era cemetery in Szólád,
Hungary. Forty-six burials at this fully excavated site will undergo DNA
extraction followed by whole mitochondrial (mtDNA) sequencing. Those burials for
which mtDNA sequencing is successful will then undergo sequencing at
approximately 390,000 sites from across the genome. This will allow inference of
genetic relatedness between burials down to at least third degree relatives.
Standard statistical methods will test whether relatedness is associated with
the spatial arrangement of burials, and genomic ancestry will be correlated with
other archaeological data to develop a high-resolution conceptual model of
social organization, hierarchies, and gender relationships. Besides illuminating
the structure of this specific community, the results will contribute to the
development of new approaches to the application of genomic analysis of
historical populations.