* 1450657
* Collaborative Research: Development of the U.S. Hub of the Future Earth Secretariat
* GEO,ICER
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,018,954.00

This award supports the initial development of the US hub of Future Earth
Secretariat. Future Earth seeks to harness the insights and capacity of the
global scientific community, development professions, and stakeholders to
address global scale problems. The Future Earth effort is based on the
recognition that modern environmental problems cannot be solved by disciplinary
science alone and rather requires the coordinated efforts of many disciplines
working with stakeholders to meet today's societal challenges and to catalyze a
transition to global sustainability. Future Earth seeks to advance a new way of
doing science by directly emphasizing the co-design and co-production of
knowledge with those who most need scientific information to make effective
decisions to help manage a changing environment.

First and foremost the Future Earth Secretariat will serve the needs of
stakeholders and scientists around the world. The Future Earth program is
organized around three major themes: Dynamic Planet; Global Development; and
Transformations toward Sustainability. Under the auspices of these three themes,
the Secretariat will support workshops and other efforts to foster the co-design
of research to enhance transdisciplinary efforts to inform solutions and
decision making. The secretariat will also develop programs and initiatives to
educate the next generation of inter-disciplinary professionals on how to
integrate global sustainability with human prosperity and will actively engage
the public through an extensive communication and outreach effort.