* 1450147
* IRES: US-Korea Collaborative Software- and Hardware-Design of Humanoids for Real-World tasks in Human-Centered Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Oh, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 236,986.00

The Fukushima nuclear disaster was an awakening moment for robotics. Despite
years of research and a wide range of robots, performing tasks like turning
valves and attaching hoses, could not be done. If such tasks were executed in
the earliest stages of the accident, much of the aftermath could have been
averted. The fact that radiation levels were too high, forced rescue workers to
wait and the disaster grew. Power plants and industrial sites are human-centered
environments that are often characterized by doors, hatches, stairs and ladders
that need to be entered or climbed. Additionally such environments feature
valves, hoses and switches that need to be manipulated and connected. Robots
however are not mature enough to efficiently function and effectively operate in
such environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year IRES project partners
American and Korean roboticists who respectively have expertise in the software
and hardware design of humanoids. The objective is to collaboratively design
humanoids to operate in human-centered environments. This is both important and
urgent, addressing both national and international needs. Such service and
mitigation by robots demands the coupled development of software and hardware
where the robot?s form must follow its function. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project?s intellectual merit stems from the formulation of a unified algorithmic
framework. Current humanoids have the form to mimic a person?s motions but lack
the software to function and operate in human-centered environments. Through the
IRES, at least 12 American students will each spend 6-months in Korea working at
the KAIST Hubo Lab. This partnership enables the American software developers to
drive Korean hardware efforts and together design future versions of KAIST?s
world-class humanoid. The net effect will be a robot that can efficiently
function and effectively operate in human-centered environments like power
plants and industry sites for collaborative tasks, humanitarian assistance and
disaster response.&lt;br/&gt;The project broadly impacts research, education,
business development and K-12 curricula: humanoid design will advance research
in legged locomotion, whole-body motion planning, perception and dexterous
manipulation; the 6-month experience at KAIST educates US students in
international research collaboration; the involvement of Korean robotics
companies helps US students develop products; and the after-school programs with
a Philadelphia High School will yield robotics-based teaching modules. The net
effect is a set of broader impacts which are enabled by the IRES and sustainable
well after the project completes.