* 1450182
* I-Corps Site: New Jersey Institute of Technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2022
* Michael Ehrlich, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 439,914.00

This is a proposal to create an I-Corps Site at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology. NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NJIT's I-Corps Site will enhance the quantity and quality
of commercializable student and faculty research projects while complementing
the existing innovation and entrepreneurship activities at the institution. The
Site funding will catalyze and accelerate faculty and student efforts to
commercialize original research and new technologies by providing financial
support for prototypes and customer engagement. Lean Startup training will help
teams discover their potential customers and product-market fit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NJIT's support for entrepreneurs has four main anchors:
the Enterprise Development Center, a 100,000-sq.-foot high technology and life
sciences business incubator; the newly established NJ Innovation Institute; the
NJ Innovation Acceleration Center, an initiative of School of Management and the
Office of Technology Development; and the NJIT Undergraduate Research and
Innovation initiative where students form interdisciplinary teams and
participate in experiential research activities that can solve societal
problems. An NSF I-Corps Site at NJIT will help bridge one of the roadblocks to
the commercialization of research by providing funds for the development of
risky early-stage prototypes. Faculty/Student teams seeking financial support
will be required to participate in Lean Startup training and entrepreneurial
networking that will help them to transition from researchers to potential
innovators and entrepreneurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An NSF I-Corps Site at NJIT
will establish a robust pathway to market for original research and new
technologies by cross-fertilizing academic, entrepreneurial, and corporate
participation. The grant will further enhance NJIT's relationship with the
entrepreneurial and corporate communities as we bring community members onto
campus as mentors for the I-Corps Site teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An I-Corps
Site at NJIT will create pathway for underrepresented teams to participate in
the NSF I-Corps program and support the mission of promoting science and
technology to advance the national health. By combining academic research
activities with commercialization activities, the I-Corp Site at NJIT will
foster experiential teaching, training, and learning for students and faculty.
Students and faculty who learn to discover the path to commercialization will be
able to view research discoveries with greater
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kauffman Foundation has recognized that
minorities are underrepresented among entrepreneurs. All entrepreneurs face
resource constraints but the barriers to entrepreneurship may be insurmountable
for economically disadvantaged students and students who don't have a strong
network from which to derive resources. An NSF I-Corp Site at NJIT will draw
students from one of the most diverse campuses within the US and will provide
early stage funding to women, minorities, and economically disadvantaged
participants on a meritocratic basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveling the playing
field will broaden participation from underrepresented groups and create a new
class of technology entrepreneurs and will benefit society by helping to move
ideas out of academic silos. Nearly all net new job growth in the US has come
from the formation of new companies and the subset of new companies that have
grown most rapidly has been technology-based companies, the sorts of technology
startups that would be fostered at NJIT.