* 1450543
* EAGER: Machine learning of discourse structure for personalized online tutoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Geoffrey Gordon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Technology in education provides both tremendous opportunities and tremendous
challenges.  By delivering instruction online, we may be able to reach a much
wider range of students than previously possible.  But, while technology allows
instruction to reach more students, it also risks losing the rich interaction
and feedback that in-person instruction provides.  To be truly effective,
courses need both rich content and personalized interaction and feedback. So,
this project seeks to provide a technical foundation for restoring richer
interaction to the online learning experience, particularly through natural
language content such as discussion boards and peer
grading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop machine learning
techniques for discovering high-level structure in natural language text,
including discourse structure (relationships among pieces of text), topic
structure, and semantic structure.  To discover this structure, the project
investigates the use of spectral learning methods.  These methods, which rely on
factoring a matrix or tensor of observed moments, are able to learn latent
structures efficiently and without local optima.  Of particular interest and
challenge is to develop tractable methods that can learn latent structure from
unlabeled or weakly-labeled data.  Many current NLP techniques have difficulty
with informal language and do not extract higher level structure; our goal is to
develop spectral methods to address these weaknesses. The project will attempt
to learn this high-level latent structure in data taken from discussion boards
of large online classes.  The idea is that future work could use this
understanding to help personalize the way students access this sort of rich
natural language content: e.g., by helping to focus searches, find relevant and
cohesive content, synthesize answers to student questions, promote productive
behaviors in online discussions, and support self and peer grading.  The
eventual goal is to provide personalized interfaces to students that facilitate
their learning of novel material.