* 1450738
* Workshop on Research Directions for Cyber Physical Systems Related to Future Energy and Power Grids, Arlington, VA, March 17-18, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2015
* USD 40,000.00

Workshop on Research Directions for Cyber Physical Systems Related to Future
Energy and Power Grids&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning and development of the
future grid requires additional research, particularly research that can be used
within the next 5-10 years. Many organizations such as NSF, DOE, EPRI, ARPA-E,
and NIST have focused on different aspects of the research ranging from a short-
term, two to three year horizon, to a long term, strategic, 20-30 year horizon.
Many workshops, symposia, and conferences have supported the exchange of
research and development results. However, the research efforts are not
currently well coordinated for the time horizon of 5-10 years where tangible and
innovative commercial solutions could be deployed. This proposed workshop will
focus on this 5-10 year time horizon with a goal of bringing together national
industry and research community leaders, as well as the executives from the end-
user and manufacturing industry, to discuss and coordinate a research strategy
and related action plan to meet industry needs for new solutions in response to
the new developments affecting the grid.&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives are to
actively involve major players from various industry sectors, government
organizations, and universities to create a common understanding of and map out
the appropriate directions in research priorities and associated activities. An
important initial step will be to convene a broad and representative assembly of
the stakeholders to initiate this effort, which this workshop will accomplish.
Spacific activities include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Invite a key industry figure
to open the workshop, outline the motivation, and set the discussion stage for
how the goals and objectives may be achieved over the horizon of
interest&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Invite CEOs of major utilities and manufacturing
industries to state their requirements and expectations regarding research needs
and technology deployment over the next 5-10 years&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
Involve CTOs and CIOs of major companies seeking their views on what
advancements in the control, communication, and information infrastructure are
needed over the 5-10 year horizon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Attract top managers at
NSF, DOE, EPRI, ARPA-E and NIST, other appropriate agencies to articulate their
plans for the 5-10 year horizon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Assure participation of
recognized experts from academia and research organizations who can add to the
discussions or answer questions as needed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Formulate a
prioritized and achievable list of expected research accomplishments over the
5-10 year period with measurable improvements for the energy cyber-physical
system&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Formulate an action plan to secure adequate
funding to achieve the targeted goals, laying the foundation for a new
collaborative funding opportunity for industry-university partnerships.