* 1450986
* Scientific Software Innovation Institute for Computational Chemistry and Materials Modeling (S2I2C2M2) Software Summer School
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Robert Harrison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 40,000.00

The (SICM)2 project held an inaugural Software Summer School at Virginia Tech in
July 2013. The school involved 26 graduate students (including eight women) from
18 different institutions working with seven instructors and four graduate
assistants. The reviews from the students were overwhelmingly positive, and
numerous other students have made inquiries regarding future schools.
Recognizing the value of this to the students, the research productivity of
themselves and their groups, and the huge value for community building, the
(SICM)2 project collaboration is holding a second Software Summer School, in
this case at Stony Brook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Software Summer School
promotes community building and broadening participation of groups and
individuals nationwide. It takes primarily 1st/2nd year graduate students with
some very basic skills in programming and puts them on a trajectory to becoming
skilled and professional developers of scientific software who are aware of
basic software engineering practices and skills, and also aware of foundational
concepts and techniques in HPC. Peer-to-peer engagement is perhaps even more
important: students build confidence in themselves by networking with their
peers and realizing they are all in the same boat; career-long relationships can
form in such events.&lt;br/&gt;