* 1450856
* I-Corps:  Outsourcing molecular cloning through standardized, high-throughput DNA assembly
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* John Dueber, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Molecular cloning--the construction of recombinant DNA--is the foundation of
modern biology, particularly synthetic biology. However, traditional cloning
methods and DNA synthesis have failed to meet growing demand and are limiting
the pace of discovery and engineering. Advanced DNA assembly technologies are
improving throughput, but the fact that researchers are still responsible for
performing these steps in-house suggests there may be an unaddressed market
opportunity. This I-Corps Teams proposal will explore the commercial feasibility
of DNA assembly as a service.

Synthetic biology has provided cutting-edge technologies that aid in the
manipulation of recombinant DNA, but the full potential of these new techniques
has not yet been realized. Many scientists shy away from adopting new methods
because they seem overly difficult compared to their current practice. Some
reluctantly pay exorbitant sums to get their DNA synthesized. A DNA assembly
service company would disrupt the current custom DNA market, offering lower
prices and faster turnaround times than any existing provider. The consequences
of this advance will be two-fold: the general pace of research--both basic and
applied--will accelerate; and the cost of research will be reduced. The latter
effect has interesting implications for the education and training of the next
generation of biologists and bioengineers. If the cost of conducting research is
reduced, not only can more scientists be trained, but they can be taught to
think differently, where they are restricted only by the scope of their ideas
and aren?t limited by an inability to implement them.