* 1450867
* EAGER: Response individuality in collectively oscillating biofims
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Gurol Suel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 07/31/2017
* USD 352,188.00

The cell is the fundamental unit of life. However, cells in nature rarely lead a
solitary existence, but rather reside in large communities, much like most of
the human population on our planet resides in cities. Even bacteria, which are
single cell organisms are predominantly found within communities known as
biofilms. This provokes a fundamental question: How much independence does the
individual cell retain when it is part of a community? Specifically, does the
individual cell, or the community, determine the response to a local
perturbation? There is an urgent need to address this question, since a
bacterial cell within the biofilm community can be thousand times more drug
resistant than the same bacterium living in solitude. Antibiotics typically
target biochemical processes within individual cells. Therefore, knowledge on
how biological systems balance the need for cellular individuality versus
collective coordination would improve strategies to curtail deleterious effects
or enhance the beneficial ones. In line with the goals of the NSF, this research
exemplifies interdisciplinary research and applies concepts from the field of
mathematics and physics to solve a fundamental problem in biology. As such, it
will provide an excellent training opportunity not only for the graduate student
and postdoc, but also for the many undergraduate and high school students with
diverse backgrounds that receive training in the investigator?s laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has recently uncovered that bacterial
biofilms exhibit global oscillations in protein aggregation and growth.
Motivated by this breakthrough, he proposes to develop a prototype microfluidic
device in which the response of an individual bacterium can be tracked within
large biofilms. The PI will integrate the data collected with a mathematical
theory based on the Phase Response Curves that revolutionized the study of
circadian rhythms. He will develop a novel microfluidic system that will allow
the precise determination. how cells within a biofilm community respond to a
local perturbation. The question of individuality versus collective behavior
remains unresolved not only in biology, but also across all the physical
sciences. The investigator also pursues the unprecedente prediction that the
observed relatively long-range (milimeter distances) coordinaton of population
behavior is unlikely due to the diffusion of chemical signals, but rather,
derives from by radical gases associated with aging bacterial populations.