* 1450383
* EAGER: Linking Crow Roosting Behavior with Nitrogen Biogeochemistry in Urban Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Weixing Zhu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,600.00

The earth has become urbanized at an accelerating rate, with more than half of
its population now living in cities. Human land use and resource consumption
have profound impacts on the natural patterns and processes at the city, region,
and global scales. But while humans are clearly the dominant drivers of urban
ecosystems, animals living in cities can also play important roles. For example,
movement of chemicals from human food sources into otherwise isolated urban
forests by animals can produce unique chemical hot spots with multiple potential
consequences. Even so, very few studies have linked the movement of chemicals
with the behavior and dynamics of urban wildlife populations. This project will
explore the links between the nesting behavior of American crows and the
movement of nitrogen to create hotspots in the many small to medium sized cities
in central New York. Under-represented minority students from local areas will
be recruited for the project, which will also involve citizen scientists and
lead to increased public awareness of human-nature connections. The project will
also provide a base of science to local city managers and county soil and water
conservation managers.

The central hypothesis of this project is that when urbanized American crow
populations forage on human-subsidized food sources and roost in high densities
in urban forest patches, they create high ? and sometimes episodic - nitrogen
availability. That changes the pattern of nitrogen cycling in the forest
fragments, affects critical ecosystem processes of denitrification and nitrogen
leaching, and causes localized water and air pollution. This study poses two
main questions. First, what is the distribution of crow roosts and its
association with cities and towns? Second, what are the biogeochemical
consequences of concentrated N input from crow roosts? The study will
investigate a novel linkage between crow behavior, including foraging, roosting
and defecating, and the formation of biogeochemical hot spots. It will compare
and contrast nitrogen transformations and transfers between the hot spots and
urban sites without concentrated bird activities. It will examine the patterns
and mechanisms regulating different pathways of N loss (leaching vs.
denitrification) and various potential end forms of nitrogen gas and dissolved
losses in urban hot spots receiving pulsed, concentrated N input. Finally, it
will advance urban ecological research by integrating population and ecosystem
level studies beyond the usual foci of humans and trees. The project will
examine fundamental aspects of how animal species affect ecosystem function in
the novel context of a spatially heterogeneous urban landscape (driven by human
land use decisions) and supplemental energy and material (driven by human food
consumption).