* 1450143
* Workshop: Sino-US Collaborative Research on the Rise of Modern Biological Diversity In the Phanerozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Zhe-Xi Luo, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 12/31/2017
* USD 48,176.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;PIs propose to convene a cross-disciplinary workshop that
brings together key players and junior researchers from China and the US in
paleontology, evolutionary biology, taphonomy and other field related to the
Rise of Modern Biodiversity in the Phanerozoic. This workshop will continue a
series of bilateral workshops to address Criticial Transitions in the History of
Life started in 2005 and co-sponsored by the US National Science Foundation and
China National Science Foundation have co-sponsored a series. The workshop will
be hosted at the Field Museum in Chicago, and will feature five broad themes
chosen to capture recent, high profile research activities. Experts at all
career stages will be invited to provide brief summaries of the status of
current research followed by extensive, moderated discussions to identify new
research directions and initiatives, which will be disseminated to a wider
audience on dedicated web sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical:&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together a diverse group of Sino-US
experts that spans the breadth of paleobiology to address Criticial Transitions
in the History of Life started in 2005 and co-sponsored by the US National
Science Foundation and China National Science Foundation. The workshop will help
identify new research directions and initiatives in paleobiology and the
outcomes will be widely disseminated to the paleobiology research community.