* 1450987
* CAREER: Polymer therapeutics for bone regeneration: next-generation osteoporosis treatments
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Danielle Benoit, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2022
* USD 533,338.00

1450987&lt;br/&gt;Benoit, Danielle &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
Award is to develop targeted drug delivery systems to treat osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis results from imbalances in bone production and resorption and
affects ~14 million Americans. The US medical cost of osteoporotic fractures was
estimated at $22 billion in 2008. The majority of osteoporosis therapies reduce
the activity of cells that resorb bone. Development of therapies targeted
towards cells that produce new bone matrix (e.g., bone anabolic drugs),
therefore, may revolutionize osteoporosis therapies by offering an alternative
and/or synergistic mechanism to restore bone health. Several bone anabolic drugs
have been identified. However, systemic administration of these drugs suffers
from low bone accumulation (&lt;1%) and serious side-effects due to accumulation
in tissues other than bone. Thus, a critical technological gap exists in
developing drug delivery approaches that provide specific treatment to bone. To
overcome this challenge, this work seeks to develop drug delivery approaches to
efficiently and specifically target anabolic drugs to bone to develop novel
treatments for osteoporosis. Successful completion of this research will
significantly advance therapeutic strategies for osteoporosis and the approaches
developed will be readily adaptable to treat other bone diseases. Additionally,
the fundamental design criteria determined via planned experiments will provide
insights into the design of drug delivery systems for a myriad of diseases, as
the general material platform can be tailored for delivery of unlimited
combinations of drugs and tissue targeting groups, resulting in great
transformative and translational potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of
osteoporosis therapies are anti-resorptive, acting only to inhibit overactive
osteoclasts. Development of bone-selective osteoanabolic therapies, therefore,
may revolutionize osteoporosis therapies by offering an alternative and/or
synergistic mechanism to restore bone health. Wnt signaling is a critical
pathway on which to focus efforts to develop osteoanabolic agents due to its
recognized importance for bone formation and regeneration and its downregulation
in the development of osteoporosis. Several Wnt agonists have been identified.
However, systemic administration of small molecule drugs including Wnt agonists
suffer from low bone accumulation (&lt;1%) and serious off-target effects due to
the prevalence of Wnt signaling in healthy tissues. In this work, peptide-
functionalized, multivalent, and highly controlled poly(ethylene
glycol)(PEG)-based polymers will be synthesized that target bone resorption
surfaces and controllably release Wnt agonists. These polymers accumulate at
sites of bone remodeling in vivo and have been adapted to include Wnt agonists
tethered through releasable linkages to control dose and release kinetics. The
impact of targeting peptide, drug incorporation, and polymer molecular weight on
polymer affinity in vitro and osteoporotic bone biodistribution in vivo will be
assessed. Additionally, the upregulation of osteoprogenitor Wnt signaling and
bone formation in vitro through temporally controlled, longitudinal drug release
from polymer therapeutics will be investigated. Finally, the regenerative
efficacy of targeted Wnt agonism in osteoporotic murine models will be
delineated. The approach detailed herein is transformative as it will lay the
foundation for a programmatic focus in development of next-generation, targeted
bone anabolic drug delivery systems. This approach will offer alternative and
possibly superior therapeutics for osteoporosis that are complementary to the
current cohort of anti-resorptive drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and
outreach efforts initiated through this project will encourage scientific
engagement at inner city elementary schools. Portable, hands-on demonstration
modules will be developed for local schools to increase interest in science and
engineering. Additionally, an annual "Expanding Your Horizons" outreach event
will be established at the University of Rochester to foster science,
technology, engineering, and math interests in local middle school aged girls.
Finally, the commitment to undergraduate mentoring at the University of
Rochester will also be continued, leading to the intellectual development and
interest in technology and pursuance of advanced degrees of these students. The
cumulative and long-term impact of the proposed educational and outreach efforts
will be increased enrollment and retention of students in science and
engineering fields, particularly girls and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems Division is co-funded by the Biomaterials Program of the
Division of Materials Research.