* 1450318
* EAGER: Coupling remote acoustic recorders and camera traps with crowd sourcing for monitoring (or surveying) vertebrate biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* David Luther, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 239,102.00

Abstract EF 1450318 McShea

Understanding the relationship between animal abundance and composition and the
characteristics and quality of their habitat remains a fundamental question in
biology because of the challenges in adequately measuring the numbers and kinds
of animals using that habitat. New tools and approaches are becoming available
to remotely measure animals using sound and photographs that provide a window
into nature not possible by conventional sampling methods. However these new
technologies require new approaches to summarizing and synthesizing the pictures
and sounds to convert them into meaningful information about animals. This EAGER
is focused on tackling one of the most fundamental issues in measuring animals
without using human observers or capture techniques.

This EAGER award will test questions about the relationship between animal
productivity and biodiversity and evaluate the relationship between biodiversity
and productivity at the habitat, site, and landscape scales. In addition the
research will allow the assessment of how these relationships shift in different
ecological networks, testing hypotheses where community composition is
important. Each technology brings high-density complex data and unique
processing challenges. The combination of data involves creative development of
software, a data workflow to process and identify photo and sound data, and use
of crowdsourcing to process the significant sound and visual data and expert
review to implement quality control measures on the large amount of data
collected. The crowd sourcing programs will involve many volunteers to identify
mammals? photos and frog, bat, and bird recordings, revealing a hidden world of
wildlife and educating these volunteers on the diversity that surrounds them.
Results from the project will also be incorporated into existing Smithsonian
outreach and educational programs that involve eMammal