* 1450747
* CAREER: Programming Dynamic Growth and Reconfiguration in Nucleic Acid Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Elisa Franco, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 512,459.00

Non-technical: This CAREER Award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the University of California, Riverside will be used to
develop responsive, programmable materials made with RNA and synthetic genes.
Biological organisms control their shape in space and time by producing and
directing the assembly of molecular building blocks with molecular circuits. The
cellular scaffold, for instance, grows and reorganizes its shape in response to
environmental stimuli that trigger the production of the scaffold materials and
the molecules that regulate its organization. Reproducing the properties of
cellular scaffolds in synthetic materials will advance our ability to manipulate
matter at the nanoscale and create reconfigurable, regenerating materials.
However, cellular materials are too complex to be directly embedded in a man-
made material, and chemical synthesis of active assembling materials is very
laborious. In contrast, DNA and RNA are highly programmable polymers that can be
used to build self-assembling structures as well as molecular control circuits.
The overall objective of this project is to couple RNA structures and circuits
to build dynamic RNA nanomaterials encoded in minimal artificial DNA gene
networks; experiments and modeling will be combined to achieve this objective.
RNA nanostructures will be assembled from monomers (tiles) produced by
artificial genes. Timed assembly and disassembly instructions will also be
encoded in RNA signals generated by synthetic gene networks, resulting in a new
generation of smart materials capable of growth, metamorphosis, and self-repair.
This grant will support graduate and undergraduate students to perform cutting
edge research in biomaterials science. The PI and her team of students will also
collaborate with the University of California Television (UCTV), and the UC
Riverside Media Relations office to produce short educational clips to be aired
on UCTV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This research project aims at building
active, programmable nucleic acid biomaterials encoded in synthetic genes.
Modular RNA nanostructures (tubes and ribbons) will be designed to self-assemble
from monomers (tiles) and grow, self-regulate and repair. Production and control
pathways will be embedded in transcriptional circuits and only involve DNA, RNA
and off-the-shelf proteins. Mathematical models will elucidate design principles
and guide experiments. This research has the potential to transform current
methods to design and build synthetic materials, because these RNA dynamic
nanostructures will be produced, self-assembled, and regulated from a finite
number of components, rather than being synthesized with a top-down approach.
This approach mimics the organization of cellular pathways for the synthesis and
control of molecular materials such as the cytoskeleton: however, our materials
will be rationally designed and built, exploiting the programmability of nucleic
acids. This project is integrated with an outreach program aimed at
disseminating research results and at inspiring high school and undergraduate
students to pursue higher education through the production of educational
materials and short video clips in collaboration with the University of
California Television (UCTV), and the UC Riverside Media Relations office.