* 1450386
* I-Corps Sites: Southeastern Wisconsin - Enhancing Regional Technology Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 328,557.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
(UWM). NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established
at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help
Wisconsin grow its economy, UWM and regional partners launched an NSF I-Corps
site to enhance technology commercialization in southeastern Wisconsin. This
site leverages the existing partnerships among five regional universities:
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Marquette University, Milwaukee School of
Engineering, Medical College of Wisconsin, and Concordia University of
Wisconsin. Southeastern Wisconsin has over 1,200 manufacturing companies with
national and international markets and partnerships covering the entire globe
across most industry segments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By establishing the site, a
robust framework is created for I-Corps team formation and development, thereby
increasing the volume of commercialization activities and success rates in
securing resources needed for business formation and development. The UWM site
addresses three important needs of academic institutions and industry in
Southeastern Wisconsin: (1) a need to increase the activity level related to
commercialization of applied academic research and faculty/student innovation,
(2) a need to build an innovation/commercialization network that would provide
multifaceted support to faculty and/or student ventures, and (3) a need to
broaden the pool of students and faculty fluent in LLP methodology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UWM leveraged Federal Economic Development Authority
support by investing $8M in building the Innovation Accelerator at the new UWM
Innovation Campus adjacent to the Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW), the Blood
Research Institute of Wisconsin, two major Wisconsin hospitals, and GE
Healthcare. The accelerator is used to achieve the site's curricular objectives.
It satisfies low-resolution and more advanced prototyping needs of the teams
working in the healthcare domain and provides a focus point for collaboration
between MCW and UWM. Teams working in the advanced manufacturing domain leverage
Milwaukee School of Engineering and UWM facilities and resources. The Global
Water Center provides support for freshwater teams, while the UWM main campus is
the hub for energy research teams. The UWM Research Foundation manages the site
and coordinate the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader societal impact of
the proposed site include an increased volume of innovative technologies and
solutions brought to consumers to solve problems in healthcare, energy,
freshwater and other areas. The Site partners with existing outreach programs
within member institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial impact of the
UWM I-Corps Site will be measured by the number of teams and participants going
through the LLP process, the number and value of submitted federal/state/local
grant proposals, the success rate of submitted proposals, the capital raised,
the number of startups launched, the number of technology licenses, and the
number of new research collaborations between cohort teams and team members -
all which benefit the region and the nation.