* 1450806
* EAGER: Unified Photon and Electron Harvesting Method for High Efficiency Thin-film Silicon Solar Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Debashis Chanda, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2018
* USD 199,942.00

Monocrystalline silicon remains the number one material of choice for harnessing
solar energy due to its natural abundance and superior electronic properties.
Thinner solar cells are important for many applications such as powering
flexible electronics. While thin silicon is lighter, its photon absorption is
low thus limiting how thin the solar cell can be made without compromising
efficiency. In order to realize ultra-thin (less than 30 micron) monocrystalline
silicon solar cells, a combined photon and electron transport management process
needs to be established that will achieve the theoretical efficiency limit of
about 33 percent. This EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award will
investigate the science behind a unified design approach in order to maximize
collective photon-electron harvesting. The research will implement a unified
photon-electron harvesting mechanism to achieve greater than 20 percent energy
conversion efficiency in a 25-micron thick monocrystalline silicon wafer, which
is about 7 times thinner than present conventional cells. This will result in
enormous cost, weight and material savings as well as enabling flexible solar
modules. To fabricate these modules, a large area nanoimprinting technique will
be employed that is shown to reach molecular level of resolution and
reproducibility, which are needed for efficient photon and electron transport
inside the thin-film. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many years, the photovoltaic
community has studied carrier life time, surface passivation and recombination
mechanisms to improve efficiencies in silicon solar cells. Similarly, the optics
community has extensively studied various light trapping mechanisms to maximize
photon absorption. Evidently, both electronic and photonic concepts have
followed very independent and somewhat mutually exclusive paths. A unified
photon-electron harvesting method is needed in order to maximize solar cell
efficiency. Light trapping mechanisms, whether based on photonic or plasmonic
effects, create local "hot-spots" of high absorption, which significantly
modulate the charge carrier generation rate across the wafer. However, all
present cell architectures assume uniform generation of charge carriers, which
fails to take advantage of such light trapping and hence, even with high photon
absorption, the cell electrical efficiency remains low. These are some of the
reasons that to date there has been no demonstration of high efficiency in thin-
film solar cells. This inter-disciplinary research work will employ a
nanoimprinted large area light trapping system in conjunction with multi-
functional composite passivation and anti-reflection layer, a graded doping
based efficient charge separation and an interdigitated electron collection
system to maximize combined photon-electron harvesting in order to create high
efficiency thin-film solar cells approaching the Shockley-Queisser limit of 33
percent.