* 1450467
* I-Corps Sites:   The Penn I-Corps Site - Integrating Company Formation and Experiential Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Tomas Isakowitz, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal from the University of
Pennsylvania to establish an Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Site at its
commercialization hub, the Penn Center for Innovation (PCI). The Penn I-Corps
Site will support translation of research from STEM areas into the marketplace
by providing educational programming, financial support and strategic guidance
through offering Site E-teams access to commercialization programs at PCI and a
new entrepreneurial curriculum, as well as guidance by the Wharton Small
Business Development Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical I-Corps Site is funded for
approximately $100,000 per year for up to three years. The Site funding is used
to by academic institutions to catalyze teams (with amounts ranging from $1,000
to $3,000) whose technology concepts are likely candidates for
commercialization. The make-up of teams at the Sites is modeled after the
composition of I-Corps Teams, and education at the Sites shares the principles
of the I-Corps Curriculum. With the support and mentorship of the Sites, the
teams will learn first-hand about entrepreneurship and explore the transition of
their ideas, devices, processes or other intellectual activities into the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. The Penn Site will employ a
structured process for business model validation following the Lean Launchpad
methodology. Within the context of technologies arising from STEM research at
Penn, the goals of the Site are to expand PCI?s start-up creation services to
teams involving faculty and students, provide hands-on experiential
entrepreneurial education, and accelerate startup-creation at Penn. This project
will provide a commercialization path for Penn?s educational entrepreneurial
activities in STEM by expanding PCI?s company formation for faculty/student
teams in STEM and by adding an entrepreneurial component to PCI?s educational
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A direct result of
the PCI-ICS will be hands-on training in the Customer Discover Methodology
(Blank, 2012) of 90+ faculty and students, creation of business plans and
pitches suitable to present to partners and investors, the creation of new
start-ups and, when appropriate, licensing of technologies originating from Penn
research. The ultimate goal is to help transition of research to
commercialization, while integrating education and traditional technology
transfer activities by promoting a hands-on experiential approach to development
of startup ideas. This will be accomplished by establishing a framework that
acts as a bridge between educational coursework and PCI?s company formation
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PCI Site will help spawn faculty and
students trained in fundamental aspects of entrepreneurism. A collaboration with
the Wharton-SBDC will have the dual impact of providing business guidance to
entrepreneurs in STEM and exposing business students to STEM areas of research.
By connecting Penn nascent entrepreneurs with the PCI?s network of
entrepreneurs, investors, and advisors as well as with the Ben Franklin
Technology Partners Southeastern Pennsylvania Economic Development Agency and
the Mayor of the City of Philadelphia, the Penn I-Corps site may be an important
contributor to the development of dynamic entrepreneurial ecosystem in the
region.