* 1450339
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research:  Scalable Infrastructure for Enabling Multiscale and Multiphysics Applications in Fluid Dynamics, Solid Mechanics, and Fluid-Structure Interaction
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Matthew Knepley, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 02/29/2016
* USD 262,655.00

Many biological and biomedical systems involve the interaction of a flexible
structure and a fluid. These systems range from the writhing and coiling of DNA,
to the beating and pumping of cilia and flagella, to the flow of blood in the
body, to the locomotion of fish, insects, and birds. This project aims to
develop advanced software infrastructure for performing dynamic computer
simulations of such biological and biomedical systems. To facilitate the
deployment of this software in a range of scientific and engineering
applications, this project will develop new software capabilities in concert
with new computer models that use the software. Specific application domains to
be advanced in this project include models of aquatic locomotion that can be
used to understand the neural control of movement and ultimately to develop new
treatments for neurological pathologies such as spinal cord injuries, and models
that simulate the interaction between the electrophysiology of the heart and the
contractions of the heart that pump blood throughout the body, which could lead
to improved approaches to treating heart disease. The software to be developed
within the project is freely available online and is used by a number of
independent research groups in a variety of scientific and engineering domains.
It is being actively used in projects that model different aspects of
cardiovascular dynamics, such as platelet aggregation and the dynamics of
natural and prosthetic heart valves, and in projects that study other biological
problems, including cancer dynamics, insect flight, aquatic locomotion, and the
dynamics of phytoplankton. The software is also being applied to non-biological
problems, including nanoscale models of colloidal suspensions and models of
active particles. The improved methods and software to be developed in this
project will thereby have a broad and sustained impact on a large number of
ongoing research efforts in the biological and biomedical sciences and other
scientific and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immersed
boundary (IB) method is a broadly applicable framework for modeling and
simulating fluid-structure interaction (FSI). The IB method was introduced to
model the fluid dynamics of heart valves, and subsequent development initially
focused on simulating cardiac fluid dynamics. This methodology is broadly
useful, however, and has been applied to a variety of problems in which a fluid
flow interacts with immersed structures, including elastic bodies, bodies with
known or prescribed deformational kinematics, and rigid bodies. Extensions of
the IB method have also been developed to model electrophysiological systems and
systems with chemically active structures. To improve the efficiency of the IB
method, the PI has developed adaptive versions of the IB method that employ
structured adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) to deploy high spatial resolution only
where needed. These methods have been implemented within the IBAMR software
framework, which provides parallel implementations of the IB method and its
extensions that leverage high-quality computational libraries including SAMRAI,
PETSc, and libMesh. This project will further extend the IBAMR software by
implementing modeling and discretization technologies required by the research
applications of current and prospective users of the software, by developing
improved solver infrastructure facilitated by the implementation of native
support for structured AMR discretizations in the PETSc library, and by
integrating with existing high-quality software tools for model development,
deployment, and analysis. IBAMR is freely distributed online and is used within
a number of independent research groups both to the further development of the
IB method and also to its application to simulate diverse problems in fluid
dynamics and FSI. By enhancing IBAMR, this project will also enhance the ability
of these and other researchers to construct detailed models without requiring
those researchers to develop the significant software infrastructure needed to
perform such simulations. This project will also develop general-purpose support
for AMR discretizations in PETSc, a software library with thousands of active
users, ~400 downloads per month, and numerous applications. The work of this
project will help to grow the IBAMR user community of students and researchers
by developing UI tools for building models, running simulations, and analyzing
results. Students will be actively engaged in all aspects of the project,
including code, method, and model development.