* 1450919
* Meeting: Increasing American Participation and Integrating the 'omics' in the Second International Conference on Oxidative Stress in Aquatic Ecosystems. Nov 11-14, 2015; La Paz, MX
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Joanna Joyner-Matos, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Oxidative stress results from the imbalance between free radical production and
cellular detoxification and repair. At large interdisciplinary conferences,
presentations addressing oxidative stress tend to be scattered throughout the
program, often at concurrent sessions. Those conferences that focus on oxidative
stress do so almost exclusively within the contexts of medicine or toxicology.
Following a successful First International Conference on Oxidative Stress in
Aquatic Habitats in 2012; this award will support portions of the Second
International Conference on Oxidative Stress in Aquatic Habitats. Funds will
support symposium speakers who integrate the 'omics' into their research
programs and will support the conference attendance of U.S. students,
postdoctoral associates, and early career scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference structure will include three types of working group sessions that
will create synergy across disciplines and nationalities and enhance the
development of collaborations. The conference design creates a unique
opportunity to contribute to the interdisciplinary and global workforce needed
for the Genomes - Phenomes Grand Challenge. Summative assessments will provide
valuable information about what components of the conference design were most
effective at facilitating collaborations and bridging disciplines and
nationalities. Support from this award will enable participation by students,
postdoctoral associates and early career scientists who self-identify into one
or more category of underrepresented status. This will help increase the
diversity of the STEM workforce that participates in international
collaborations and that is engaged in studying the genome - phenome continuum.