* 1450933
* EAGER: Studying Emotional Responses of Children with Autism in Interaction with Facially Expressive Social Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mohammad Mahoor, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 80,000.00

Recent research suggests that children with autism exhibit certain positive
social behaviors when interacting with robots when compared to their peers that
do not interact with robots. These investigations suggest that interaction with
robots may be a promising approach for rehabilitation of children with autism.
Despite the positive signs and observations reported in the literature, research
on using social robots for autism therapy is in its infancy and more fundamental
and exploratory studies should be carried out before one can study the
effectiveness and clinical impact of robots for autism therapy.

This project explores several research questions on emotional and behavioral
response of children with autism when interacting with a facially expressive
robot. Representative questions include: (1) Do children with autism recognize
facial expressions shown by an expressive robot similarly to typically developed
(TD) children? (2) Should the robot use body gesture and movement in conjunction
with facial expression to better convey emotion to children with autism? (3) How
do physiological responses of Autistic and TD children vary in interaction with
a human versus a robot? To address these questions, the research team plans to
recruit a group of children diagnosed with High Functioning Autism and TD
children to interact with a facially expressive robot. The sessions are video
recorded and analyzed using state-of-the-art automatic computer vision
algorithms for facial expression recognition. Children's physiological and
emotional responses are also acquired using Electro Dermal Activity (EDA)
sensors. The EDA signals are used to create a computational affective model to
describe and compare the arousal (excitement) level of the two groups of
children in interaction with the robot. Results from this study can be used in
designing robot-assisted therapy for human mental and social disabilities such
as designing interventions for children suffering from autism, depression, or
attention disorder. In addition, the affective model can impact the measurement
of emotional conditions in experimental non-interactive protocols. Data
generated in this project are a rich source for further analysis by other
researchers.