* 1450897
* BRAIN EAGER: Graphene-based Microfluidic Platforms for Measuring Cell-Cell Communication in the Central Nervous System with Sub-Synaptic Resolution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Our brains are composed of trillions of dendritic spines and synapses that serve
as sites of communication between neurons within complex neuronal circuits.
Dendritic spines and synapses are thought be unique and display different
properties and activities, which points to an urgent need to study individual
spines and synapses within brain circuits. However, this is currently not
feasible due to the lack of available technologies for investigating individual
spines and synapses. In this project, a new technology will be developed that
will allow researchers to examine the properties and activities of individual
spines and synapses. Because a major function of spines and synapses is to
transmit signals that control information flow within the brain, studying these
structures at an individual synapse level will lead to a new understanding of
how information is relayed among brain circuits to control cognitive function.
Furthermore, since changes in the structure and function of spines and synapses
are associated with many neurological disorders, insight gained from studies
examining individual spines and synapses could lead to better treatments for
various neurological disorders. Our project will combine the expertise of
neurobiologists and engineers to develop the new technology. As such, training
opportunities will be provided for both graduate and undergraduate students in
an interdisciplinary environment that will be extremely beneficial to their
long-term career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop this technology, a
new class of microfluidic platforms, with integrated graphene probes will be
designed to investigate synaptic activity with single synapse resolution.
Graphene-based sensors, which have the capability of detecting single molecular
charge and capturing electrical and optical events in tens of picoseconds, will
be combined with scanning photocurrent microscopy to detect local electrical and
chemical signals at sub-synaptic resolution (~ 500 nm). These unique properties
of graphene enable the new platform to map the activity of neurons with single
synapse spatial resolution, sub-millisecond temporal resolution, and single-
molecule-charge sensitivity. The obtained data with assays enabled by this new
platform will provide new insight into the molecular mechanisms that underlie
cognitive brain function.This award is jointly made by two programs the
Instrument Development for Biological Research program (IDBR) and Emerging
Frontiers (EF) in the Directorate of Biological Sciences (BIO).