* 1450460
* I-Corps Sites:  STEM-Business (STEM-B)  -The Fifth Element of Technology Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 359,348.00

This project, from the University of Houston (UH), creates an I-Corps Site at
UH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and
regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This UH Site
builds on several iniatives including a faculty inventor/entrepreneurship
student partnering program, an internal Technology Gap Fund, and a UH start-up
incubator and various public-private partnerships providing access to investment
capital. The long-term goal of this Site is to build a sustainable, innovation
ecosystem anchored at UH with strong links to the local entrepreneurial
community while also helping to address the national "innovation gap".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective for the UH Site is to create an
innovation culture at UH by establishing an I-Corps site to house an
institutional-led, cross-disciplinary, initiative providing a combination of
academic and "hands-on" entrepreneurial business training in STEM + Business
(UH?s STEM-B program). Funding from this program, coupled with institutional
resources, will be used to "seed" the formation of entrepreneurial teams around
technologies "spun-out" from the UH IP portfolio or "spun-in" from the local
ecosystem. The I-Corps site and STEM-B will be used to coordinate a range of
other related activities such as a Life Sciences Entrepreneur Associate
internship program, the UH Entrepreneur-In-Residence (EIR) program, a new Life
Sciences Laboratory Incubator facility to complement the existing UH Innovation
Center and UH's recent $25 M strategic partnership with a venture capital firm,
all located at the UH Energy Research Park. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The creation of an I-Corps site at UH will augment the number
of STEM-qualified entrepreneurs available to enter the growing Greater Houston-
area innovation ecosystem, while helping to address the national "innovation
gap". It will also serve to strengthen existing relationships with the local and
regional ecosystem by providing formal bi-directional partnering mechanisms for
technology commercialization that takes advantage of the burgeoning UH
entrepreneurial workforce. A key goal is to develop a cadre of qualified
"Entrepreneurial Leads" eligible to serve on I-Corps grants submitted by both UH
and non-UH inventors. It will also provide ongoing support and mentoring to
these early-stage entrepreneurs, thereby leveraging UH's infrastructure to
assist in enhancing the local, regional and national innovation systems in
bringing technologies to market.