* 1450440
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: A Software Infrastructure for MPI Performance Engineering: Integrating MVAPICH and TAU via the MPI Tools Interface
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,200,000.00

Message-Passing Interface (MPI) continues to dominate the supercomputing
landscape, being the primary parallel programming model of choice. A large
variety of scientific applications in use today are based on MPI. On the current
and next-generation High-End Computing (HEC) systems, it is essential to
understand the interaction between time-critical applications and the underlying
MPI implementations in order to better optimize them for both scalability and
performance. Current users of HEC systems develop their applications with high-
performance MPI implementations, but analyze and fine tune the behavior using
standalone performance tools. Essentially, each software component views the
other as a blackbox, with little sharing of information or access to
capabilities that might be useful in optimization strategies. Lack of a
standardized interface that allows interaction between the profiling tool and
the MPI library has been a big impediment. The newly introduced MPI_T interface
in the MPI-3 standard provides a simple mechanism that allows MPI implementers
to expose variables representing configuration parameters or performance
measurements from within the implementation for the benefit of tools, tuning
frameworks, and other support libraries. However, few performance analysis and
tuning tools take advantage of the MPI_T interface and none do so to dynamically
optimize at execution time. This research and development effort aims to build a
software infrastructure for MPI performance engineering using the new MPI_T
interface.

With the adoption of MPI_T in the MPI standard, it is now possible to take
positive steps to realize close interaction between and integration of MPI
libraries and performance tools. This research, undertaken by a team of computer
scientists from OSU and UO representing the open source MVAPICH and TAU
projects, aims to create an open source integrated software infrastructure built
on the MPI_T interface which defines the API for interaction and information
interchange to enable fine grained performance optimizations for HPC
applications. The challenges addressed by the project include: 1) enhancing
existing support for MPI_T in MVAPICH to expose a richer set of performance and
control variables; 2) redesigning TAU to take advantage of the new MPI_T
variables exposed by MVAPICH; 3) extending and enhancing TAU and MVAPICH with
the ability to generate recommendations and performance engineering reports; 4)
proposing fundamental design changes to make MPI libraries like MVAPICH
``reconfigurable'' at runtime; and 5) adding support to MVAPICH and TAU for
interactive performance engineering sessions. The framework will be validated on
a variety of HPC benchmarks and applications. The integrated middleware and
tools will be made publicly available to the community. The research will have a
significant impact on enabling optimizations of HPC applications that have
previously been difficult to provide. As a result, it will contribute to
deriving "best practice" guidelines for running on next-generation Multi-
Petaflop and Exascale systems. The research directions and their solutions will
be used in the curriculum of the PIs to train undergraduate and graduate
students.