* 1450512
* Collaborative Research: Inner-Magnetospheric Array for Geospace Science: iMAGS
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Athanasios Boudouridis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 10/31/2019
* USD 412,566.00

This project will combine efforts from three previous projects involving
observations of Earth's magnetic field. It will collect data from the AMBER,
MEASURE and SAMBA magnetometer arrays and process the data in a uniform manner.
The data will be used in several different research projects. One of the major
projects will be to improve our understanding of the structure and dynamics of
the plasmasphere, including the mass density within the plasmasphere and the
location of the plasmapause. The other major research project is to understand
how ultra-low frequency (ULF) waves propagate from high to low latitudes and how
these waves affect the structure of the equatorial electrojet. Such wave
activity may play an important role in the formation of plasma bubbles in the
electrojet which then cause strong radio-wave scintillations. Radio-wave
scintillations are an important space weather phenomenon that can affect radio
communications and GPS location services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the fundamental research to be carried out by the members of the project, the
data from the instruments will be made available to other scientific researchers
through a simple web portal. The project will also include education and public
outreach activities that involve middle and high school teachers and students.
Teachers and students will use the data to enhance public understanding of
Earth's space environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main scientific
goals of this program. The first goal is to understand the structure and
dynamics of the plasmasphere. To examine that topic the project will make use of
resonant oscillations of ULF waves in the plasmasphere. The resonant waves allow
one to determine the mass loading along the magnetic field lines that pass
through the locations of the magnetometers. The field-line resonance data can
also be used to identify the location of the plasmapause (or more accurately,
the location of the plasmasphere boundary layer). The PBL can commonly be
located on the dayside because ULF wave activity is a common phenomenon on the
dayside. In order to locate the PBL on the nightside, the project will utilize
TEC (total electron content) data from GPS measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second major scientific goal of the project is to
investigate the dynamics of the equatorial electrojet, including the affects of
ULF waves and the formation of large plasma irregularities that lead to radio
scintillation effects. Radio scintillations at low and equatorial latitudes can
have significant effects on radio communications and GPS location accuracy.
Indeed, when strong radio scintillation occurs, GPS receives may fail to work at
all. This project will examine the longitudinal variability of density
irregularities and scintillation. It will also determine how often and under
what solar wind conditions ULF waves can propagate from high latitudes to low
and equatorial latitudes.