* 1450545
* EAGER: A Method to Retrieve Non-Textual Data from Widespread Repositories
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Eduard Hovy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

As the results of scholarly research in data-rich sciences, the growth of non-
textual data, for example, numerical data, continues to expand. This work
explores through a prototype whether alternatives can be found to large
centralized repositories of non-textual data that are easy to use, universal and
low cost. The idea is to be able to access non-textual information as easily and
readily as documents without laborious additional work. The automatic creation
of a number of indices would provide a mechanism to facilitate indexing and
retrieval, such as done by internet search giants for text. If successful, it
will be easy to post numerical data and and have it be available via standard
web search engines as easily as textual information is today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will build a system using a wide variety of data
sources and objects from a range of disciplines, and then design representations
that specify the characteristics of non-textual data, including numerical data.
Next they will develop enhanced indexing capabilities to handle queries in an
extended search engine and procures to annotate the data by each type. After
developing a query and interaction interface for developers and pilot users,
they will test the viability of the approach and the effectiveness for creating
descriptive additions for various types of data.