* 1450100
* Travel Support for the Solar Information Processing Workshop; La Roche-en-Ardenne, Belgium; August 18-21, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Farzad Kamalabadi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This one-year project is to enable the participation of students and junior
researchers from the USA at the Seventh Workshop on Solar Information
Processing. The conference will be held on August 18-21, 2014, in La Roche-en-
Ardenne, Belgium. This conference is aimed at cultivating a forum, where experts
from the disciplines of space physics and information science (scientific
computing, statistics, signal processing, and visualization) gather to identify
fundamental open questions in solar-terrestrial physics that are particularly
suited to be addressed through novel cyber-enabled approaches to scientific
exploration. The conference will address issues such as: (i) coronal heating and
the statistical inference on power law indices; (ii) solar dynamo and the
extraction of signatures of physical processes from data; and, (iii) space
weather forecasting and the necessary combination of physics-based simulations
and multi-modal observations to achieve meaningful prediction. It will also
tackle the data analysis challenges brought by the upcoming Solar Orbiter and
Solar Probe Plus missions. Coordinated exploitation of these heterogeneous
datasets requires expertise at the confluence of space physics, computational
imaging, time series analysis, and information processing.

One of the most important aspects of the conference is to ensure a significant
student participation worldwide. As a way to foster communication between solar
physics and information processing communities and in order to provide adequate
training in both fields, invited speakers from both the solar physics and
information processing fields will jointly address particular topics of mutual
scientific interest. A special issue in a refereed journal is also planned to
ensure broad dissemination of the conference results. This project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.